EXPORT OF RICE FROM MOULMEIN

                     Baskets           Value
       1840           67,318           38,708
       1841           11,175            6,900
       1842           64,055           40,034
       1843           35,635           35,289
       1844           71,822           44,529
       1845          149,815           73,034
       1846          193,267          101,465

  --(Simmonds's "Colonial Magazine," vol. xii., p. 462.)

From Tavoy and Mergui rice was also exported, equal in value to 41,000
rupees, in 1846; 100 baskets of 12 seers each, are equal to 30 Bengal
maunds. The basket of rice named above, is equal to 55½ lbs. English.

Paddy means rice in the husk--rice, the grain when unhusked--a
distinction to be kept in mind.

The daily average consumption of rice in a family of five, is rated in
the Straits' settlements at three and a quarter chupahs.

The Burmese and Siamese are the grossest consumers of rice. A common
laboring Malay requires monthly 30 chupahs, or 56 pounds of rice,
value 3s. 9d. or 4s. The Burmese and Siamese about 34 chupahs, or 64
pounds. Rice land in Penang yields a return which cannot be averaged
higher than seventy-five fold--or nearly thirty guntangs of paddy for
each orlong (1-1/3 acres); but it has been considered advisable to rate
it here at sixty fold only.

The rice land of Province Wellesley gives an average return of 117½
fold; the maximum degree of productiveness being 600 guntangs of paddy
to an orlong of well flooded, alluvial land, or 150 fold, equal to 300
guntangs of clean rice, weighing nearly 4,520 English pounds. The
present average produce has been very moderately estimated at 470
guntangs the orlong of paddy. The quantity of seed invariably allotted
for an orlong of land is four guntangs. In Siam forty fold is
estimated a good average produce. At Tavoy, on the Tenasserim coast,
the maximum rate of productiveness of the rice land was, in 1825, and
is still believed to be, nearly the same as the average of Siam; while
their _average_ was only twenty-fold.--(Low, on "Straits
Settlements.")

Rice in Cochin-China is the "staff of life," and forms the main
article of culture. There are six different sorts grown; two on the
uplands, used for confectionery, and yielding only one crop annually;
the other sorts affording from two to five crops a year; but generally
two, one in April and another in October; or three when the
inundations have been profuse.

The late Dr. Gutzlaff stated, at a meeting of the Statistical Society
of London, that the population of China was about 367,000,000, and the
returns of the land subject to tax as used in rice cultivation there,
gave nearly half an acre to each living person; and he further stated
that in the southern and well watered provinces, it is anything but
uncommon to take two crops of rice, one of wheat, and one of pulse,
from the same land in a single season. Rice is the only article the
Chinese ever offer a bounty for; the price fluctuates according to the
seasons, from one and three-quarter dollars to eight dollars per
picul. Siam and the Indian Islands, particularly Bali and Lombok,
supply the empire occasionally with large quantities.

The price of rice in China varies according to the state of the canals
leading to the interior; if they are full of water the prices rise; if
on the contrary they are low, prices fall in proportion at the
producing districts. The amount of consumption is controlled, in a
considerable degree, by the cost of transit; when this is cheap prices
rise from the general demand; but when land-carriage to any extent has
to be resorted to, they fall; it raises prices so much at any great
distance, that rice must be used very sparingly, from its enhanced
price. It is obvious that if the waters are sufficiently high to allow
a boat to pass fully loaded, she does so at an expense of nearly 50
per cent, less than she would do, if, from want of water, she could
only take half the quantity; when transport is cheap every one obtains
a full supply; when it is dear the rice districts have more than they
can consume.

At home we are so much accustomed to the facilities of transit offered
by railroads, canal boats, &c., that we do not readily take into
consideration, that in China, except by water, all articles are
conveyed from one place to another on men's shoulders. Taking the
population of Canton at the usual estimate of a million, and allowing
to each a catty a day, the quantity of rice required for one day's
consumption alone in that city would be 10,000 piculs, of 133 lbs.
each = 1,340,000 lbs.

Java is the granary of plenty for all the Eastern Archipelago; and the
Dutch East India Company occupies itself in this culture with
solicitude, well persuaded that a scarcity of rice might be fatal to
its power. Ordinances to encourage and increase this branch of
agriculture, have been promulgated at different times by an authority
called to watch over the physical well-being of many millions of
inhabitants.

As an evident proof that the culture of rice, of which it would be
difficult to fix the quantity produced annually, increases
considerably, I may mention that the exportation from Java, in 1840,
was 1,488,350 piculs of 125 Dutch lbs.

Rice is cultivated in Java in three systems. The name of _sawah_ is
given to the rice fields, which can be irrigated artificially;
_tepar_, or _tagal_, are elevated but level grounds; and _gagah_, or
_ladang_, are cleared forest grounds. The two last only give one crop;
a second crop may be obtained from the _sawah_, which then most
commonly consists of _katjang_, from which oil is extracted, in
_kapus_ or fine cotton, and in _ubie_, a kind of potato.

There are, says Mr. Crawfurd, two distinct descriptions of rice
cultivated throughout the Indian islands, one which grows without the
help of immersion in water, and another for which that immersion is
indispensably requisite. In external character there is very little
difference between them, and in intrinsic value not much. The marsh
rice generally brings a somewhat higher price in the market. The great
advantage of this latter consists in its superior fecundity. Two very
important varieties of each are well known to the Javanese husbandman,
one being a large productive, but delicate grain, which requires about
seven months to ripen, and the other a small, hardy, and less fruitful
one, which takes little more than five months. The first we constantly
find cultivated in rich lands, where one annual crop only is taken;
and the last in well watered lands, but of inferior fertility, where
two crops may be raised.

Both of these, but particularly the marsh rice, is divided into a
great number of sub-varieties, characterised by being awned or
otherwise, having a long or round grain, or being in color black, red,
or white. The most singular variety is the _O. glutinosa_, of
Rumphius. This is never used as bread, but commonly preserved as a
sweetmeat. The rudest, and probably the earliest practised mode of
cultivating rice, consists in taking from forest lands a fugitive
crop, after burning the trees, grass, and underwood. The ground is
turned up with the mattock, and the seed planted by dibbling between
the stumps of trees. The period of sowing is the commencement of the
rains, and of reaping that of the dry season. The rice is of course of
that description which does not require immersion.

The second description of tillage consists also in growing mountain or
dry land rice. This mode is usually adopted on the common upland
arable lands, which cannot conveniently be irrigated. The grain is
sown in the middle of the dry season, either broadcast or by dibbling,
and reaped in seven or five months, as the grain happens to be the
larger or the smaller variety.

The culture of rice by the aid of the periodical rains forms the
third mode. The grain being that kind which requires submersion, the
process of sowing and reaping is determined with precision by the
seasons. With the first fall of the rains the lands are ploughed and
harrowed. The seed is sown in beds, usually by strewing very thickly
the corn in the ear. From these beds the plants, when 12 or 14 days
old, are removed into the fields and thinly set by the hand. They are
then kept constantly immersed in water until within a fortnight of the
harvest, when it is drawn off to facilitate the ripening of the grain.

The fourth mode of cultivating rice is by forcing a crop by artificial
irrigation, at any time of the year; thus, in one field, in various
plots, the operations of sowing, ploughing, transplanting, and reaping
may be seen at the same period.

The fertile, populous, and industrious countries of the Eastern
Archipelago export rice to their neighbours. The most remarkable of
these are Java, Bali, some parts of Celebes, with the most fertile
spots of Sumatra, and of the Malay Peninsula. Rice is generally
imported to these western countries from those farther east, such as
the Spice Islands. Java is the principal place of production for the
consumption of the other islands, and the only island of the
Archipelago that sends rice _abroad_. The rice of the eastern
districts is generally superior to that of the western. The worst rice
is that of Indramayu, which is usually discolored. The subdivision of
the province of Cheribon, called Gabang, yields rice of fine white
grain, equal to that of Carolina. The rice of Gressie preserves best.
All Indian rice is classed, in commercial language, into the three
descriptions of table rice, white rice, and cargo rice. From the
limited demand for the first, it is only to be had in Java, in small
quantity. For the same reason the second is not procurable in large
quantity, unless bespoken some time before-hand; but the third may be
had at the shortest notice in any quantity required. Java rice is
inferior in estimation to that of Bengal or Carolina in the markets of
Europe.

The following statistics show the extent and progress of the culture
in Java:--

                                                          In 1840.     In 1841.

  No. of Residencies in which rice is cultivated                18           18

     "   Regencies                                              69           68

     "   Districts                                             414          414

     "   Desas or villages                                  39,931       36,296

  Amount of the population who take a part in it,
    without distinction of caste                         6,704,797    6,857,372

  Number of families, &c.                                1,466,845    1,475,675

    "     " families who devote themselves to the
    cultivation                                          1,150,406    1,146,083

  Number of men bound to obligatory service              1,321,767    1,325,746

  Cleared grounds in _bahus_, of 71 decametres           1,470,047    1,540,054

  Upon this extent the population had cultivated for
    the government, in _bahus_ of 71 decametres             78,182       74,277

  Extent of fields which the population had cultivated   1,286,139    1,381,216
    on their own account, in _bahus_, &c.

  Extent of land in fallow in _bahus_, &c.                 105,726       84,561

  Produce in piculs of fields cultivated by the
    population on its own account                       21,273,278   23,810,573

  Average produce of a _bahu_                                  16½           17

  Gross amount of the land tax of 1840               8,502,402 fl  9,030,761 fl.

  Extent of rice fields newly cultivated in
    _bahus_                                                 10,328       13,561

This comparative summary shows that the culture of rice increases
yearly, and that the average produce of the fields is also continually
increasing. These results have been obtained by the attention paid to
the proper irrigation of the soil fit for this culture; and to the
hydraulic works which the Government executes on its own account in
the parts of the island where rice fields can be established, and
where they are required to feed a population whose number is still
increasing yearly.

I have seen, continues Mr. Crawfurd, lands which have produced, from
time beyond the memory of any living person, two yearly crops of rice.
When this practice is pursued, it is always the five-months grain
which is grown. The rapid growth of this variety, has, indeed, enabled
the Javanese husbandman, in a few happy situations, to urge the
culture to the amount of six crops in two years and a half. Rice
cultivated in a virgin soil, where the wood has been burnt off, will,
under favorable circumstances, give a return of twenty-five and thirty
fold. Of mountain rice, cultivated in ordinary upland arable lands,
fifteen fold may be looked upon as a good return. In fertile soils,
when one crop only is taken in the year, marsh rice will yield a
return of twenty-five seeds. When a double crop is taken, not more
than fifteen or sixteen can be expected. In the fine province of Kadu,
an English acre of good land, yielding annually one green crop and a
crop of rice, was found to produce of the latter 641 lbs. of clean
grain. In the light sandy, but well watered lands of the province of
Mataram, where it is the common practice to exact two crops of rice
yearly without any fallow, an acre was found to yield no more than 285
lbs. of clean rice, or an annual produce of 570 lbs. --("History of
the Indian Archipelago.")

The low estimation of Java rice is not attributable to any real
inferiority in the grain, but to the mode of preparing it for the
market. In husking it, it is, for the want of proper machinery, much
broken, and, from carelessness in drying, subject to decay from the
attack of insects and worms. When in the progress of improvement more
intelligent methods are pursued in preparing the grain for the market,
it will equal the grain of any other country. Machinery must be
employed for husking the grain, and some degree of kiln drying will be
necessary to ensure its preservation in a long voyage.

I know nowhere that rice is so cheap as in Java, except in Siam,
whence it is exported at one-third less cost. A great deal of rice is
exported from Siam to China by the junks, and also occasionally a
little from Java.

  The quantity exported from Java in 1830      was      13,521 coyans.

              "          "           1835       "       25,577    "

              "          "           1839       "    1,103,378 piculs

              "          "           1841       "      676,213    "

              "          "           1843       "    1,108,774    "

Rice is grown to some extent in the Dutch portion of Celebes; it
yields at a minimum one hundred and fifty fold. The average annual
delivery of rice to the Government, from 1838 to 1842, was 3,390,119
lbs. At present the Government pays sixty cents for a measure of forty
pounds. That which is sold for the consumption of the inhabitants may
be procured at the public warehouse for a guilder the 35½ lbs.; and
that which is sold for export may be had at public auction for 125
florins the coyan of 3,000 lbs.

The following description of some varieties of rice cultivated in the
Philippine islands, is given by Mr. Rich, botanist to the United
States Exploring Expedition. The varieties are very numerous; the
natives distinguish them by the size and shape of their grain:--

    _Binambang_.--Leaves slightly hairy; glumes whitish; grows to the
    height of about five feet; flowers in December: aquatic.

    _Lamuyo_ greatly resembles the above; is more extensively
    cultivated, particularly in Batangas, where it forms the principal
    article of food of the inhabitants of the coast: aquatic.

    _Malagcquit_.--This variety derives its name from its being very
    glutinous after bailing; it is much used by the natives in making
    sweet or fancy dishes; and also used in making a whitewash, mixed
    with lime, which is remarkable for its brilliancy, and for
    withstanding rain, &c.: aquatic.

    _Bontot Cabayo_.--Common in Ilocos, where it is cultivated both
    upland and lowland; it produces a large grain, and is therefore much
    esteemed, but has rather a rough taste.

    _Dumali, or early rice_.--This rice is raised in the uplands
    exclusively, and derives its name from ripening its grain three
    months from planting; the seed is rather broader and shorter than
    the other varieties; it is not extensively cultivated, as birds and
    insects are very destructive to it.

    _Quinanda_, with smooth leaves.--This variety is held in great
    estimation by the people of Batangas, as they say it swells more in
    boiling than any other variety; it is sown in May, and gathered in
    October: upland.

    _Bolohan_.--This variety has very hairy glumes; it is not held in
    much esteem by the natives, but it is cultivated on account of its
    not being so liable to the attacks of insects and diseases as most
    of the other upland varieties.

    _Malagcquit_.--With smooth leaves, and red glumes (all the preceding
    are whitish); possesses all the qualities of the aquatic variety of
    the same name--that of being very glutinous after boiling. This rice
    is said to be a remedy for worms in horses, soaked in water, with
    the hulls on; it is given with honey and water.

    _Tangi_.--Leaves slightly hairy, glumes light violet color. This
    upland variety is held in much esteem for its fine flavor.

435,067 arrobas of rice were exported from Manilla in 1847.

A simple but rude mill is in use in Siam, and many parts of India, for
hulling paddy, which is similar to those used 4,000 years ago. It
consists of two circular stones, two feet in diameter, resting one on
the other; a bamboo basket is wrought around the upper one, so as to
form the hopper. A peg is firmly set into the face of the upper stone,
half way between its periphery and centre, having tied to it by one
end a stick three feet long, extended horizontally, and attached by
the other to another stick pending from the roof of the shed under
which the mill is placed. This forms a crank, by which the upper stone
is made to revolve on the other set firmly on the ground. The motion
throws the rice through the centre of the stone, and causes it to
escape between the edges of the two.

More starch is contained in this grain than in wheat. Braconnet
obtained from Carolina rice 85.07, and from Piedmont rice 83.8 per
cent. of starch. Vogel procured from a dried rice no less than 98 per
cent. of starch. There are several patent processes in existence for
the manufacture of rice-starch, which are accomplished chiefly by
digesting rice in solutions, more or less strong, of caustic alkali
(soda), by which the gluten is dissolved and removed, leaving an
insoluble matter composed of starch, and a white substance technically
called fibre. Under Jones's patent, the alkaline solution employed
contains 200 grains of real soda in every gallon of liquor, and 150
gallons of this liquor are requisite to convert 100 lbs. of rice into
starch. In manufacturing rice-starch on a large scale, Patna rice
yields 80 per cent, of marketable starch, and 8.2 per cent. of fibre,
the remaining 11.8 per cent. being made up of gluten, gruff, or bran,
and a small quantity of light starch carried off in suspension by the
solution.

Jones's process may be thus described:--100 lbs. of rice are macerated
for 24 hours in 50 gallons of the alkaline solution, and afterwards
washed with cold water, drained, and ground. To 100 gallons of the
alkaline solution are then to be added 100 lbs. of ground rice, and
the mixture stirred repeatedly during 24 hours, and then allowed to
stand for about 70 hours to settle or deposit. The alkaline solution
is to be drawn off, and to the deposit cold water is to be added, for
the double purpose of washing out the alkali and for drawing off the
starch from the other matters. The mixture is to be well stirred up
and then allowed to rest about an hour for the fibre to fall down. The
liquor holding the starch in suspension is to be drawn off and allowed
to stand for about 70 hours for the starch to deposit. The waste
liquor is now to be removed, and the starch stirred up, blued (if
thought necessary), drained, dried, and finished in the usual way.[44]
Rice is imported into this country in bags of 1½ cwt., and tierces of
6 cwt., not only for edible purposes, but, when ground into flour, for
cotton manufactures, in aiding to form the weaver's dressings for
warps. Rice-meal is commonly used for feeding pigs.

                        Imported.
                 British                           Retained for home
               Plantation.       Foreign.      consumption of all kinds.
                  Bags.            Bags.               Bags.
  1843           136,319          35,125              60,965
  1844           127,876          69,112             126,733
  1845           173,794           5,713             114,933

                  Tons.           Tons.                Tons.
  1847           38,736           3,033               28,375
  1848           21,226           4,631               15,468
  1849           19,397           1,410               14,961


                       Total imported.         Re-exported.
  1849                  976,196 cwts.          290,732 cwts.
    "   in the husk      31,828 qrs.
  1850                  785,451 cwts.          248,136  "
    "   in the husk      37,150 qrs.
  1851                  714,847 cwts.          345,677  "
    "   in the husk      31,481 qrs.
  1852                  989,316 cwts.          414,507  "
    "   in the husk      23,946 qrs.

The quantity of rice retained for home consumption, by the corrected
returns, in 1850, was 401,018 cwts. and 35,119 quarters; in 1851,
399,170 cwts. and 31,481 quarters; in 1852, 574,809 cwts. and 23,946
quarters. The aggregate imports range from 40,000 to 80,000 tons
annually, of which about 500 to 800 tons are in the husk.

Among culmiferous plants and legumes used in the East, are the
_Panicum italicum_, _P. miliaceum_, _Eleusine coracana_ (the meal of
which is baked and eaten in Ceylon under the name of Corakan flour),
and _Paspalum_ of several varieties. The pigeon pea (_Cytisus Cajan_),
and a very valuable and prolific species of bean, called the Mauritius
black bean (_Mucuna utilis_), growing even in the poorest soil, is
cultivated in India and Ceylon. _Sorghum vulgare_ is the principal
grain of Southern Arabia, and the stems are also used extensively for
feeding cattle. The plant bears its Indian name of joar, or juri, and
is cultivated throughout Western Hindostan. Job's tears (_Croix
lachryma_) is another cereal grass, native of the East Indies.


MILLET.

Millet of different kinds is met with in the hottest parts of Africa,
in the South of Europe, in Asia Minor, and in the East Indies. It is a
small yellowish seed, growing in dense panicles or clusters, the
produce of a grassy plant with large and compact seeds, growing to the
height, in India, of seven or eight feet.

The millets, known to Europeans as _petit mais_, are tropical or
sub-tropical crops. In India they hold a second rank to rice alone;
and in Egypt, perhaps, surpass all other crops in importance. In
Western Africa they are the staff of life. The red and white millets
shown by Austria, Russia, and the United States, at the Great
Exhibition, were beautiful, and Ceylon exhibited fair samples. Turkey
abounds in small grains.

_Panicum miliaceum_ and _P. frumentaceum_ are the species grown in the
East Indies. Loudon says there are three distinct species of millet;
the Polish, the common or German, and the Indian. _Setaria Germanica_
yields German millet. The plants are readily increased by division of
the roots or by seed, and will grow in any common soil. The native
West Indian species are _P. fascisculatwm_ and _oryzoides_. Millet
receives some attention in New South Wales. In 1844 there were 100
acres of land under cultivation with it, and the amount grown in some
years in this colony has been about 3,500 bushels.

In the United States millet is chiefly grown for making hay, being
found a good substitute for clover and the ordinary grasses. It is a
plant which will flourish well on rather thin soils, and it grows so
fast that when it is up and well set it is seldom much affected by
drought. It is commonly sown there in June, but the time of sowing
will vary with the latitude. Half a bushel of seed to the acre is the
usual quantity, sown broadcast and harrowed in. For the finest
quantity of hay, it is thought advisable to sow an additional quantity
of three or four quarts of seed. The ordinary yield of crops may be
put at from a ton to a ton and a half of hay to the acre. It should be
cut as soon as it is out of blossom; if it stands later, the stems are
liable to become too hard to make good hay. The variety known as
German millet is that most common in North America. It grows
ordinarily to the height of about three feet, with compact heads from
six to nine inches in length, bearing yellow seed. There are some
sub-varieties of this, as the white and purple-seeded.

The Italian millet, _Setaria italica_, is larger than the preceding,
reaching the height of four feet in tolerable soil, and its leaves are
correspondingly larger and thicker. The heads are sometimes a foot or
more in length, and are less compact than the German, being composed
of several spikes slightly branching from the main stem. It is said to
derive its specific name from being cultivated in Italy, though its
native habitat is India. It is claimed by some that this variety will
yield more seed than any other, and the seed is rather larger, but the
stalk is coarser, and would probably be less relished by stock.

If the greatest amount of seed is desired from the crop, it is best to
sow it in drills, two to two-and-a-half feet apart, using a seed drill
for the purpose. This admits of the use of a small harrow or
cultivator between the rows, while the plants are small, which keeps
out the weeds. The crop will ripen more uniformly in this way than
broadcast, and enables the cultivator to cut it when there will be the
least waste. The seed shatters out very easily when it is ripe, and
when the crop ripens unequally it cannot be cut without loss, because
either a portion of it will be immature, or, if left till it is all
ripe, the seed of the earliest falls out. It should be closely
watched, and cut in just about the same stage that it is proper to cut
wheat, while the grain may be crushed between the fingers. It may be
cut with a grain cradle, and, when dry, bound and shocked like grain;
but it should be threshed out as soon as practicable, on account of
its being usually much attacked by birds, many kinds of which are very
fond of the seed. In particular localities they assail the crop in
such numbers, from the time it is out of the "milk," till it is
harvested and carried off the field, that it is no object to attempt
to ripen it. This crop is sometimes sown in drills, when it is only
intended for fodder, being cut and cured in bundles, as the stalks of
Indian corn are. It is best to pass it through a cutting machine
before feeding it to stock; indeed, all millet hay will be fed with
less loss in this way, than if fed to animals without cutting.

The seed is used in various European countries as a substitute for
sago, for which it is considered excellent. It is likewise a valuable
food for poultry, particularly for young chickens, which from the
smallness of the grain can eat it readily, and it appears to be
wholesome for them.

In some countries millet seed is ground into flour and converted into
bread; but this is brown and heavy. It is, however, useful in other
respects, as a substitute for rice. A good vinegar has been made from
it by fermentation, and, on distillation, it yields a strong spirit.
Millet seed--the produce of _H. saccharatum_--is imported into this
country from the East Indies for the purpose chiefly of puddings; by
many persons it is preferred to rice. It is cultivated largely in
China and Cochin-China. The stalks, if subjected to the same process
that is adopted with the sugar-cane, yield a sweet juice, from which
an excellent kind of sugar may be made.

Millet will grow best on light, dry soils. The ground being first well
prepared, half a bushel of seed to the acre is ploughed in at the
commencement of the rains, in India. The crop ripens within three
months from the time of sowing. The usual produce is about 16 bushels
to the acre. The Canary Islands export annually about 212,400 bushels
of millet.

_Great Indian Millet, or Guinea Corn_.--This is a native of India (the
_Sorghum vulgare_, the _Andropogon Sorghum_ of Roxburgh), which
produces a grain a little larger than mustard or millet seed. It is
grown in most tropical countries, and has peculiar local names. In the
West Indies, where it is chiefly raised for feeding poultry, it is
called Guinea corn. In Egypt it is known as Dhurra, in Hindostan and
Bengal as Joar, and in some districts as Cush.

In Lower Scinde joar is very extensively cultivated, as well as bajree
(_H. spicatus_). It is harvested in December and January; requires a
light soil, and is usually grown in the east, after _Cynosurus
corocanus_.

Guinea corn is extensively cultivated in some parts of Jamaica. I did
not, however, find it thrive on the north side of the island. It is
best planted in the West Indies between September and November, and
ripens in January. It ratoons or yields a second crop, when cut. The
returns are from 30 to 60 bushels an acre, but the crops are
uncertain.

Mr. C. Bravo tried Guinea corn at St. Ann's, Jamaica, as a green crop,
sown broadcast, for fodder, and it answered admirably, the produce
being very considerable. It was weighed, and yielded 14 tons of fodder
per acre, and was found very palatable and nutritious for cattle. It
was grown on a very poor soil, which had, previously to ploughing,
given nothing but marigolds and weeds. The luxuriant growth of the
corn completely kept under the weeds. A great number of the stalks
were measured, and they averaged 10 feet from the root to the top of
the upper leaf. It had been planted 10 weeks, and had, therefore,
grown a foot a month. Mr. Bravo is of opinion, that sown broadcast it
would answer either as a grain crop, as fodder, or ploughed in to
increase the fertility of the soil.

Dr. Phillips, of Barbados, being of opinion that it might be
advantageously employed as human food, requested Dr. Shier, the
analytical chemist, of Demerara, to determine in his laboratory its
richness in protein compounds (the muscle-forming part of vegetable
food) in comparison with Indian corn. He, therefore, caused a sample
of each to be burned for nitrogen, when the following results were
obtained:--

                          Indian corn.     Guinea corn.
  Water, per cent.           12.81            13.76
  In ordinary state--
    Nitrogen, per cent.       1.83             1.18
    Protein compounds        11.51             7.42
  In dry state--
    Nitrogen, per cent.       2.10             1.36
    Protein compounds        13.20             8.60

According to these results, the Guinea corn is less rich in nitrogen
or protein compounds than Indian corn, though not much less so than
some varieties of English wheat.

Indian corn meal, analysed by Mr. Hereford, from two localities, gave
in the ordinary state of dryness 11.53 and 12.48 per cent. of protein
compounds--results which come very near to that obtained by Dr. Shier.

_Sorghum avenaceum_, or _Holcus avenaceus_, is a native of the Cape.

Several species and varieties of sorghum have been introduced, and
more or less cultivated in the United States. It is often popularly
termed Egyptian corn. It is closely allied to broom corn (_S.
saccharatum_), the head being similar in structure, and the seed
similar, except that in most varieties of sorghum, the outer covering
does not adhere as in broom corn. The plant bears a strong
resemblance, while growing, to maize or Indian corn. There is also
some similarity in the grain, and it is extensively used as food by
many oriental nations.

A variety, under the name of African purple millet, was some years
since introduced into North America, and recommended for cultivation
as a soiling crop; but this, as well as other varieties, do not
possess any advantages over Indian corn.

The natives of Mysore reckon three kinds, known as white, green, and
red. The red ripens a month earlier than the rest, or about four
months from the time of sowing. Near Bengal, Bombay, and elsewhere, in
Eastern India, sowing is performed at the close of May or early in
June. A gallon and a third of seed is sown per acre, and the produce
averages 16 bushels. This grain, though small, and the size of its
head diminutive, compensates for this deficiency by the great hulk
and goodness of its straw, which grows usually to the height of 8 or
10 feet. It is sometimes sown for fodder in the beginning of April,
and is ready to cut in July. It is said to be injurious to cattle, if
eaten as green provender, the straw is therefore first dried, and is
then preferable to that of rice.

This grain is frequently fermented to form the basis, in combination
with goor or half made sugar, of the common arrack of the natives, and
in the hills is fermented into a kind of beer or sweet wort, drank
warm.

_Holcus spicatus_, the _Panicum spicatum_ of Roxburgh, is cultivated
in Mysore, Behar, and the provinces more to the north. From one to
four seers are sown on a biggah of land, and the yield is about four
maunds per acre. It is sown after the heavy rains commence, and the
plough serves to cover the seed. The crop is ripe in three months, and
the ears only are taken off at first. Afterwards the straw is cut down
close to the surface of the soil, to be used for thatching, for it is
not much in request as fodder. Being a grain of small price, it is a
common food of the poorer class of natives, and really yields a sweet
palatable flour. It is also excellent as a fattening grain for
poultry.

The _Poa Abyssinica_is one of the bread-corns of Abyssinia. The bread
made from it is called _teff_, and is the ordinary food of the
country, that made from wheat being only used by the higher classes.
The way of manufacturing it is by allowing the dough to become sour,
when, generating carbonic acid gas, it serves instead of yeast. It is
then baked in circular cakes, which are white, spongy, and of a hot
acid taste, but easy of digestion. This bread, carefully toasted, and
left in water for three or four days, furnishes the _bousa_, or common
beer of the country, similar to the _quas_ of Russia.


BROOM CORN.

The production of broom corn is rapidly extending, and corn brooms are
driving broom sedge, as an article for sweeping floors, out of every
humble dwelling in the United States. There are about 1,000 acres of
it under culture in one county (Montgomery) alone, and it brings 30
dollars per acre in the field.

Messrs. Van Eppes, of Schenectady, have been engaged in the broom
manufactory business about eleven years. They have a farm of about 300
acres, 200 of which are Mohawk flats. A large portion of the flats was
formerly of little value, in consequence of being kept wet by a
shallow stream which ran through, it, and which, together with several
springs that issue from the sandy bluff on the south side of the
flats, kept the ground marshy, and unfit for cultivation. By deepening
the channel of the stream, and conducting most of the springs into it,
many acres, which were formerly almost worthless, have been made
worth 125 dollars per acre. They have also, by deepening the channel,
saving the water of the springs, and securing all the fall, made a
water privilege, on which they have erected an excellent mill, with
several run of stones, leaving besides sufficient power to carry saws
for cutting out the handles of brooms, &c.

They have about 200 acres of the flats in broom-corn. The cultivation
of this article has within a few years been simplified to almost as
great a degree as its manufacture. The seed is sown with a seed-barrow
or drill, as early in the spring as the state of the ground will
admit, in rows 3½ feet apart. As soon as the corn is above ground, it
is hoed, and soon after thinned, so as to leave the stalks two or
three inches apart. It is only hoed in the row, in order to get out
the weeds that are close to the plants, the remaining space being left
for the harrow and cultivator, which are run so frequently as to keep
down the weeds. The cultivation is finished by running a small, double
mould-board plough, rather shallow, between the rows.

The broom corn is not left to ripen, as formerly, but is cut when it
is quite green, and the seed not much past the milk. It was formerly
the practice to lop down the tops of the corn, and let it hang some
time, that the brush might become straightened in one direction. Now,
the tops are not lopped till the brush is ready to cut, which, as
before stated, is while the corn is green. A set of hands goes
forward, and lops or bends the tops to one side, and another set
follows immediately and cuts off the tops at the place at which they
are bent, and a third set gathers the cut tops into carts or waggons,
which take them to the factory. Here they are first sorted over, and
parcelled out into small bunches, each bunch being made up into brush
of equal length. The seed is then taken off by an apparatus with
teeth, like a hatchet. The machine is worked by six horses, and cleans
the brush very rapidly. It is then spread thin to dry, on racks put up
in buildings designed for the purpose. In about a week, with ordinary
weather, it becomes so dry that it will bear to be packed closely.

The stalks of the corn, after the tops have been cut off, are five or
six feet high, and they are left on the ground, and ploughed in the
next spring. It is found that this keeps up the fertility of the soil,
so that the crop is continued for several years without apparent
diminution. It should be observed, however, that the ground is
overflowed every winter or spring, and a considerable deposit left on
the surface, which is undoubtedly equivalent to a dressing of manure.

This may be inferred from the fact that some of the flats have been in
Indian corn every year for forty or fifty years, without manure, and
with good cultivation have seldom produced less than sixty bushels per
acre, and with extra cultivation from eighty to ninety bushels have
been obtained.

In case of need, the stalks would furnish a large amount of good food
for cattle. They are full of leaves which are nutritive, and whether
cut and dried for winter, or eaten green by stock turned on the ground
where they grow, would be very valuable in case of deficiency of
grass.

Messrs. Van Eppes employ twenty hands during the summer; and in
autumn, when the brush is being gathered and prepared, they have
nearly a hundred, male and female. They are mostly Germans, who come
to Schenectady with their families during the broom corn harvest, and
leave when it is over.

The manufacture of brooms is carried on mostly in the winter season.
The quantity usually turned out by Messrs. Van Eppes is 150,000 dozen
per annum.--("Albany Cultivator.")


CHENOPODIUM QUINOA.

About twenty-eight years ago this plant was introduced into Britain
from Peru, where the seeds are used as food, under the name of petty
rice. Attention was drawn to it by Loudon, in his "Gardener's
Magazine," in 1834, and in 1836 it was cultivated on a large scale by
Sir Charles Lemon. This plant and the lentil are two of the most
promising exotics that have been recommended for field culture. There
are two varieties of quinoa, the white and the red seeded; the red has
bitter properties, and is only used for medicine. In North America the
seeds of the former are used as a substitute for maize and the potato.
A white meal is obtained from it, having a tinge of yellow. It
contains scarcely any gluten, but, like oatmeal, makes very good
porridge and cakes. Its nutritive qualities are proved by the analysis
of Dr. Voelcker ("Journal of Agriculture of Scotland," October, 1850),
which states it to yield 3.66 per cent. of nitrogen, equal to 2.87 per
cent. of protein compounds. In this respect the meal appears to be
superior to rye, barley, rice, maize, the plantain, and potato. It has
long furnished the food of millions in South America; and in Scotland
and Ireland the plant would find a congenial climate and rich soil.


FUNDI OR FUNDUNGI.

This is an hitherto undescribed species of African grain (probably the
_Paspalum exile_), much cultivated and esteemed in Sierra Leone, and
other places on the African coast, where it is known by the Foulahs,
Joloffs, and other native tribes, under the local name of Hungry rice.
It is a slender grass with digitate spikes, which have much of the
habit of _Digitaria_, but which, on account of the absence of the
small outer glume existing in that genus, Mr. Keppist, Librarian of
the Linnean Society, of London, refers to _Paspalum_. It produces a
semi-transparent cordiform grain, about the size of a mignionette
seed; the ear consists of two conjugate spikes, the grain being
arranged on the outer edge of either spike, and alternated; they are
attached by a peduncle to the husk. The èpicarp, or outer membrane, is
slightly rugous.

The ground is cleared for its reception by burning down the copse wood
and hoeing between the roots and stumps. It is sown in the months of
May and June, the ground being slightly opened, and again lightly
drawn together over the seeds with a hoe. In August, when it shoots
up, it is carefully weeded. It ripens in September, growing to the
height of about 18 inches, and its stems, which are very slender, are
bent to the earth by the mere weight of the grain. The patch of land
is then either suffered to lie fallow, or is planted with yams or
cassava in rotation. Experienced cultivators of this Lilliputian grain
assert that manure is unnecessary, as it delights in light soils, and
it is even raised on rocky situations, which are most frequent about
Kissy. When cut down, it is tied up in small sheafs and placed in a
dry situation within the hut; for if allowed to remain on the ground
and to become wet, the grains are agglutinated to their coverings. The
grain is trodden out with the feet, and is then parched or dried in
the sun, to allow the more easy removal of the chaff in the process of
pounding, which is performed in wooden mortars. It is afterwards
winnowed with a kind of cane fanner or mats.

This grain could be raised in sufficient quantities to become an
article of commerce, and I have no doubt would prove a valuable
addition to the list of light farinaceous articles of food in use
among the delicate or convalescent. In preparing this delicious grain
for food, it is first put into boiling water, in which it is
assiduously stirred for a few minutes; the water is then poured off,
and the Foulahs, Joloffs, &c., add to it palm oil, butter, or milk;
but Europeans and negroes connected with Sierra Leone prepare it as
follows:--To the grain cooked as above mentioned, fowl, fish, or
mutton, with a piece of salt pork for the sake of flavor is added, the
whole being then stewed in a close saucepan. This makes a very good
dish, and thus prepared resembles "_Kous-kous_." The grain is
sometimes made into puddings, with the usual condiments, and eaten
either hot or cold, with milk. By the few natives of Scotland in the
colony, it is occasionally dressed as milk porridge.

The negroes also eat it in the same way as they do rice, with palaver
sauce. Fundi ought to be well washed in cold water, and afterwards
rewashed in boiling water. If properly prepared it will be white, and
perfectly free from gritty matter.

Canary-seed, obtained from _Phalaris canariensis_, is grown rather
largely in Kent, the Isle of Thanet, and other parts of the south of
England, as much as 500 tons being annually consumed here for feeding
singing birds. The produce is three to five quarters the acre, and it
is sold at about £25 the ton. We receive foreign supplies of the seed
from Germany and the Mediterranean, and the duty on imports is 2s. 6d.
per bushel.


PULSE.

There are a variety of pulses and leguminous seeds extensively
cultivated as food for both man and cattle, and which form an
important article in the husbandry of tropical countries. The
importance of peas and beans is well appreciated, both by the
horticulturists and agriculturists in Europe and our temperate
colonies, where, however, they are comparatively of less importance
than the smaller pulses and grains are in various tropical countries,
such as haricots in the Brazils and West Indies; ground or earth nuts
in South America, and especially in Western Africa; beans of different
kinds amongst the miners of Peru; gram (_Ervum lens_), and dholl
(_Cajanus_), with innumerable varieties of beans and small lentils
among the natives of India and Egypt; and the Carob bean, or St.
John's bread (_Ceratonia siliqua_), in the Mediterranean
countries.--("Jury Reports.")

Of leguminous grains there are various species cultivated and used by
the Asiatics, as the _Phaseolus Mungo_, _P. Max_ and _P. radiatus_,
which contain much alimentary matter; the earth-nut (_Arachis
hypogæa_), which buries its pods under ground after flowering.

The gram (_Cicer arictinum_) which is mentioned by Dr. Christie
("Madras Journal of Science," No. 13) as exuding oxalic acid from all
parts of the plant. It is used by the ryots in their curries instead
of vinegar. It is the chick pea of England, and _chenna_ of Hindostan.

Among the most commonly cultivated leguminous plants are the lentil
(_Ervum lens_), horse gram (_Dolichos biflorus_, Linn), various
species of _Cytisus_ and _Cajanus_, &c. Many of these are grown in
India as fodder plants; others for their seeds, known as gram, dholl,
&c. The _Cajanus flavus_, of Decandolle (_Cytisus Cajan_), is very
generally cultivated along the Western coast of Africa, and continues
to bear for three years. Several species of dolichos are used as food
in various countries, as _D. ensiformus_ in Jamaica, _D. tuberosus_ in
Martinique, _D. bulbosus_ and _D. lignosus_ in the East Indies.

The vessels of the North bring to Shanghae a great quantity of a dry
paste, known under the name of tanping, the residuum or husk of a
leguminous plant called Teuss, from which the Chinese extract oil, and
which is used, after being pressed, as manure for the ground. Captain
H. Biggs, in a communication to the Agri.-Hort. Soc. of India, in
1845, states that of the esculents a large white pea forms the staple
of the trade of Shanghae, or nearly so, to the astonishing amount of
two and a-half millions sterling. This he gives on the authority of
the Rev. Mr. Medhurst, of Shanghae, and Mr. Thorns, British Consul at
Ningpo. These peas are ground in a mill and then pressed, in a
somewhat complicated, though, as usual in China, a most efficient
press, by means of wedges driven under the outer parts of the
framework with mallets. The oil is used both for eating and burning,
more for the latter purpose, however, and the cake, like large
Gloucester cheese, or small grindstones in circular shape, is
distributed about China in every direction, both as food for pigs and
buffaloes, as also for manure.

We import on the average about 20,000 quarters of beans, peas, &c.,
from Ireland, 450,000 quarters of beans and 200,000 quarters of peas
from foreign countries.

The land under cultivation with pulse, and the crops raised, have been
estimated as follows:--

                         Acres.          Quarters.
  England               500,000          1,875,000
  Ireland               130,000            540,000
  Scotland               50,000            150,000

                        680,000          2,565,000

This is of course exclusive of garden cultivation. The average produce
of beans per acre in England is 3¾ quarters, 3½ in Ireland, and three
in Scotland.

The price of beans per quarter in the last ten years has ranged from
39s. to 27s. the quarter; peas from 40s. 6d. to 27s. 6d.

_Algaroba beans_.--The seed pods or bean of the carob-tree (_Ceratonia
siliqua_, or _Prosopis pallida_?) a tree common in the Levant and
South of Europe, are used as food. The pods contain a large proportion
of sweet fecula, and are frequently used by singers, being considered
to improve the voice. The name of St. John's Head has been applied to
them, from the supposition that they were the wild honey spoken of in
Scripture as the food of John the Baptist. About 40,000 quintals of
these carobs are annually exported from Crete. During the Peninsular
war, the horses of our cavalry were principally fed upon these
algaroba seeds. The pods of the West India locust tree, _Hymenæa
courbaril_, also supply a nutritious matter.

That well known sauce, Soy, is made in some parts of the East, from a
species of the Dolichos bean (_Soja hispida_), which grows in China
and Japan. In Java it is procured from the _Phaseolus radiatus_. The
beans are boiled soft, with wheat or barley of equal quantities, and
left for three months to ferment; salt and water are then added, when
the liquor is pressed and strained. Good soy is agreeable when a few
years old; the Japan soy is superior to the Chinese. Large quantities
are shipped for England and America. The Dolichos bean is much
cultivated in Japan, where various culinary articles are prepared from
it; but the principal are a sort of butter, termed _mico_, and a
pickle called _sooja_.

1,108 piculs of soy were shipped from Canton in 1844, for London,
British India, and Singapore. 100 jars, or about 50 gallons of soy,
were received at Liverpool in 1850. The price is about 6s. per gallon
in the London market.


THE SAGO PALMS, BREAD-FRUIT, &c.

Sago, and starchy matter allied to it, is obtained from many palms. It
is contained in the cellular tissue of the stem, and is separated by
bruising and elutriation. From the soft stem of _Cycas circinalis_, a
kind of sago is produced in the East and West Indies. The finest is,
however, procured from the stems of _Sagus lævis_ (_S. inermis_, of
Roxburgh), a native of Borneo and Sumatra; and _Arenga saccharifera_,
or _Gomutus saccharifus_, of Rumphius. The _Saguerus Rumphii_, or
_Metroxylon Sagus_, which is found in the Eastern Islands of the
Indian Ocean, yields a feculent matter. After the starchy substance is
washed out of the stems of these palms, it is then granulated so as to
form sago. The last-mentioned palm also furnishes a large supply of
sugar. Sago as well as sugar, and a kind of palm wine, are procured
from _Caryota urens_.

In China sago is obtained from _Rhapis flabelliformis_, a dwarfish
palm; and some sago is made from it for native use in Travancore,
Mysore, and Wynaad, and the jungles in the East Indies.

The trunk of the sago palm is five or six feet round, and it grows to
the height of about 20 feet. It can only be propagated by seed. It
flourishes best in bogs and swampy marshes; a good plantation being
often a bog, knee deep. The pith producing the sago is seldom of use
till the tree is fourteen or fifteen years old; and the tree does not
live longer than thirty years. Mr. Crawfurd says there are four
varieties of this palm; the cultivated, the wild, one distinguished by
long spines on the branches, and a fourth destitute of these spines,
and called by the natives female sago. This and the cultivated species
afford the best farina; the spiny variety, which has a slender trunk,
and the wild tree, yield but an inferior quality of sago. The
farinaceous matter afforded by each plant is very considerable, 500
lbs. being a frequent quantity, while 300 lbs. may be taken as the
common average produce of each tree.

Supposing the plants set at a distance of ten feet apart, an acre
would contain 435 trees, which, on coming to maturity in fifteen
years, would yield at the before-mentioned rate 120,500 lbs. annually
of farinaceous matter. The sago meal, in its raw state, will keep good
about a month. The Malays and natives of the Eastern Islands, with
whom it forms the chief article of sustenance, partially bake it in
earthenware moulds into small hard cakes, which will keep for a
considerable time. In Java the word "saga" signifies bread. The sago
palm (_Metroxylon Sagus_) is one of the smallest of its tribe, seldom
reaching to more than 30 feet in height, and grows only in a region
extending west to Celebes and Borneo, north to Mindanao, south to
Timor, and east to Papua. Ceram is its chief seat, and there large
forests of it are found. The edible farina is the central pith, which
varies considerably in different trees, and as to the time required
for its attaining proper maturity. It is eaten by the natives in the
form of pottage. A farina of an inferior kind is supplied by the
Gomuti palm (_Borassus gomutus_), another tree peculiar to the Eastern
Archipelago growing in the valleys of hilly tracts.

At so great a distance it is difficult to decide as to which of these
trees really produce the ordinary sagos of commerce, for there are
several kinds. Planche, in an excellent memoir on the sagos, has
described six species, which he distinguishes by the names of the
places from which they come. Preferring to classify them according to
their characters, M. Mayet distinguishes only three species.

The first he denominates Ancient sago, which comes from different
parts, and varies much in color. It comprehends--1st, Maldivian sago
of Planche, in spherical globules, of two or three millimetres in
diameter, translucid, of an unequal pinkish white color, very hard and
insipid. 2nd, New Guinea sago, of Planche, in rather smaller globules,
of a bright red color on one side, and white on the other. 3rd. Grey
sago of the Moluccas or brown sago of the English; of unequal
globules, from one to three millimetres in diameter, opaque, of a dull
grey color on one side, and whitish on the other. This grey color
probably arises from long keeping and humidity. 4th. Large grey sago
of the Moluccas, exactly resembling No. 3, only that the globules are
from four to eight millimetres in diameter. 5th. Fine white sago of
the Moluccas; entirely resembling No. 3, only that it is purely white,
owing to the complete edulcoration of the fecula of which it is made.

Whatever may be the places of origin of these sagos, they all possess
the following characters--

Rounded globules, generally spherical, all isolated, very hard,
elastic, and difficult to break or powder. The globules put into
water, generally swell to twice their original size, but do not adhere
together.

_Second sage_.--This species corresponds with the pinkish sago of the
Moluccas of Planche. It is in very small globules, less regular than
those of the "first sago," and sometimes stuck together to the number
of two or three. Soaked in water, it swells to double its volume.

Third Species.--_Tapioca sago_.---This name has been applied to a
species of sago now abundant in commerce, because it bears the same
relation to the ancient or first sago, and even to the preceding sago,
that tapioca bears to "Moussache," which is the fecula of the manioc,
_Janipha manihot (Manihot utilissima_).

Whilst the two preceding species of sago, whatever may have been
stated to the contrary, have been neither baked nor submitted to any
heating process, as is proved by the perfect state of nearly all their
grains of fecula, this species has been subjected to the action of
heat while in a state of a moist paste. This sago is not in spherical
globules, like the two preceding species, or at least there are but
few of the globules of that form; it is rather in the form of very
small irregular tubercular masses, formed by the adherence of
different numbers of the primary globules. The facility with which
this sago swells and is divided by water, has occasioned it to be
preferred as an article of food to the ancient sago. It has been
described by Planche under the name of the white sago of the Moluccas,
and by Dr. Pereira under the name of pearl sago.

Bennet, in his work on "Ceylon and its Capabilities," (1843), states
that sago is procured from the granulated pith of the talipot palm,
_Corypha umbraculifera_.

The _Sagus Rumphii_, Willdenow, and _S. farinifera_, Gaertner.--Before
maturity, and previous to the formation of the fruit, the stem
consists of a thin hard wall, about two inches thick, and of an
enormous volume of tissue (commonly termed the _medulla_ or _pith_),
from which the farina or sago is obtained. As the fruit forms, the
farinaceous medulla disappears, and when the tree, attains full
maturity, the stem is no more than a hollow shell. Sago occurs in
commerce in two states, pulverulent and granulated. 1. The meal or
flour as imported in the form of a fine amylaceous powder. It is
whitish, with a buffy or reddish tint. Its odor is faint, but somewhat
unpleasant and musty. 2. Granulated sago is of two kinds, pearl and
common brown. The former occurs in small hard grains, not exceeding in
size that of a pin's head, inodorous, and having little taste. They
have a brownish or pinkish yellow tint, and are somewhat translucent.
By the aid of a solution of chloride of lime they can be bleached, and
rendered perfectly white. The dealers, it is said, pay £7 per ton for
bleaching it. Common sago occurs in larger grains, about the size of
pearl barley, which are brownish white.

Sago is an article of exportation to Europe, and is also shipped to
India, principally Bengal, and to China. It is in its granulated form
that it is usually sent abroad. The best sago is the produce of Siak,
on the north coast of Sumatra. This is of a light brown color, the
grains large, and not easily broken. The sago of Borneo is the next in
value; it is whiter, but more friable. The produce of the Moluccas,
though greatest in quantity, is of the smallest estimation. The cost
of granulated sago, from the hands of the grower or producer, was,
according to Mr. Crawfurd, only a dollar a picul. It fetches in the
London market--common pearl, 20s. to 26s. the cwt., sago flour, 20s.
the cwt. The Chinese of Malacca and Singapore have invented a process
by which they refine sago, so as to give it a fine pearly lustre, and
it is from thence we now principally derive our supplies of this
article. The exports from Singapore in 1847 exceeded 6½ million
pounds, but are now much larger.

The following is a description of the manufacture of this important
article of commerce:--The tree being cut down, the exterior bark is
removed, and the heart, or pith of the palm, a soft, white, spongy and
mealy substance is gathered; and for the purpose of distant
transportation, it is put into conical bags, made of plantain leaves,
and neatly tied up. In that state it is called by the Malays _Sangoo
tampin_, or bundles of sago; each bundle weighs about 30 lbs.

On its arrival at Singapore it is purchased by the Chinese
manufacturers of sago, and is thus treated:--Upon being carried to the
manufactory, the plantain-leaf covering is removed, and the raw sago,
imparting a strong acid odor, is bruised, and is put into large tubs
of cold spring water, where it undergoes a process of purification by
being stirred, suffered to repose, and again re-stirred in
newly-introduced water. When well purified thus, it is taken out of
the tubs by means of small vessels; and being mixed with a great deal
of water, the liquid is gently poured upon a large and slightly
inclined trough, about ten inches in height and width; and in the
descent towards the depressed end, the sago is deposited in the bottom
of the trough, whilst the water flows into another large tub, where
what may remain of sago is finally deposited. As the strata of
deposited sago increases in the trough, small pieces of slates are
adjusted to its lower end to prevent the escape of the substance. When
by this pouring process the trough becomes quite full of sago, it is
then removed to make room for a fresh one, whilst the former one is
put out into the air, under cover, for a short time; and on its being
well dried, the sago within is cut into square pieces and taken out to
be thoroughly dried, under cover, to protect it from the sun. It has
then lost the acid smell already noticed, and has become quite white.
After one day's drying thus, it is taken into what may be called the
manufactory, a long shed, open in front and on one side, and closed at
the other and in the rear. Here the lumps of sago are broken up, and
are reduced into an impalpable flour, which is passed through a sieve.
The lumps, which are retained by the sieve are put back to be
re-bruised, whilst that portion which has passed is collected, and is
placed in a long cloth bag, the gathered ends of which, like those of
a hammock, are attached to a pole, which pole being suspended to a
beam of the building by a rope, one end of it is sharply thrown
forward with a particular jerk, by means of which the sago within is
shortly granulated very fine, and becomes what is technically termed
"pearled." It is then taken out and put into iron vessels, called
_quallies_, for the purpose of being dried. These quallies are small
elliptical pans, and resemble in form the sugar coppers of the West
Indies, and would each hold about five gallons of fluid. They are set
a little inclining, and in a range, over a line of furnaces, each one
having its own fire. Before putting in the sago to be dried, a cloth,
which contains a small quantity of hog's-lard, or some oily substance,
is hastily passed into the qually, and the sago is equally quickly put
into it, and a Chinese laborer who attends it, commences stirring it
with a _pallit_, and thus continues his labor during the few minutes
necessary to expel the moisture contained in the substance. Thus each
qually, containing about ten pounds of sago, requires the attendance
of a man. The sago, on being taken off the fire, is spread out to cool
on large tables, after which it is fit to be packed in boxes, or put
into bags for shipment; and is known in commerce under the name of
"pearl sago." Thus the labor of fifteen or twenty men is required to
do that which, with the aid of simple machinery, might be done much
better by three or four laborers. A water-wheel would both work a
stirring machine and cause an inclined cylinder to revolve over a
fire, for the purpose of drying the sago, in the manner used for corn,
meal, and flour in America, or for roasting coffee and chicory in
England. But the Chinese have no idea of substituting artificial
means, when manual ones are obtainable.

A considerable quantity of sago is exported from Singapore in the
state of flour. The whole quantity made and exported there exceeds, on
the average, 2,500 tons annually. The quantity shipped from this
entrepot is shown by the annexed returns, nearly all of which was
grown and manufactured in the settlement. The estimated value for
export is set down at 14s. per picul of 1¼ cwt.

      EXPORTS FROM SINGAPORE.
                           Piculs
  1840-41   Pearl sago     41,146
     "      Sago flour     33,552
  1841-42   Pearl sago     46,225
     "      Sago flour      7,447
  1842-43   Pearl sago     25,306
     "      Sago flour      4,838
  1843-44   Pearl sago     14,266
     "      Sago flour     14,067
  1844-45   Pearl sago     18,472
     "      Sago flour     36,141
  1845-46   Pearl sago     19,333
     "      Sago flour     26,925
  1846-47   Pearl sago     40,765
     "      Sago flour      9,025

Imports of sago into the United Kingdom, and quantity retained for
home consumption:--

            Imports.     Home consumption.
              Cwts.            Cwts.
  1826        9,644            2,565
  1830        2,677            3,385
  1834       25,763           13,827
  1838       18,627           28,396
  1842       45,646           50,994
  1846       38,595           45,671
  1848       65,000
  1849       83,711           72,741
  1850       89,884           83,954


THE BREAD-FRUIT TREE.

_Artocarpus incisa_.--This tree is less cultivated than would be
supposed from its useful properties. In the West Indies and the Indian
Islands, where it has been introduced from its native place, the South
Sea Islands, it is held in very little consideration, the graminea,
tuberous roots, and farinaceous plants being more easily and readily
cultivated. There are two or three varieties known in the Asiatic
regions. The properties of this tree are thus enumerated by
Hooker:--The fruit serves for food; clothes are made from the fibres
of the inner bark; the wood is used for building houses and making
boats; the male catkins are employed as tinder; the leaves for table
cloths and for wrapping provisions in; and the viscid milky juice
affords birdlime.

_A. integrifolia_is the Jack or Jacca, the fruit of which attains a
large size, sometimes weighing 30 lbs., but is inferior in quality to
the bread-fruit.

The nuts or fruit of _Brosimum Alicastrum_, an evergreen shrub, native
of Jamaica, are nutritious and agreeable articles of food. When boiled
with salt fish, pork or beef, they have frequently been the support of
the negroes and poorer sorts of white people in times of scarcity, and
proved a wholesome and not unpleasant food; when roasted it eats
something like our common chesnut, and is called bread-nut.

_Kafir Bread_.--According to Thunberg, the Hottentots being very
little acquainted with agriculture, or with the use of the cerealia,
and subsisting principally upon wild bulbs and fruits, obtain food
also from _Encephalartos caffer_, a species of _Zamia_, with a
cylindrical trunk, the thickness of a man's body, and about seven feet
high. Having cut down a tree, they took out the pith, that nearly
fills its trunk, and which abounds in mucilage and an amylaceous
fluid; after keeping this for some time buried under ground in the
skin of an animal, they reduced it by pounding and kneading into a
kind of paste; and then baked it in hot ashes, in the form of round
cakes, nearly an inch thick. The Dutch colonists, in consequence of
this practice of the natives, called the plant brood-boon, which
signifies literally bread tree.

THE PLANTAIN AND BANANA.

The several varieties of the edible plantain which are known and
cultivated throughout the West Indies, Africa, and in the East are all
reducible to two classes, viz., the Plantain and the Banana (_Musa
Paradisiaca_and _sapientum_). The difference between these two plants
is even so slight as to be scarcely specific; it is therefore most
probable that there was originally but one stock, from which they
have, by cultivation and change of locality, been derived.

The tiger plantain (_M. maculata_) and the black ditto (_M.
sylvestris_) are cultivated in Jamaica. The whole of the species and
varieties of the tribe are what are called polygamous monoecious
plants, each individual tree bearing the male and female organs of
reproduction.

The plantain and its varieties invariably bear male, female and
hermaphrodite flowers within the same spathe, all of them being
imperfect and consequently unproductive of seed. An individual may,
even from excess of culture, moisture, &c., be entirely incapable of
flowering. During the prevalence of a disease or blight among the
plantain walks of Demerara in the years 1844 and 1845, it was
seriously proposed to introduce male plantains, or obtain fresh stock
by seed.

It is, therefore, necessary to determine with exactness, if possible,
whether the Plantain or Banana, (whichever be the parent stock) exists
anywhere at present, or has been known to have existed as a perfect
plant, that is bearing fertile seeds; or, whether it has always
existed in the imperfect state, that is, incapable of being procreated
by seed, the only state in which it at present exists in our colonies.

Whether Linnæus be right in his conjecture (Spec. Plant, 1763) that
the "Bihai" (_Heliconia humilis_), a native of Caraccas, which
produces fertile seeds, is the stock plant of the plantain, it is
almost impossible to ascertain; but the absence of any description of
a wild seed-bearing plantain, renders it highly probable that the
cultivated species are hybrids produced long ago. The banana, from
time immemorial, has been the food of the philosophers and sages of
the East, and almost all travellers throughout the tropics have
described these plants exactly as they are known to us, either as
sweet fruit eaten raw, or a farinaceous vegetable roasted or boiled.
It is remarkable that the plantain and banana should be indigenous, or
at all events cultivated for ages both in the Old and New World.
Numerous South American travellers describe some one of these plants
as being indigenous articles of food among the natives, thus showing
(if the plantain and its varieties be hybrids) a communication between
the tropics of America, Asia and Africa, long before the time of
Columbus. The older writers on the colony of Guiana, as Hartsinck,
Bellin and others, consider the plantain to be a native. It is
remarkable that Sir R. Schomburgk, during his travels, found a large
species of edible plantain far in the interior. It appears, therefore,
from all the investigations that have been made, that the plantain is
either a hybrid, or its power of production from seed has been
destroyed long ago by cultivation, and that it is not known to exist
anywhere in a perfect state; in which case any attempt to improve the
present stock by the introduction of suckers from elsewhere, must be
totally futile. Mr. A. Garnett recommends the following system of
cultivation, as calculated to prevent the blight. The walk or
plantation is to be formed into beds 36 feet wide, divided by open
drains 30 inches deep. Two rows of plantains to be planted upon each
bed at 18 feet distance, both between and along the rows, to afford a
clear ventilation to the enlarging plants, and so soon as the
plantation has been established, the space of land between each row to
be shovel-ploughed 12 inches deep; the same to be repeated annually,
and upon the interspace may be planted maize, yams, sugar cane, or
eddoes, and the whole kept clear at all times. Thus, with the
conjoined principles of good tillage, free ventilation, and mixed
crops, the blight may yet be successfully combated.

A great diminution in the cultivation of the plantain has been
occasioned in British Guiana by this blight or disease, which first
made its destructive appearance in Essequibo, upwards of thirty years
ago, where its ravages increased with such fatal intensity as to
render the profitable growth of the plant almost hopeless; and up to
this hour no one has been able to discover the immediate or remote
cause of this extraordinary vegetable endemic; whether arising from
the action of insects among the sheathes of the petioles of the
leaves, or in the soil, or from organic decay of the plant, remains
without solution. The last-named cause seems to be rejected, by the
fact that the fructification of the plant is as healthy and abundant
in parts of the colony where the blight does not prevail, both in
number and size of the fruit upon the spike, as at any former period.
On the east coast of Demerara, both the plantain and banana have been
grown for more than twenty years upon the same land, without any
attack of the disease, and without any extraneous manure or even lime
having been applied, and the plants still exhibit great luxuriance,
and produce their former weight of fruit.

The foliage of the plantain affords food and bedding, and is used for
thatch, making paper, and basket making; and from its petioles is
obtained a fine and durable thread. The tops of the young plants are
eaten as a delicate vegetable; the fermented juice of the trunk
produces an agreeable wine.

The abundance and excellence of the nutritive food which the plants of
this valuable genus supply are well known; but of the numerous uses to
which they are applied I may mention, the following:--

The fruit is served up both raw and stewed; slices fried are also
considered a delicacy. Plantains are sometimes boiled and eaten with
salt meat, and pounded and made into puddings, and used in various
other ways. In their ripe state these fruits contain much starchy
matter. From their spurious stems, the fibres of the spiral vessels
may be pulled out in such quantity as to be used for tinder. _M.
textilis_ yields a fibre which is used in India in the manufacture of
fine muslins, and the coarser woody tissue is exported in large
quantities from Manila, under the name of white rope or Manila hemp.
Horses, cattle, swine, and other domestic animals are fed upon the
fruit, leaves, and succulent trunks.

The same extent of ground which in wheat would only maintain two
persons, will yield sustenance under the banana to fifty. That eminent
naturalist and elegant writer, the Baron Von Humboldt, states
("Political Essay on New Spain," vol. ii.) that an acre of land
cultivated with plantains produces nearly twenty times as much food as
the like space sown with corn in Europe. He refers to a place in
Venezuela, where the most careful tillage was rendered to a piece of
land, yielding produce supporting a humble population residing in
huts, each placed in the centre of an enclosure, growing the sugar
cane, Indian corn, the Papaw tree, and the Musa--a tropical
garden!--upon the elaborate culture of which a whole family relied for
subsistence.

Although from the extensive plantain walks in our colonies--which are
seldom cultivated with a garden-like care--so large an average
proportion may not be obtained as twenty times the production of wheat
in Europe, yet I have had practical experience of the prodigious
quantity of farinaceous matter obtainable from an acre of tolerably
well-cultivated plantains, and no esculent plant requires less labor
in its culture upon land suitable for its production. They are readily
increased by suckers, which the old plants produce in abundance.

Lindley enumerates ten species of Musa, some of which grow to the
height of 25 or 30 feet, but that valuable species _M. Cavendishii_,
does not grow more than four or five feet high.

The bananas of the family of the Musaceæ, appear to be natives of the
southern portion of the Asiatic continent (R. Brown, "Bot. of Congo,"
p. 51). Transplanted at an unknown epoch into the Indian Archipelago
and Africa, they have spread also into the, New World, and in general
into all intertropical countries, sometimes before the arrival of
Europeans.

According to Humboldt it affords, in a given extent of ground,
forty-four times more nutritive matter than the potato, and 133 times
more than wheat. These figures must be considered as only
approximative, since nothing is more difficult than to estimate the
nutritive qualities of different aliments.

_Musa paradisiaca_ is cultivated in Syria, to latitude 34 deg.
Humboldt says it ceases to yield fruit at a height of 3,000 feet,
where the mean annual temperature is 68 deg., and where, probably, the
heat of summer is deficient.

The banana seems, however, to be found no higher than 4,600 feet in a
state of perfection.

No fruit is so easily cultivated as are the varieties of the plantain.
There is hardly a cottage in the tropics that is not partly shaded by
them; and it is successfully grown under other fruit trees, although
it is independent of shelter. Its succulent roots and dew-attracting
leaves render it useful in keeping the ground moist during the
greatest heats. The plantain may be deemed the most valuable of
fruits, since it will, in some measure, supply the place of grain in
time of scarcity. To the negroes in the West Indian Islands the
plantain is invaluable, and, like bread to the Europeans, is with them
denominated the staff of life. In Jamaica, Demerara, Trinidad, and
other principal colonies, many thousand acres are planted with these
trees.

The vegetation of this tree is so rapid that if a line of thread be
drawn across, and on a level with the top of one of the leaves, when
it begins to expand, it will be seen, in the course of an hour, to
have grown nearly an inch. The fruit when ripe is of a pale yellow,
about a foot in length and two inches thick, and is produced in
bunches so large as each to weigh 40 lbs. and upwards.

The soil best suited to the growth of the plantain is found in the
virgin land most recently taken in from the forest, having a formation
of clay and decomposed vegetable substances. A large portion of
organic matter is required, as well as clay or other ponderous strata,
to afford the greatest production of fruit. I have known good
plantains produced in the West Indies, upon land considerably
exhausted by the culture of cotton, but which was enriched by the
application of a quantity of the decomposed seed of that shrub near
the roots of the young plantains.

In the Straits' settlements of the East, the following are the most
approved varieties:--The royal plantain, which fruits in eight months;
one which bears in a year, the milk plantain, the downy plantain, and
the golden plantain or banana. A species termed _gindy_ has been
lately imported from Madras, where it is in great request. It has this
advantage over the other kinds, that it can be stewed down like an
apple while they remain tough.

The Malays allege that they can produce new varieties, by planting
three shoots of different sorts together, and by cutting the shoots
down to the ground three successive times, when they have reached the
height of nine or ten inches.

About 144 suckers of the plantain are set on an orlong (1-1/3 acres),
each of which spreads into a group of six or eight stems, of about six
inches to one foot in diameter, which yield each a bunch of fruit, and
are then cut down, when fresh shoots succeed. In very rich soils the
plant will continue to bear for twenty years, but otherwise it is dug
up after the seventh or eighth year. The cost of cultivating 100
orlongs of land exclusively with plantains, will be nearly 2,000
Spanish dollars until produce be obtained. About 43,200 bunches may be
had afterwards yearly, which might give a return of 2,160 dollars, or,
deducting the cost of cultivation and original expenses, a profit per
annum of 1,450 dollars.

The plantain has frequently been suggested as an article of export
from our colonies. A few bunches are occasionally brought over by the
Royal West India Mail Company's steamers running to Southampton, but
more as a curiosity than as articles of commerce.

In its ripe state no unexceptionable and sufficiently cheap method of
preserving it has yet been suggested.

In some districts of Mexico it is, indeed, dried in the sun, and in
this state forms a considerable article of internal commerce under the
name of "plantado pasado."

It is sometimes so abundant and cheap in Demerara, Jamaica, Trinidad,
and other of our colonies, that it might, if cut and dried, in its
green state, be exported with advantage.

It is in the unripe state that it is so largely used by the peasantry
of the colonies as an article of food. It has always been believed to
be highly nutritive, but Dr. Shier states that, in any sample of the
dried plantain which he analysed, he could not find a larger amount
than 88 per cent of nitrogen, which corresponds with about 5½ per
cent. of proteine compounds.

When dried, and reduced to the state of meal, it cannot, like wheat
flour, be manufactured into maccaroni or vermicelli, or at least the
maccaroni made from it falls to powder when put into hot water. The
fresh plantain, however, when boiled whole, forms a pretty dense firm
mass, of greater consistency and toughness than the potato. The mass,
beaten in a mortar, constitutes the _foo-foo_ of the negroes. The
plantain meal cannot be got into this state unless by mixing it up
with water to form a stiff dough, and then boiling it in shapes or
bound in cloths.

Plantain meal is prepared by stripping off the husk of the plantain,
slicing the core, and drying it the sun. When thoroughly dry it is
powdered and sifted. It is known among the Creoles of the West Indies
under the name of _Conquin tay_. It has a fragrant odour, acquired in
drying, somewhat resembling fresh hay or tea. It is largely employed
as the food of infants, children, and invalids. As food for children
and convalescents, it would probably be much esteemed in Europe, and
it deserves a trial on account of its fragrance, and its being
exceedingly easy of digestion. In respect of nutritiveness, it
deserves a preference over all the pure starches on account of the
proteine compounds it contains.

The plantain meal would probably be best and freshest were the sliced
and dried plantain cores exported, leaving the grinding and sifting to
be done in Europe. The flavor of the meal depends a good deal on the
rapidity with which the slices are dried; hence the operation is only
fitted for dry weather, unless indeed, when there was occasion for it,
resource were had to a kiln or stove. Above all, the plantain must not
be allowed to approach too closely to yellowness or ripeness,
otherwise it becomes impossible to dry it. The color of the meal is
injured when steel knives are used in husking or slicing, but silver
or nickel blades do not injure the color. On the large scale a
machine, on the principle of the turnip slicer, might be employed. The
husking could be greatly facilitated by a very simple machine. Were
the plantain meal to come into use in England, and bear a price in any
way approaching to that of Bermuda arrowroot, it would become an
extensive and very profitable export. Full-sized and well-filled
bunches give 60 per cent. of core to 40 of husk and top-stem, but in
general it would be found that the core did not much exceed 50 per
cent., and the fresh core will yield 40 per cent. of dry meal, so that
from 20 to 25 per cent. of meal is obtained from the plantain, or 5
lbs. from an average bunch of 25 lbs.; and an acre of plantain walk of
average quality, producing during the year 450 such bunches, would
yield a ton and 10 lbs. of meal, which, at the price of arrowroot,
namely, 1s. per lb., would be a gross return of £112 10s. per acre. A
new plantain walk would give twice as much. Even supposing the meal
not to command over half the price of arrowroot, it would still form
an excellent outlet for plantains whenever, from any cause, the price
in the colony sank unusually low.

In respect of the choice of a situation for establishing a plantain
walk, with a mill, boiling-house and drying ground, it will be
necessary to fix upon new land with plenty of moisture, and flat if
possible, in order that there may be no difficulty in making roads to
carry the trees; whilst a deep river traversing the land, where there
is no tide or danger of salt water--where facility would be afforded
in making the basins wherein to wash the fibre; where a sea port would
be near at hand for shipping the produce--where workmen, provisions,
and fuel would be readily obtained, and where the climate is
particularly healthy, should be especially sought after.

The plantain grows in profusion between the tropics in all parts of
the world; but as it is an object to have the London market available
for the prepared fibre, the following places may be mentioned as best
calculated to produce a good and constant supply, viz:--the West India
Colonies, the British Colonies in Africa, the South American
Republics, along the Mosquito shore, and other places on the Continent
of America, including Porto Rico, Hayti, and Cuba. The advantages to
the paper manufacturer in employing the prepared fibre instead of
rags, will be numerous, for the fibre is equal in texture, clean, and
aromatic; whilst rags are dirty, full of vermin, and very often
pestilential.

A large stock of the plantain can always be secured, without fear of
its being injured by keeping. The paper will be superior to that made
of rags, and the process of making it will be more economical,
inasmuch as the _sorting_ of the material will not be required.
Another advantage is, that a new article of commerce will be opened
for the benefit of the colonial shipping interests, and a stimulus
will be given to the cultivation of a fruit which is the favorite food
of large masses of the population.

The following is a "specification" of articles requisite for making
three tons of prepared fibre in a day:--

Four wooden boilers lined with lead, in the form of coolers, 7 feet
deep by 6 in diameter. One hydraulic press, from 400 to 500 tons. One
stout screw press, to compress the fibre before it is submitted to the
hydraulic press. One iron mill with horizontal cylinders. Six waggons;
twenty mules. Utensils, such as spatulas, cutlasses, hoes, rakes, &c.
&c. One lever, to take out the fibre from the boilers. One steam
boiler, equal to 12-horse power, to steam the four wooden boilers.

It being very desirable that the works should be in the immediate
neighbourhood of a river, the machinery should be worked by
water-power; but if this mode should be inconvenient, a steam engine
in addition must be obtained, of about 8 or 10-horse power; or if one
steam engine of 20-horse power were employed, it would be sufficient
for all purposes. Thirty men are required to make three tons of fibre
in a day.

_Buildings_.--A store, 100 feet long by 25 feet broad, in wood,
covered with straw, to contain the dried fibre and the presses. One
open shed of the same dimensions, covered with straw for the boilers.

_Capital required_.--It is ascertained that the following outlay will
be sufficient:--

  The materials will cost        £2,000
  Buildings                         500
  Purchase of land                1,500
  Working capital                 1,000

                                 £5,000

The estimated expense in cultivating one quarree, or 5 1-5th English
acres, in plantains, will be £30, as the work can be easily performed
by one laborer in 300 days, at 2s. sterling per day.

A quarree will produce 18 tons of mill fibre, the cost of the
preparation of which is as follows:--

  For workmen's wages, soda, lime, and fuel, at £3 per ton       £54
  Freight to Europe at £4 per ton                                 72
  Managers                                                        30
  Duty, insurance, office fees, &c., at £1 per ton                18

                                                                £174

Thus, making the total expense of producing 18 tons of fibre £174, or
£9 13s. 4d. per ton. In 1848 Manila rope, or plantain fibre of good
quality, was worth £38 per ton.

A correspondent in Jamaica, who has devoted much attention to the
subject, has furnished me with some very valuable detailed
information, the most complete and practical that has ever yet
appeared:--

    _Cultivation_.--The first care of a planter in superintending the
    cultivation of the banana tree, with the two-fold object of
    collecting both fibre and fruit, will be to study the nature of the
    tree to which he will give the preference. A number of experiments
    have been made upon different species of the banana with a view of
    obtaining therefrom the largest quantity and the best color of
    fibre, as well as the finest fruit. Those experiments were very
    tedious and minute, but were absolutely necessary, in order to
    arrive at the most economical and advantageous method of rendering
    the fibre into a state fit for shipment to Europe. At the same time,
    it was of the utmost importance to find out the best description of
    tree, for producing the strongest, the most abundant, and the most
    silky fibre--for containing the least quantity of juice, for
    producing the color sufficiently white to facilitate the operation
    of bleaching, for bearing fruit of the most esteemed quality, and,
    therefore, the most favorable for general consumption.

    A banana tree, which seemed at first sight to possess all those good
    qualities--being of a large size, with whitish or flaxen colored
    fibre, and producing very savoury fruit, only gave 2 per cent, of
    fibre after preparation; that is to say, 100 lbs. in its raw state,
    only gave two pounds of fibre after it was boiled. In endeavoring to
    find out the cause of such a small result, it was discovered that
    this specimen of banana (commonly called the "pig banana,")
    contained a larger proportion of water than of fibre, compared with
    other sorts--that the heart was too large, and that the inside
    leaves were so tender that they almost dissolved in the process of
    boiling. These were the greatest inconveniences of this species of
    tree. There was also another disadvantage, in the quality of its
    fruit, which was yellow in color, and not so useful as those
    descriptions of banana which are generally eaten as a substitute for
    bread. The results of several experiments made upon various
    descriptions of banana, demonstrated the properties of each species,
    both as regarded fibre and fruit. The most profitable in both
    respects is undoubtedly the yellow banana, or common plantain. This
    tree grows to the height of about fifteen feet, it is nine or ten
    inches in diameter, its fibre is firm and abundant, and its fruit is
    used both in a green and ripe state. This plantain abounds on the
    continent of Spanish America and between the tropics, where the
    natives cultivate it as producing the most nutricious fruit of its
    kind. Cargoes of the fruit are frequently exported from Surinam and
    Demerara. On the Spanish part of the American continent, land is
    measured by _fanegas_, each fanega containing twelve _quarrees_, and
    each quarree five and one-fifth English acres. A quarree measures
    one hundred geometrical paces, or three hundred square feet.

    In the first instance, the suckers of the plantain (the tree being
    propagated by cuttings or suckers which shoot up from the bulb),
    should be set at ten feet distance from each other; this proposition
    gives 300 plants on one line of trees, or 900 on the surface of one
    quarree of land. Each plant propagates itself and gives upon an
    average ten trees of the same size and bearing. On one quarree of
    land, therefore there would be 9,000 trees, yielding four pounds of
    fibre and one bunch of fruit each, which is 9,000 bunches of fruit,
    and 36,000 lbs. nett of fibre, in the whole. In good ground the same
    plant will last fifteen years without any further trouble. Flat
    lands ought to be cultivated in preference to any other. The
    plantain thrives with the root in the water, and the head to the
    sun. On the borders of the river Orinoco it grows to the height of
    twenty feet, is one foot in diameter, and the stalks of the branches
    are three inches in circumference.

    _Cutting_.--The tree which has not produced its ripe fruit ought to
    be cut, for two reasons--first, that the fruit be not lost; and
    secondly, that the tree will not have arrived at its full growth and
    ordinary size, and the fibres will be too tender. In cutting it
    down, take it off six inches above the surface of the ground, then
    divide it longitudinally into four parts, take out the heart, which
    must be left to serve for manure, and if fermentation is decided
    upon, leave the pieces at the foot of the tree, otherwise take them
    to the mill to be crushed. The tree being very tender, may, on being
    bent down, be cut asunder with a single stroke of a hatchet,
    cutlass, or other convenient instrument. One man can cut down 800
    trees, and split them in a day.

    _Carrying_.--The trees being thus divided, may be immediately
    carried to the mill to be crushed, or may remain until the
    fermentation separates the juice of sap from the fibres and the
    pith. By fermenting the trees, their weight will be so much reduced
    as to render their carriage considerably lighter than if taken away
    when first cut down. A wagon, with oxen or mules, can carry about a
    ton per day, and one man can load the wagon and drive the cattle.

    _Crushing_.--If the tree is carried from the plantation without
    being subjected to fermentation, it must be passed through a mill,
    the rollers of which, if made about three feet in length, and one
    foot in diameter, will be found a very convenient size. In this
    operation, care should be taken, first of all, to separate the
    tender from the harder or riper layers of fibre. The tree is
    composed of different layers of fibre, which may be divided into
    three sorts; those of the exterior, having been exposed to the
    atmosphere, possess a great degree of tenacity--whilst those of the
    interior, having been secluded from the air, are much more soft and
    tender. If, therefore, the layers of the plantain are passed
    indiscriminately through the mill, those which are hard or firm will
    not be injured by the pressure, whilst those which are soft will be
    almost reduced to pulp. Therefore, the rollers of the mill should be
    always placed horizontally, and upon passing the trees lengthways
    through the mill, the pressure will be uniform and the fibre
    uninjured. In this manner, pass the different sorts of layers
    separately, and the produce will be about four pounds of fibre from
    each tree. The stalks of the branches of the plantain give the best
    fibre, and a large quantity, as compared with the body of the tree;
    100 lbs. of the stalk will give 15 lbs. nett of fibre. In general,
    if a tree will give 4 lbs. nett of fibre, the stalks will give 1 lb.
    out of the 4 lbs. The stalks ought also to be crushed separately,
    because they are harder than the exterior layers of the tree. About
    3,000 trees may be passed through the mill in a day. Whilst the
    experiments were in progress it was ascertained that with a single
    horse, 100 plantain trees on an average were crushed in twenty
    minutes, giving five minutes rest for the horse.

    _Fermentation_.--This operation may be performed in several ways. If
    the trees are allowed to ferment upon the spot after being cut, a
    great saving will occur in respect of _carriage_; this matter ought
    to be carefully studied, because, on an extensive scale of
    manufacture, it is of serious importance. It is found that the trees
    when cut and heaped up, are subject to a drainage of juice, which,
    having a tanning property, discolors those pieces which lie at the
    bottom; hence much time is consumed in afterwards restoring the
    fibre to its natural color. The cut plants should be removed from
    the stumps of the trees, and then placed in heaps, shaded from the
    sun by laying the leaves over them. They will take several weeks to
    ferment. To pursue this process in the immediate vicinity of the
    establishment, would give rise to many inconveniences, in
    consequence of the very large space of ground that would thereby be
    occupied. Fermentation requires a mean temperature. A tree cut down
    and exposed to the sun, would be nearly dry at about 30 deg.
    centigrade, showing a result quite different to that which ought to
    be obtained; whilst a tree placed on a wet soil, and open for the
    fresh air to circulate between the plants, covered at the same time
    with its own leaves, and shaded by the foliage of the plantation,
    would be decomposed at the desired point of about 22 degrees. The
    different modes of fermentation require the same proportions. If the
    cut plants be covered with a thick layer of earth, they will not
    decompose in six _months_; but if, on the contrary, they are covered
    slightly, so that they may receive the freshness of the earth, and
    the heat of the air, they will decompose in six _weeks_. It is the
    same with the fermentation of alkaline baths. Baths at only _one_
    degree will produce decomposition, whilst baths at _three_ degrees
    will not produce any decomposition. The stuff after being passed
    through the mill, or after fermentation, will be put into the
    chemical baths, or vats, or chemical liquor, and the persons in
    charge of the mill and boilers will do this work. Fermentation may
    be advantageously used, in cases where the trees are grown at a
    distance from the establishment--but, where they are in the
    immediate vicinity of the works, it will be best to crush them by
    the mill. The principal saving that is occasioned by fermentation,
    will be found in the carriage, as the substance will be much reduced
    in weight by that process. In an establishment where the manufacture
    is carried on upon a very large scale, trees cut down at a distance
    can be fermented, whilst those produced near the mill can be
    crushed.

    _Chemical Agents._--For decomposing the gluten in the trees during
    the process of boiling, soda, carbonate of soda, and quick lime, are
    used. The proportions herein given, are those requisite for making
    three tons of fibre per day, upon which scale the cost price of the
    fibre in a prepared state for bleaching, is subsequently calculated.
    To make three tons of fibre per day, it is necessary to have four
    boilers of 800 gallons each, and give five boilings in a day, or
    1,650 lbs. of nett fibre for each boiler, or 6,600 lbs. for the four
    boilers per day. After having put into the boiler a sufficient
    quantity of water to cover the material, wait until the water begins
    to boil, and then add the chemical agents.

                                                          lbs.
  To the first boiling of a copper, put of soda            60
  To the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th boilings of the same
    copper, 15 lbs., each making                           60

                                                          120

  Therefore the four boilings will take of soda           480
  The same liquid will serve for two other days, by
    adding 15 lbs. to each fresh boiling, say, in the
    whole, 40 lbs., or                                    600
  It will consume in soda for nine tons made in three
    days                                                1,080
  Or 360 lbs. for three tons made in one day.

    On the fourth day commence again in the same manner, and go on for
    the two remaining days as above, producing eighteen tons in the six
    days. The quick lime is to be employed in each of the boilings, in
    the proportion of one-third less than the quantity of soda. Crude
    soda may be used in the boilings, without previously discarbonising
    it, and quick lime reduced to lime water; but, to render the action
    of the chemical ingredients more quick and certain, it is better to
    discarbonise the soda before it is put into the boiler. This may be
    done by preparing in a small separate boiler the quantity of liquid
    necessary for a day's consumption, which is prepared in about an
    hour. The carbonisation is effected in the following  manner:--

  Ten parts of salt of soda.           }
  Six parts of quick lime.             }  In weight.
  Seventy parts of water (never less.) }

    _Boiling_.--This is a most important operation. By it the gluten and
    coloring matter are separated from the fibres, which separation is
    absolutely necessary, in order to prepare the fibre to receive the
    bleaching. It is necessary to observe that the three several sorts
    of layers which are found in the tree, and which, under the head of
    "crushing," are recommended to be _pressed_ separately, should be
    also _boiled_ separately, because the outermost layer has more
    coloring matter than the next under it, which again has more than
    the innermost layer. As they are boiled so will they be dried and
    shipped, and each sort will have a different price in the market;
    that fibre which is lightest in color bearing the preference, in
    consequence of its not requiring more than _six_ hours to
    bleach--whilst the darkest will, probably from its greater tenacity,
    take _twelve_ to _eighteen_ hours. It is advisable to place over
    each boiler the means of lifting the mass of fibre when boiled, and
    suffering it to drain into the boiler before it is carried away to
    be washed. This is easily effected by a chain from the roof, to
    which may be hung a lever, having at that end over the boiler some
    hooks attached to it, whereby the mass is lifted out of the boiler,
    and the liquor thus preserved for the next boiling.

    _Washing_.--It is absolutely necessary that the fibre should be well
    washed after being taken out of the boiler, in order that all
    extraneous matter may be separated therefrom. In choosing the site
    for an establishment of this kind, care must always be taken to make
    choice of a spot in the immediate neighbourhood of a large river, or
    other plentiful supply of fresh clean water. The machinery necessary
    for cleansing and washing the fibre may be of various descriptions;
    but, perhaps a selection from one of the three following sorts will
    be found to answer every purpose, viz., those used by paper
    manufacturers in England, and by coffee planters and arrowroot
    growers in the West Indies.

    _Drying_.--The washed fibre, when hung over lines made of the
    twisted fibre, or any other convenient material, will be
    sufficiently dry in a few hours to be taken down, when more can be
    hung up, and then several batches can be dried in a day; and it will
    be necessary to have the drying ground as near the water as
    possible, in order to save weight in carriage.

    _Pressing_.--When the fibre is perfectly dry, it must be well
    pressed, for the convenience of packing, carriage, and shipment. The
    hydraulic press is the best machine that can be used for the
    purpose; but in the absence of that, the lever and screw will make a
    large amount of pressure available. A hydraulic press of from 400 to
    500 tons, will press bales of from four to five hundred weight each,
    which will not be too large for shipment."


STARCH-PRODUCING PLANTS INVESTIGATED.

Starch is one of the constituent parts in all mealy farinaceous seeds,
fruits, roots, and other parts of plants, and is in large demand for
domestic use, the arts, &c. Our common starch is made from wheat, and
a good deal from potatoes. Pure fecula is separated by art from a
variety of plants.

Of plants yielding starch we have the Indian arrowroot, which is the
fecula in the rhizomata of several species of the Marantaceæ. In the
West Indies it is obtained from the _Maranta arundinacea_, _Allomyca_
and _nobilis_, and also from various species of _Canna_ called _Tous
les mois_, and in the East Indies from species of _Curcuma_, and from
_Maranta ramossissima_ in Silhet.

The bread fruit (_Artocarpus incisa_), already alluded to, yields a
large quantity of starch; as do the sweet potato (_Convolvulus
Batatas_, or _Batatas edulis_). The pith or farinaceous part of the
trunk of the _Caryota urens_, is almost equal to the finest sago. In
Assam the sago of this palm is much used.

The two varieties of the Cassava afford a very superior fecula, which
is imported under the name of Brazilian arrowroot. 8,354 bags of
tapioca and farina were imported from Maranham in 1834. Some excellent
starch from Norfolk Island was shown at the Great Exhibition.

The Cycadaceous family yields much starchy matter, along with
mucilage. From the soft stems of _Cycas revoluta_ and _C. circinalis_,
natives of China and the East Indies, a kind of sago is made. These
plants are propagated by suckers. _Zamia pumila_, a native of the Cape
of Good Hope, and other species of this remarkable genus of plants,
which is nearly related to both ferns and palms, supply an amylaceous
matter, which has been sold as arrowroot. A similar product is
obtained from _Alstroemeria pallida_, a perennial plant, with pink red
flowers, growing in Chili. From the nuts of the _Cycas circinalis_,
the Singalese prepare an inferior kind of starch, by pounding the
fresh kernels. These are cut in slices, and well dried in the sun
before they are fit for use, otherwise when eaten they are
intoxicating, and occasion vomiting and purging.

The quantity of starch in a plant varies according to the period of
growth. The results of examination on the comparative yield of starch
in the potato, showed that while it abounded towards the latter part
of the season, it decreased when the tubers began to germinate in the
spring. It was found by Professor Balfour that 240 lbs. of potatoes
left in the ground, contained of starch--

                        lbs.         Per cent.
  In August          23 to 25  or   9.6 to 10.4
  September          32 "  38  "   13.3 "  16
  October            32 "  40  "   13.3 "  16.6
  November           38 "  45  "   16   "  18.7
  April              38 "  28  "   16   "  11.6
  May                28 "  20  "   11.6 "   8.3

The quantity of starch remained the same during the dormant state of
winter, but decreased whenever the plant began to grow, and to require
a supply of nourishment.

Mr. Harris, of Jamaica, some years ago, made experiments upon the
nutritious qualities of the principal roots and vegetables of the West
Indies. These being well washed and scraped, were grated, in each case
into two gallons of clear rain-water, and the whole then filtered
through a clean linen strainer, after which it was left to settle;
when the amylaceous matter had wholly subsided the supernatant liquor
was carefully decanted, and fresh water added, which process was
repeated until every foreign substance appeared to be removed; the
produce of these several operations was then carefully collected and
dried with a temperature of about 110 deg. Fahrenheit, and, when dry,
weighed. In this manner the results given in the following table were
obtained:--

  PRODUCE FROM FIVE POUNDS OF THE
                                                   Oz. Drms. Centes. prop.
  Root of the sweet cassava (_Janipha
    Loeflingii_)                                   14    1      17.27
  Root of ocoes or taniers (_Caladium
    esculentum_)                                   11   17      14.29
  Root of the bitter cassava (_Janipha
    manihot_), the Yucca amarga of the
    Spaniards                                      11    2      13.90
  Full grown but unripe fruit of the plantain
    (_Musa paradisiaca_)                           11    1      13.82
  Root of the Guinea yam (_Dioscorea_
    _bulbifera_)                                    8    6      10.46
  Root of the sweet potato (_Batatas_
    _edulis_)                                       8    6      10.46
  Root of the arrowroot (_Maranta_
    _arundinacea_)                                  5    6       6.71
  The full-grown but unripe fruit of the banana
    (_Musa sapientum_)                              0    0       0.00

This table exhibits, no doubt, very unexpected results, since it
places the sweet cassava at the very top, and the banana at the lowest
place in the list, while the bitter cassava, which seems to be little
more than a variety of the sweet, notwithstanding its being the staple
material of West Indian bread, occupies two places lower down, and is
followed by the plantain. The sweet potato and the yam, both of which
are considered to be less nutritious than the arrowroot, rank above it
in the centesimal proportion of their amylaceous produce. Upon what,
then, do the nutritive properties of these various substances depend?
Is it upon a gluten which was overlooked by Mr. Harris, in his
experiments, or, if not, may we not suspect some inaccuracy in the
proportion of starch assigned by him to each? It is to be wished that
similar experiments were repeated with care in different quarters, and
the list extended to other tropical products applicable to human
sustenance, especially the roots which yield the farinaceous starch of
the South Sea islanders, to the achira of Choco, &c.

I shall extract largely from a very valuable report drawn up by Dr.
John Shier, agricultural chemist, of Demerara, and submitted to the
Governor of that colony in 1847, on the starch-producing plants, which
is deserving of more widely extended publicity than the merely local
circulation it has received. The remarks and results of experiments
are worthy of deep consideration; and although they were meant to
apply specially to British Guiana, they are equally pertinent to the
West India colonies generally, our African and Australian settlements,
and many other of our foreign possessions.

For many reasons it is desirable that the number of the staples of
cultivation and export of our colonies should be increased. It is the
general experience of British agriculturists, that the mixed system of
agriculture is more profitable to the farmer and safer for the land,
than the continued cultivation of any single crop, or indeed of
nearly allied crops; and although fewer valid objections can be urged
against the continued cultivation of the sugar cane, when properly
conducted, than against that of grain crops, it is nevertheless
certain that a well-arranged alternation or rotation of crops would be
better. When an efficient system of covered drainage is adopted in
British Guiana, there can be no doubt that the sugar cane will be
replanted at shorter intervals of time than at present, and that other
crops, such as provender crops for cattle, and provision crops for the
colonial and perhaps the home market, will be made to alternate in
cultivation with the cane. When the cane rows are as far apart as they
require to be, to admit of sufficient tillage with the plough and
other implements, it will also be possible to intercalate crops of
rapidly growing plants; and were this done, as it easily might, in
such a manner as to prevent undue exhaustion of the land, or
impoverishment of the sugar crop, the returns could not fail to be
materially increased. It would then probably be found that the
fluctuations in prices would be less felt, for they would not likely,
at the same time, affect different crops in the same manner.

It has been ascertained, in regard to some plants at least, that a
much larger return can be obtained in the colonies than can be grown
in temperate countries, however fertile. This is partly owing to the
greater fertility of the soil under powerful tropical atmospheric
influences, and partly to the fact that vegetation is continuous
throughout the year, so that slow growing plants can do more within
the time, from their functions not being arrested by the chill of
winter; and of many rapidly growing plants, two successive crops can
be grown within the year.

Starch is a substance easily manufactured, and being largely used in
several of the arts, as well as an article of diet, there consequently
exists a considerable demand for it in England. It may be obtained
from a great variety of plants, and many of the most productive of it
are natives of the tropics.

The high prices commanded by grain and breadstuffs in Europe, renders
the present a remarkably favorable time to ascertain what can be done
in this branch of tropical agriculture; for should the potato disease
return, or this root be less extensively planted than hitherto, starch
must maintain a high price, and it will be worth ascertaining whether
some of the superior starch-producing plants of the tropics might not
be cultivated to such an extent as to supply the English market, and
thus be at once profitable to the colonies and advantageous to the
mother country.

Before entering on such a cultivation, however, various points require
investigation. We ought to be able to answer such questions as the
following:--

1. What differences exist between the characters of starch produced by
different plants?

2. What are the qualities or properties that lead
manufacturers--calico printers for example--to prefer one variety to
another?

3. For culinary purposes, and as an article of diet, what qualities
or characters obtain a preference?

4. Can the starches from different plants be distinguished from one
another by distinct and well marked characters, so that the
substitution of a less esteemed variety for a more esteemed one, or
the adulteration of a high priced variety with a cheaper one, could be
readily detected?

5. What plants produce the most esteemed varieties?

6. What plants produce it in the largest quantity?

7. What plants produce the largest yield per acre?

8. From what plants is it most easily manufactured?

9. Is the process attended with any particular difficulties that ought
to deter the East and West India planters from engaging in it?

In the following observations (continues Dr. Shier) I shall be able to
reply to several of these questions, especially those capable of being
settled in the laboratory. On other points, particularly those
relating to the returns per acre, I am at present but imperfectly
informed, in consequence of the limited extent to which these plants
have hitherto been cultivated in this colony (Demerara), and from the
total absence of authentic data regarding the amount of yield.

_Characters of starch produced from different plants_.--Starches from
different plants are best distinguished from one another by
examination under a good miscroscope. The grains or globules may be
examined either as transparent or opaque objects; and although in the
same species there are considerable differences in size and form, the
different kinds are, on the whole, quite distinguishable. One of the
best ways of examining the form of the globules, under the microscope,
is to lay them on a plate of glass and cover them with a drop of
aqueous solution of iodine, which renders them gradually blue and
opaque. When the difference in size and form between the globules of
different species is considerable, as between the _Tous les mois_
starch and cassava starch, or even between the arrowroot starch and
cassava starch frequently used to adulterate it, it is not difficult,
with a little practice, to detect the fraud.


TABLE ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE SIZE AND FORM OF THE STARCH GLOBULES OF
VARIOUS PLANTS.

1. Tous-les-mois (_Canna coccinea_).--Grown in Grenada, 1-300 to
1-2,000 of an inch; general size, 1-500; form of the globules, large,
elliptical and ovate, and remarkably transparent.

2. Ditto ditto (species unknown).--From a plant grown in the garden of
the Hon. J. Croal, Georgetown, but gathered before the root was fully
ripe; globules spherical, shortly ovate and elliptical; size, from
1-600 to 1-1,600; general size, 1-800.

3. Buck Yam (_Dioscorea triphylla_).--Grown on the banks of the
Demerara River. Form of globules, elliptical, often truncated at one
end, so as to be mullar-shaped, some pear-shaped; length, twice the
width; size, 1-600 to 1-2,000; general size, 1-800.

4. Common Yam (_D. sativa_).--Grown on No. 1 Canal, Demerara River.
Elliptical, some long elliptical; size, 1-700 to 1-2,000; general
size, 1-1,000.

5. Guinea Yam (_D. aculeata_).--Grown in the same locality. Larger
globules, elliptical; smaller ditto, spherical, often truncated; some
shortly ovate, with the appearance of being flattened; general size
and range, same as No. 4.

6. Barbados Yam, grown on banks of Demerara river. Globules,
pear-shaped and mullar-shaped; range, 1-700 to 1-1,600; general size,
1-1,000.

7. Plantain (_Musa paradisiaca_).--Grown on the banks of the Demerara
river. Globules long and narrow, generally long elliptical, often more
acute at the ends than in any other species, some linear ended
abruptly; length, often three times the width; range, from 1-400 to
1-4,000 of an inch; general size, 1-800.

8. Potato (_Solanum tuberosum_).--Irish tubers, from Belfast Sound.
Globules, 1-600 to 1-2,000; general size, 1-1,200.

9. Potato (Commercial).--Locality unknown. Range from 1-600; globules
generally same as former, but a few stray ones as large as 1-40 of an
inch.

10. Sweet Potato (_Convolvulus Batatas_).--Grown at the Lodge,
Demerara. Form of globules, spherical aggregated; range, 1-1,000 to
1-4,000; general size, 1-2,400.

11. Arrowroot (_Maranta arundinacea_).--Specimens from Bermuda, where
the highest priced and best quality is prepared. Ovate and elliptical;
length in the larger globules, twice the width; range, from 1-800 to
1-2,400; general size, 1-1,400.

12. Ditto ditto, grown on plantation Turkeyen, Demerara, by J.W. King.
Size and description same as No. 11.

13. Ditto ditto, grown and prepared in Barbados. Characteristics the
same, but globules more uniform in size.

14. Ditto ditto, grown on plantation Enmore; not quite so uniform in
size.

15. Bitter Cassava (_Janipha Manihot_).--Grown on Haagsbosch
plantation. A few globules occur as large as the 1-1,000 of an inch;
these are ovate, the rest are spherical. The range is from 1-2,000 to
1-8,000; general size, 1-4,000.

16. Sweet Cassava (_Janipha Loeflingii_).--Grown on No. 1 Canal,
Demerara River.

17. Tannia (_Caladium sagittifolium_).--Grown at the Lodge. Globules
not so truly spherical as the foregoing, but range and size the same.

18. Wheat (_Triticum sativum_).--Locality unknown. Form of globules,
spherical and slightly elliptical, some very small; range, 1-2,000 to
1-6,000, the former the general size.

19. Maize (_Zea Mays_).--Grown in the colony, but locality uncertain.
Globules, approaching to spherical, much aggregated; range, 1-2,000 to
1-4,000; general size, 1-3,000.


From an inspection of this list, it does not appear that the species
would be easily distinguishable, and it is not easy briefly to
describe the differences; in practice, however, and especially when
the observer has a number of pure and authentic specimens before him,
to have recourse to as standards of comparison, the discrimination is
by no means difficult.

_Specific gravity of starch derived from various plants_.--Of many
bodies the determination of the specific gravity is one of the best
modes of distinguishing the purity. With the view of ascertaining
whether the different varieties of starch have all the same density,
as has been asserted by some, trials were carefully made of as many
specimens as I could procure. The results are embodied in the
following table:--

       TABLE No. I.--DENSITY OF STARCH DERIVED FROM VARIOUS PLANTS.
  ------------------+-------+-------+-----------------------------------------
                    |       |Tem. at|
       Names of     |Density|time of|               Remarks
        Plants      |       |Obs. F.|
  ------------------+-------+-------+------------------------------------
   1. Bitter cassava|1.4  3 | 87.   |Grown in the colony and prepared in
                    |       |       |  the Colonial Laboratory.
   2. Tannia        |1.4773 | 87.   |Ditto             ditto
   3. Arrowroot     |1.4772 | 86.25 |Ditto             ditto
   4. Arrowroot     |1.4748 | 86.25 |Ditto             ditto
   5. Common yam    |1.4733 | 83.25 |Ditto             ditto
   6. Sweet potato  |1.4718 | 85.75 |Ditto             ditto
   7. Arrowroot     |1.4717 | 82.75 |St. Vincent's, commercial
   8. Arrowroot     |1.4701 | 84.75 |Grown in the colony and prepared in C.L.
   9. Tous les mois |1.4698 | 85.25 |Ditto             ditto
  10. Sweet cassava |1.4692 | 86.5  |Ditto             ditto
  11. Wheat starch  |1.4632 | 85.   |Commercial, of English manufacture
  12. Plantain      |1.4615 | 85.75 |Grown in the colony and prepared in C.L.
  13. Tous les mois |1.4611 | 84.25 |Grenada, commercial
  14. Barbados yam  |1.4607 | 83.5  |Grown in the colony and prepared in C.L.
  15. Irish potato  |1.4589 | 84.75 |Tubers from Belfast; prepared in C.L.
  16. Guinea  yam   |1.4581 | 84.2  |Grown in the colony and prepared in C.L.
  17. Potato        |1.4561 | 84.   |Commercial
  18. Buck yam      |1.4489 | 81.25 |Grown in the colony and prepared in C.L.
  19. Arrowroot     |1.4443 | 85.5  |Barbados, commercial
  20. Arrowroot     |1.4158 | 86.25 |Bermuda, ditto
  21. Maize         |1.4109 | 85.5  |Grown in the colony and prepared in C.L.
  ------------------+-------+-------+----------------------------------------

From this it will be seen that the order of density does not
correspond with the order in any of the other tables. Probably those
specimens prepared from dry seeds, such as wheat and maize starch,
which, as commercial articles at least, are less pure than those
prepared from recently dug roots, have also the lowest density.

_Hygroscopic properties of starch produced from different
plants_.--Such of the specimens as are marked in the following table,
as prepared in the colonial laboratory, were dried in the sun in
shallow trays, to which they had previously been transferred in the
wet state. When sun dried, the masses were broken down, and the
starches freely exposed to the air in the shade for ten days. Any
adherent masses were then rubbed to powder by light pressure in a
glazed mortar, and the whole sifted. Portions of each of these
starches, and of others for the sake of comparison, were then dried,
at 212 degrees Fahrenheit, in a current of dry air, and the loss
determined:--

    TABLE No. II.--SHOWING THE HYGROSCOPIC WATER CONTAINED BY STARCH
                     PRODUCED FROM DIFFERENT PLANTS.

                     Per centage of water.              Remarks.
   1. Potato                 20.27         Commercial, locality unknown
   2. Sweet potato           19.57         C., C.L.**
   3. Buck yam               19.43         C., C.L.
   4. Barbados yam           19.40         C., C.L.
   5. Arrowroot              18.81         Bermuda, commercial
   6. Irish potato           17.28         Tubers from Belfast, C.L.
   7. Guinea yam             17.14         C., C.L.
   8. Tous les mois          16.74         Grenada, commercial
   9. Arrowroot              16.43         Barbados, ditto
  10. Common yam             16.36         C., C.L.
  11. Plantain               16.23         C., C.L.
  12. Arrowroot              15.65         C., C.L.
  13. Arrowroot              14.84         C., Plantation Enmore
  14. Tous les mois          14.64         C., C.L.
  15. Tannia                 14.60         C., C.L.
  16. Sweet cassava          14.30         C., C.L.
  17. Maize                  14.22         C., C.L.
  18. Arrowroot              13.36         C., C.L.
  19. Bitter cassava         11.88         C., C.L.
  20. Wheat starch           11.16         Commercial, of English manufacture

  [** The initial C. throughout these tables indicates that the plant
  was grown in the colony; C.L., that the starch was prepared in the
  colonial laboratory.]

That the extremes in this table should occur in the case of the
starches of commerce, was, perhaps, to be expected; nevertheless the
difference between the starch of the sweet potato and that of the
bitter cassava is nearly as great, and both these specimens were
prepared in the laboratory, by the same process, and subject to the
same temperature and exposure.

_Characters of the jellies formed by various
starches._--_Tenacity_.--I have met with no very precise results on
this subject, except the well-known fact that it takes a much larger
quantity of some starches, the arrowroot for instance, to form a jelly
of equal tenacity with that formed by others, such as the _Tous les
mois_; and hence in the West Indies the latter is universally
preferred to the cassava starches.

After trying various plans, the method which I found best fitted for
comparing the tenacity of different starch jellies, was the
following:--Of each of the kinds of starch, 24 grains were weighed out
and mixed with 400 grains of distilled water, in a porcelain capsule
of suitable size. The mixture was then heated and boiled briskly for
three minutes, with constant stirring, and was immediately poured into
a conical test-glass,[45] which the jelly nearly filled. The time at
which each glass was filled was noted, and exactly two hours were
allowed for the contents to cool in a current of air. The glass is
then set on a plate of glass, supported on a ring of a retort stand,
and the weight ascertained, which was necessary to force a metallic
disc, of ascertained size, through the jelly. The most convenient way
of doing this was by using a piece of apparatus of the form rudely
represented on the margin. The rectangular frame is of thin brass
wire, and the slightly cup-shaped disc, _d d_, is soldered to a wire,
attached to the upper short side of the rectangle. From the opposite
or lower side of the rectangle a small glass cup, _c._, is suspended,
into which weights are put as soon as the disc has been made to rest
on the surface of the jelly, _pp_ is the plate of glass on which the
test-glass is set. Whenever the disc tears the skin of the jelly and
begins to sink in it, no further addition, of weights is made, and
the weight of the disc, framework, and cup being known, we have an
estimate of the tenacity of the jelly. This process is but
approximative, and some practice is necessary before the operator
succeeds in getting uniform results from the same series of specimens.

    +--------------------+
    |          |         |
    |          |         |
    |          |         |
    |    d  \_____/  d   |
    |                    |
    |                    |
    |                    |
    |  p--------------p  |
    |                    |
    |                    |
    +--------------------+
               |
               |
               |
               |

               c.

The following statement shows the results on such specimens as I could
procure. The disc was exactly 7/10ths of an inch in diameter.

           TABLE NO. III.--TENACITY OF STARCH IN JELLIES.

  No.      Names of specimens.                 Weight in grains required
                                                  to break the jelly.
   1. Tous les mois, C., C.L.                           2,446*
   2. Tous les mois, Grenada, Commercial                1,742
   3. Maize, C., C.L.                                     955
   4. Barbados yam, C., C.L.                              895
   5. Irish potato, from Belfast, C.L.                    756
   6. Tannia, C., C.L.                                    630
   7. Bermuda arrowroot, finest Commercial                627
   8. Common yam, C., C.L.                                657
   9. Guinea yam, C., C.L.                                571
  10. Plantain, C., C.L.                                  467
  11. Potato starch, Commercial                           467
  12. Arrowroot, C., C.L.                                 393
  13. Sweet potato, C., C.L.                              368
  14. Arrowroot, C., C.L.                                 340
  15. Arrowroot, C.                                       301
  16. Arrowroot, St. Vincent's, Commercial                289
  17. Barbados arrowroot, Commercial                      273
  18. Wheat starch, Commercial                            183
  19. Buck yam, C., C.L.                                  151
  20. Bitter cassava, C., C.L.                            150
  21. Sweet cassava, C., C.L.                              78

[* In this instance the weight stated detached the jelly from the side
of the glass, but the skin of the jelly was not torn as in the other
cases.]


From this list it is obvious that, in respect of tenacity, there is a
very great difference between the jellies prepared from the different
starches--greater, indeed, than exists in regard to any other
character. At first I thought it probable that the tenacity of the
jelly would bear some relation to the size of the globules, and it is
true that we find the Grenada Tous les mois, the largest globule, next
the top, and the cassava among the smallest, at the bottom of the
scale. But, on the other hand, we have the Buck yam starch, a large
sized globule, very high; together with many other exceptions.

As an article of diet, the most tenacious varieties of starch are
preferred, on account of the economy of employing an article of which
a less quantity will suffice; and the same is true when applied to
starching linen, provided the jelly be not deficient in clearness.

_Clearness of jellies_.--When starch jelly is used for the purpose of
starching, or glazing linen, or cotton goods, those varieties that are
most transparent are understood to be preferred, provided, at the same
time, they possess the requisite tenacity. This and other matters
will be best determined by practical men in England; but having had
occasion many times to prepare specimens for trying the tenacity, the
opportunity was always taken of arranging the specimen of jellies in
the order of their clearness, or, to speak more accurately, of their
translucency. In this respect also they exhibit considerable
differences, varying, when prepared according to the formula described
under the head of tenacity, from very translucent approaching to
opaque. The order is shown in the annexed list, which begins with the
clearest.

  TABLE NO. IV.--SHOWING THE ORDER OF CLEARNESS OR TRANSLUCENCY OF
                 UNIFORMLY PREPARED STARCH JELLIES.

  Order.      Names of specimens.
   1.    St. Vincent Arrowroot, Commercial
   2.    Arrowroot, C., C.L.
   3.    Sweet cassava, C., C.L.
   4.    Bitter cassava, C., C.L.
   5.    Bermuda arrowroot, Coml.
   6.    Arrowroot, C., C.L.
   7.    Irish potato, C.L.
   8.    Potato starch, Coml.
   9.    Buck yam, C., C.L.
  10.    Arrowroot, C.
  11.    Plantain, C., C.L.
  12.    Tannia, C., C.L.
  13.    Sweet potato, C., C.L.
  14.    Common yam, C., C.L.
  15.    Tous les mois, Grenada, Cml.
  16.    Barbados arrowroot, Coml.
  17.    Tous les mois, C., C.L.
  18.    Barbados yam, C., C.L.
  19.    Guinea yam, C., C.L.
  20.    Wheat starch, Coml.
  21.    Maize, C., C.L.

On comparing this list with the former one, and taking a general view
of the subject, it will be seen that the jellies that are most
tenacious are generally the least translucent, and that the order of
the two lists is more nearly the converse than occurs in regard to any
other properties.

_Percentage of starch yielded by different plants_.--On this point no
two writers do or can agree. The quantity of starch, even in the same
plants, the potato for instance, varies with the season, the soil,
climate, age, ripeness, length of time the roots have been out of the
ground, &c.

In the following table I have given the result of a series of trials
made in the Colonial Laboratory, Demerara. The roots were all fresh
dug, and, with two exceptions, noticed in the remarks, were fair
average specimens. The process was the common one. The grater or
rasping machine was of copper, to avoid injuring the color of some of
the starches, which an iron grater is liable to do:--

  TABLE NO. V.--PERCENTAGE OF STARCH YIELDED BY DIFFERENT PLANTS.

  No.  Names of plants.               Percentage of starch.

   1.  Sweet cassava                          26.92
   2.  Bitter cassava                         24.84
   3.  Another sample                         20.26
   4.  A third                                16.02
   5.  Common yam                             24.47
   6.  Arrowroot (roots scarcely ripe)        21.43
   7.  Another sample                         17.28
   8.  Barbados yam                           18.75
   9.  Tannia                                 17.05
  10.  Another sample                         15.35
  11.  Guinea yam                             17.03
  12.  Plantain                               16.99
  13.  Sweet potato                           16.31
  14.  Buck yam                               16.07
  15.  Another sample                         15.63
  16.  A third, from a dark colored variety   14.83

From the foregoing list it appears that the sweet and bitter cassava
merit attention as starch-producing plants. They are occasionally
grown for this purpose in the colonies, and yield a large per centage
of starch; but there exists an opinion, whether well or ill founded,
that it is liable to rot linen, and the preference is given here to
the starch of arrowroot. It remains to be seen, however, what estimate
will be formed of this starch in England, for if it should prove an
esteemed variety, there can be no doubt of its proving a highly
profitable cultivation. Cassava grows readily in almost any soil, and
when the drainage is tolerable, two crops of the sweet variety can, it
is stated be grown in a year. I have seen it growing luxuriantly in
the light soils of the interior, as well as in the stiff clay soils of
the coasts. It is considered an excellent preparatory crop in new and
stiff land, on account of its tendency to loosen the soil. Were the
bitter variety fixed on, the preparation of _Casareep_ might be
combined with the preparation of starch; and as that substance is one
of the most esteemed bases for the preparation of various sauces, it
is probable that this might turn out the most profitable part of the
produce. At all events, bitter cassava would have this advantage over
all other starch-producing roots, that the juice of the roots could be
turned, to account as well as the starch.

Of all the plants mentioned in the list, starch is most readily
separated from the arrowroot, in consequence of the tissue being more
fibrous, and yielding little or no cellular tissue requiring to be run
off the starch. Time and water are thus saved in the process, and were
the fibrous residue pressed and dried, it could probably be turned to
good account in the manufacture of paper.

In respect of facility of preparation, the plantain starch, though of
excellent quality, ranks lowest, for the flesh-colored tissue in which
the starch is embedded is somewhat denser than the starch, and settles
down under it, and it is not a little difficult to arrange the process
so as completely to separate the finer parts of this matter from the
starch, and hence its color is never perfectly white.

_Yield of starch-producing plants per acre_.--On this subject, as
already remarked, I do not at present possess sufficiently accurate
data.

In England ten tons of potatoes are not unfrequently produced per
acre; now assuming 15 the per centage of starch, there would be a
yield of one-and-a-half tons per acre, which, at the-lowest quotation,
28s. a cwt., would give £42 per acre; and were the starch to rank with
that prepared from wheat, it would produce £40 per ton, or £60 per
acre. In the thorough drained land of Demerara, and under a good
system of cultivation, I have no doubt that ten tons of cassava could
easily be grown, and if it yielded 25 per cent. of starch, it would be
a return of 2½ tons, or of £62 10s. per acre, reckoned at the price of
potato starch.

Of the yield of the plantain we possess much more accurate
information. A new plantain walk in this colony (British Guiana) will
yield 450 bunches, of 50 lbs. each, of which, as nearly as possible,
50 per cent. will be of core, containing 17 per cent. of starch, thus
producing 17 cwt. of starch per acre. But an old plantain walk, even
when free from disease, could not be reckoned to yield more than half
this quantity, namely, 8½ cwt. per acre. Considering the value that is
set on the plantain as an article of food, and the difficulties
incident to the process of making starch from it, it is by no means
probable that it will ever be used as a source from which to obtain
starch.

Of the quantity of arrowroot that can be grown per acre, I have been
able (continues Dr. Shier) to procure no information; but from the
price it commands in the market, the facility with which it can be
grown, and the ease with which the process of separating the starch
can be carried on, it deserves a fair trial here. To cultivate it to
advantage it ought to be done on thorough-drained and well-tilled
land, planted at the proper season, and not dug till ripe and in dry
weather.

Of the Tous les mois, I have only been able to procure a single plant,
for which I am indebted to the kindness of the Hon. John Croal. As the
root was immature, it would be unfair to deduce from the quantity of
starch obtained, the per centage generally contained by the plant. Its
immaturity was also indicated by the globules being smaller than in
the specimen obtained from Grenada; in other respects, however, such
as the tenacity of its jelly, it stands highest. It is altogether one
of the most promising starch-producing plants, and obviously deserves
a careful trial. It is a plant that expends a good deal of matter in
maturing a considerable quantity of dense and bulky seeds, but as it
propagates both by root and seed, it is probable that, as a root-crop,
it would be highly advantageous to procure a variety that does not
flower.

Both the tannia and the sweet potato can be readily grown, and the
produce per acre is large; but from the foregoing tables it would
appear that there are other plants whose starch is likely to be held
in greater estimation.

_Difficulties attendant on the process of preparing starch_.--Were the
manufacture of superior starch to be carried out in this colony
(British Guiana) on a large scale and profitably, recourse would
require to be had to all the well-known means of economising labor. In
the cultivation as much as possible would require to be done by cattle
and implement labor, and this would be the easier to accomplish,
inasmuch as, to grow roots to great advantage, the land would require
to be thorough drained. When the produce was brought to the buildings,
machinery similar to what is already in use in Europe, for the
purpose of washing and rasping roots, and of separating and washing
starch, would suffice with comparatively little manual labor. An
ordinary amount of judgment being exercised in determining the proper
period of ripeness of the roots, and in selecting seasons when the
weather is usually most suitable for conducting the process of
manufacture, it does not appear that any unusual difficulty would have
to be encountered by growers or manufacturers, unless as regards the
obtaining of a sufficient supply of good water; for that is essential
to the production of good starch.

The creek water of the colony is generally too brown, and the trench
water too muddy, and contains often too much salt to produce starches
of the finest color, hence recourse would require to be had to rain
water, or Artesian water. The first is remarkably pure, and it
certainly does not appear that were sufficiently capacious reservoirs
built, or ponds dug, and protected from infiltration by the usual
well-known means, there would be great difficulty in getting a
sufficient supply of rain water. It is done in Bermuda, and why not
here? On the other hand, almost all the Artesian wells in the colony
contain a large quantity of oxide of iron held in solution by carbonic
acid, and which separates as an ochrey deposit on free exposure to the
air. Were this water used in the starch process, it would certainly
injure the color materially; but by a chemical process, exceedingly
simple, inexpensive, and easy of application, it is possible to purify
the Artesian water, and render it almost as fit as rain water for the
purpose of manufacturing starch.

In some of the other colonies a great deal of the best starch is
produced by the holders of small lots of land, and many parts of the
labor being light, and suited for women and children, it is one of the
most desirable cultivations for small holders, and would be very
beneficial for Demerara, where the lands of the peasantry too
generally lie in a state of utter neglect; yet small holders could not
be expected to be able to compete with those who should grow starch on
the large scale, and prepare it with the best machinery.

_Cassava meal, plantain meal, &c., as articles of export_.--It may
soon become an important question whether the plantain, or some of the
edible roots grown in the tropics, might not be sent to Europe in a
fresh state as a substitute for the potato. Many of them, the buck yam
and the cassava, for instance, ought to be used when fresh dug, for
every day they are out of the ground they deteriorate. This, however,
is not so much the case with some of the larger yams. It is worth
trying whether the finer sorts that deteriorate by keeping, might not,
after being sliced and dried in the sun, become articles of export,
either in that state or when ground to meal. For this purpose the
bitter cassava, the plantain, and the buck yam are the most promising.

Of the bitter cassava mention has already been made as a substance
from which the starch and _casareep_ might be prepared. In this case,
however, the woody and cellular tissue, with the small quantity of
starch left in it by the ordinary starch process, would form far too
poor an article of diet to constitute part of the food of man. But the
roots might be used as a medium from which to prepare cassava meal,
_casareep_, and the very small quantity of starch which is expressed
along with the juice, leaving all the rest of the starch to form part
of the meal. It is of such meal that the cassava cakes of the Indians
are prepared; and although by no means so nutritive as Indian corn
meal[46], there can be little doubt that in the Scotch and Irish
markets the cassava meal would obtain a preference; and were it
exported in quantity it would probably come into extensive use among
all classes.

The process would be as follows:--After washing in a revolving
apparatus, by which means the adherent earth would be got quit of, and
almost the whole of the thin dark colored cuticle become detached, the
roots could be reduced to pulp in a rasping-mill, without the use of
water; the pulp might be compressed in bags by hydraulic pressure,
whereby the juice, together with a small portion of the starch, would
be expressed. After allowing the starch to subside, the juice should
be concentrated to about the density of 1.4. The starch would be
washed, purified, and dried. The contents of the bags would then be
broken up and dried in the sun or in a current of air, after which the
meal would be sifted through a coarse sieve to separate the coarser
parts, which, if their amount was considerable, could be ground and
added to the rest. In this state of rough meal it is fit for making
the cassava cakes. If ground to flour it might be used to mix with
wheat, rye, or barley flour.

The process is usually conducted as follows:--The squeezed pulp is
broken up, sifted, and exposed to the sun on trays or mats till it is
fully more than half dry. An iron hoop of the size and thickness of
the cake to be made is then laid on a griddle or hot plate, and the
space within the hoop is filled evenly with the somewhat moist meal,
no previous kneading or rolling having been employed. As soon as the
coarse meal coheres, the ring is lifted and the cake is turned and
heated on the opposite side. The heat should not be sufficient to
brown the cake. The cakes are finally dried by exposure to the sun.
From the dry cassava meal cakes may be prepared by sprinkling it with
as much cold water as to moisten it to the proper point, and then
proceeding as above. Hot water cannot be employed, neither can
kneading, or any considerable degree of compression be used, otherwise
the water does not evaporate readily enough; the starch gets too much
altered by the heat, and the cake becomes tough.

If an acre of well-tilled thorough-drained land yield 10 tons of fresh
roots, and I have every reason to believe that such a return might be
obtained, I have ascertained that the produce would be 3½ tons of
meal, 598 lbs. of _casareep_, and 2 cwt. of starch; and estimating the
meal at 1d. per lb., the _casareep_ at 1s. 5d. per lb., and the starch
at 40s. per cwt., the gross amount would be £78 13s. 4d. per acre. In
ascertaining these proportions, very simple machinery was employed,
and had the pulp been better pressed the quantity of _casareep_ would
have been considerably greater.

From the table given in a former note it will be seen that the cassava
meal prepared in this way contains but a very small proportion of
matter nutritive in the sense of contributing to the formation of
blood, and that the expressed juice carries off fully one-half of the
proteine compounds contained in the plant.

Lichenin is a variety of starch occurring in _Cetraria islandica_, or
Iceland moss.

_Indian corn starch_.--The advance of science has recently brought to
our knowledge the preparation and use of another article, not only
important as food, but also essential in the arts. I have had occasion
to mention the high value of the Indian corn, and I might with
advantage allude to many of its uses and properties; at present I must
confine my remarks to a product from this valuable grain, known as
corn starch, and yet another as the fecula of maize. In the close of
1849, Mr. Willard and his associates, of Auburn, established extensive
works at Oswego, for the preparation of these important products,
their establishment covering an area of 49,000 square feet. As the
proprietors have to some extent held unrevealed the process by which
they produce a starch more pure than the starch of commerce, we may
not indulge in speculative curiosity; yet I can hardly doubt their
great success is mainly attributable to perfect machinery, guided by
science and talent. The rapid and extended demand for these new
products presents sufficient evidence of their character, as we are
told that about three millions of pounds of this corn starch are
demanded annually by the trade, notwithstanding the usual supply of
wheat starch is undiminished. A remarkable feature of maize starch is
the absence of impurities; upon being subjected to analysis, it is
found that only 2 76-100 parts in 1000 are of other matter than pure
starch. According to Dr. Ure, wheat yields only 35 to 40 per cent, of
good starch, a material extensively used in arts and manufactures.

In addition to starch, the Oswego starch-factory produces from Indian
corn a fecula, peculiarly adapted to culinary purposes, presenting to
our domestic economy one of the most acceptable, pure, and nutritious
articles of food. Already has it become an indispensable household
article, and is consumed largely at home and abroad. The factory,
though in its infancy, consumes annually 150,000 bushels of corn,
equal to about nine millions of pounds in weight. Hitherto the
quantities of starch used for laundry purposes and in the
manufactories of America, have been produced from costly wheats,
though it may be found in many vegetable substances, such as potatoes,
the horse chesnut and other seeds. In England, where breadstuffs,
particularly wheat, have been raised in quantities inadequate to the
demand for food, attempts have been made to convert the viscid matter
of lichens into a gum, for the use of calico printers, paper-makers,
and ink makers; for the stiffening of silks, crapes, and the endless
variety of dry goods, which, by means of these gums or starch, are
made to appear of greater consistency. Most of these attempts had
partial success, yet the making of starch from wheat has not been
arrested.

The Oswego starch factory has happily introduced the use of Indian
corn, as a grain producing a larger proportion of pure amylaceous
properties than any other known vegetable substance, proffering to the
American manufacturer another economic advantage, sustaining, in a
most legitimate matter, sound rivalry and competition with all the
world. I am not aware whether the Oswego factory has converted its
starch into gum--a process easily accomplished by heat, and thus
rendered soluble in cold water, which cannot be done while in its
condition of starch. Here is another result of vast importance
derivable from Indian corn; and we can well conceive that, in a short
period of time, the advantages now derived from the production of corn
starch, may have grown into a national benefit.

Rice (according to Prof. Solly) contains on an average about 84 per
cent of starch; but till comparatively a few years ago, no starch was
manufactured from it, notwithstanding its low price, and the large
quantity of starch which exists in it. The reason of this was, that
the old process of fermentation, by means of which starch is procured
from grain, was not found to be applicable to rice; and hence the
latter only became available as a source of starch in 1840, when Mr.
Orlando Jones introduced his new process, for which he obtained a
patent. This process consisted in macerating the rice for about 20
hours in a dilute solution of caustic potash, containing about 200
grains of the alkali in every gallon; the liquor is then drawn off,
the rice dried, reduced to powder by grinding, then a second time
digested in a similar alkaline lye for 24 hours, repeatedly agitated.
After this it is allowed to settle, and well washed with pure cold
water. A prize medal was awarded for this rice starch at the Great
Exhibition.

Mr. S. Berger, of Bromley, also received a prize medal. He adopts a
different mode of preparation. In place of employing a dilute solution
of caustic potash to dissolve the gluten and other insoluble matters
of the grain, Mr. Berger uses a solution of carbonate of soda,
containing half a pound to the gallon. The rice is steeped, in cold
water for 48 hours, levigated in a suitable mill, and the pulp thus
formed is treated with the solution of carbonate of soda for 60 or 70
hours, being repeatedly stirred; it is then allowed to settle for some
hours, the alkaline liquor is drawn off, and the starch is washed and
purified. This process was patented by Mr. Berger, in December, 1841.
A third process was patented in February, 1842, by Mr. J. Colman; he
uses dilute muriatic acid for the same purpose as Messrs Jones and
Berger.


ARROWROOT, EAST AND WEST INDIAN.

The genuine arrowroot of commerce is the produce of the tuberous
rhizomata of _Maranta arundinacea_, a native of South America, and _M.
indica_, indigenous to the West Indies, but also cultivated in the
East. The best West Indian arrowroot comes from Bermuda. Its globules
are much smaller and less glistening than those of _Tous-les-mois_, or
potato starch.

The peculiar characteristics of the starch obtained from various
plants has been particularised and described already in the elaborate
investigation of the commercial yield and value of the
starch-producing plants. Amylaceous matter of a similar kind to
arrowroot is obtained from other species of Maranta, as from some
species of _Canna_, well known under the popular name of Indian shot,
from the similarity of their round black seeds.

The arrowroot plant (_M. arundinacea_) is a perennial, its root is
fleshy and creeping, and very full of knots and numerous long white
fibres. Arising from the root are many leaves, spear-shaped, smooth on
the upper surface and hairy beneath. The length of the leaf is about
six or seven inches, and the breadth about three towards their base,
the color and consistence resembling those of the seed. From the root
arise slender petioles upon which the leaves stand, and several
herbaceous erect stalks come out between them, rising to the height of
about two feet. A loose bunch of small white flowers is succeeded by
three-cornered capsules, each containing one hard rough seed.

The propagation and culture of this plant are of the simplest kinds.
The roots should be parted, and the most suitable soil is a rich loam.

In the Bermudas, a deep rich soil, or one in which marsh or peat
prevail, is alone adapted for growing arrowroot in perfection.

A correspondent from the Bermudas, (where arrowroot forms the great
staple crop of the islands), informs me that he ploughed up a small
piece of land, twenty rods (or the eighth part of an acre), with a
small plough and one horse. He ploughed it over three times, and the
third time planted the arrowroot as he ploughed it. The land had not
been turned up before for twenty years.

The expenses and profits stand thus:--

                                EXPENSE.
                                                               £. s. d.
  To the ploughman, harrowing and planting the
    arrowroot                                                  1  0  0
  Arrowroot plants                                               16  0
  Digging it up                                      £1  0 0
  Deduct half, as the land was planted for the next
    year                                              0 10 0   0 10  0
  Balance carried down, being net profit                       5 14  0

                                                               8  0  0
                                      PRODUCE.
  By 2,000 lbs. of root at 8s. per 100 lbs.                    8  0  0
  By balance brought down as net profit                        5 14  0

The above £5 14s. clear profit on the 20 rods, is at the rate of £45
12s. profit for one acre. Now, if a small cultivator were to plant
three or four acres, and get only one-half of the above profit, it
would give a good return, and would be well worth the trial.

Arrowroot requires a good rich red soil, of which there is still much
lying waste. The best time for planting it is in April, but it can be
planted in March, or indeed at any time after the first of the year,
till May: though if taken up and planted before Christmas, you may
depend it will not come to any perfection. Arrowroot can be planted in
many ways; either in holes made with a hoe, ploughed under, or in
drills like Irish potatoes. Now the way I prefer is to prepare the
land, then strike the line at two feet apart, and make holes with a
pointed stick or dibble six inches apart, putting in each hole one
strong plant or two small ones, then cover them up. This is more
trouble than the old way, but it gives an excellent crop. It can also
be planted like Irish potatoes in drills, two feet apart in the rows,
and six inches between the plants. It should be hand-weeded in the
spring, because if it is hoed, most likely you will cut some of it off
which may be springing under ground, and it will never come up so
strong again. Arrowroot requires very strong ground and plenty of
manure. Farm yard manure is the best; next to that green seaweed
dripping with salt water--this is an excellent manure, and should be
dug in the ground as the arrowroot is taken up. I have no doubt that
it would be of great advantage to the planter, if he were to put a
cask in a cart, fill it with salt water, and put it on the land a few
weeks before it is planted. Some people say that arrowroot does not
pay so well, because it has to stay in the ground a whole year; but
then if you have onions you can plant them over it, and so obtain a
crop which will pay much better than the arrowroot itself. If you have
a large piece of arrowroot ground, take up one half early, and plant
it out with Irish potatoes; then take up the other half later, and
with the plants set out your potato ground, that is if you have taken
up your potatoes; if not, plant the arrowroot between the rows, in
holes; so that when you take up the potatoes, you clean the arrowroot
and loosen the ground, which will give a good crop; or you can plant
Indian corn very thin over the arrowroot ground (if you have nothing
else), but be sure to cut it up before it ripens corn, or it will
injure your arrowroot crop; or you may plant a few melon seeds over
it, and you will have a fine crop of fruit.

In 1845 I planted, in the months of January and February, a quarter of
an acre of good land, in arrowroot and onions.

The expense and profit stand as follow.--

                           EXPENSE
                                                  £. s. d.
  To digging the ground                            1  0  0
  Planting arrowroot                               0  6  0
  Twelve load of seaweed, at 1s.                   0 12  0
  Rotten manure for onions, 10 loads, at 2s.       1  0  0
  One bottle onion seed                            0 16  0
  Sowing onion seed and keeping the plants clean   0 10  0
  Planting out onions                              1  0  0
  Cleaning onions after set out                    0 15  0
  Tops and making basket                           1  8  0
  Pulling, cutting, and basketing                  0 18  0
  Carting and shipping                             0  8  0
  Digging arrowroot                                2  0  0

                                                  10 13  0
  Clear profit on quarter acre                    22 13  9

                                                  33  6  9
                           PRODUCE
  By onions sold                                  20 16  0
  By arrowroot                                    12 10  9

                                                  33  6  9

This is at the rate of £90 15s. clear profit per acre, which is more
than double the worth of the land. I have not named the arrowroot
plants, because I have planted my land with them again, but they might
be fairly put to the credit of the account. The above statement shows
what may be done with good land and good management; but even if a man
can only clear £10 on an acre of land, he ought not to grumble.

Dr. Ure gives a most interesting and lucid account of the mode of
manufacture in the island of St. Vincent, where the plant is now
cultivated with great success, and the root manufactured in a superior
manner.

It grows there to the height of about three feet, and it sends down
its tap root from twelve to eighteen inches into the ground. Its
maturity is known by the flagging and falling down of the leaves, an
event which takes place when the plant is from ten to twelve months'
old. The roots being dug up with the hoe, are transported to the
washing-house, where they are thoroughly freed from all adhering
earth, and next taken individually into the hand and deprived, by a
knife, of every portion of their skins, while every unsound part is
cut away. This process must be performed with great nicety, for the
cuticle contains a resinous matter, which imparts color and a
disagreeable flavor to the fecula, which no subsequent treatment can
remove. The skinned roots are thrown into a large cistern, with a
perforated bottom, and there exposed to the action of a copious
cascade of pure water, till this runs off quite unaltered. The
cleansed roots are next put into the hopper of a mill, and are
subjected to the powerful pressure of two pairs of polished rollers of
hard brass; the lower pair of rollers being set much closer together
than the upper. The starchy matter is thus ground into a pulp, which
falls into the receiver placed beneath, and is thence transferred to
large fixed copper cylinders, tinned inside, and perforated at the
bottom with numerous minute orifices, like a kitchen drainer. Within
these cylinders, wooden paddles are made to revolve with great
velocity, by the power of a water-wheel, at the same time that a
stream of pure water is admitted from above. The paddle-arms beat out
the fecula from the fibres and parenchyma of the pulp, and discharge
it in the form of a milk through the perforated bottom of the
cylinder. This starchy water runs along pipes, and then through
strainers of fine muslin into large reservoirs, where, after the
fecula has subsided, the supernatant water is drawn off, and fresh
water being let on, the whole is agitated and left again to repose.
This process of ablution is repeated till the water no longer acquires
anything from the fecula. Finally, all the deposits of fecula of the
day's work are collected into one cistern, and being covered and
agitated with a fresh change of water, are allowed to settle till next
morning. The water being now let off, the deposit is skimmed with
palette knives of German silver, to remove any of the superficial
parts, in the slightest degree colored; and only the lower, purer, and
denser portion is prepared by drying for the market.

On the Hopewell estate, in St. Vincent, where the chief improvements
have been carried out, the drying-house is constructed like the
hot-house of an English garden. But instead of plants it contains
about four dozen of drying pans, made of copper, 7½ feet by 4½ feet,
and tinned inside. Each pan is supported on a carriage having iron
axles, with _lignum vitæ_ wheels, like those of a railway carriage,
and they run on rails. Immediately after sunrise, these carriages,
with their pans, covered with white gauze to exclude dust and insects,
are run out into the open air, but if rain be apprehended they are run
back under the glazed roof. In about four days the fecula is
thoroughly dry and ready to be packed, with German silver shovels,
into tins or American flour barrels, lined with paper, attached with
arrowroot paste. The packages are never sent to this country in the
hold of the ship, as their contents are easily tainted by noisome
effluvia, of sugar, &c.

Arrowroot is much more nourishing than the starch of wheat or
potatoes, and the flavor is purer. The fresh, root consists, according
to Benzon, of 0.07 of volatile oil; 26 of starch (23 of which are
obtained in the form of powder, while the other 3 must be extracted
from the parenchyma in a paste, by boiling water); 1.48 of vegetable
albumen; 0.6 of a gummy extract; 0.25 of chloride of calcium; 6 of
insoluble fibrine; and 65.6 of water.

Arrowroot is often adulterated in this country with potato flour and
other ingredients.

Dr. Lankester asserts that the value of arrowroot starch, as an
article of diet, is not greater than that of potato starch, and that
the yield of starch is not greater from the arrowroot than from
potatoes; but this I must decidedly deny. Chemical analysis and
experience are proofs to the contrary.

The analogy arrowroot has to potato starch, has induced many persons
to adulterate the former substance with it; and not only has this been
done, but I have known instances in which potato starch alone has been
sold for the genuine foreign article. There is no harm in this, to a
certain extent; but it certainly is a very great fraud upon the public
(and one for which the perpetrators ought to be most severely
punished), to sell so cheap an article at the same price as one which
is comparatively costly. There is, moreover, in potato starch, a
peculiar taste, bringing to mind that of raw potatoes, from which the
genuine arrowroot is entirely free. This fraud, however, can be
readily detected; arrowroot is not quite so white as potato starch,
and its grains are smaller, and have a pearly and very brilliant
lustre; and further, it always contains peculiar clotted masses, more
or less large, which have been formed by the adhesion of a multitude
of grains during the drying. These masses crush very readily when
pressed between the fingers, and as before stated, arrowroot is free
from that peculiar odor due to potato starch. This may be most readily
developed by mixing the suspected sample with hot water; if it be
genuine arrowroot, the mixture is inodorous, if potato starch, the
smell of raw potatoes is immediately developed. If a mixture of
arrowroot and potato starch be minutely observed by means of a good
microscope, the grains of arrowroot may be readily detected; they are
very small and exceedingly regular in shape, whilst those of potato
starch are much larger, and very irregular in shape. But the most
convenient and delicate test of all, is that proposed by Dr.
Scharling, of Copenhagen. After mentioning the test by the microscope,
he goes on to state that he has obtained more favorable results by
employing diluted nitric acid; and that, if arrowroot or potato starch
be mixed with about two parts of concentrated nitric acid, both will
immediately assume a tough gelatinous state. This mass, when potato
starch is employed, is almost transparent, and when arrowroot is used,
is nearly opaque, as in the case above mentioned, in which
hydrochloric acid is substituted. A mixture of nitric acid and water,
however, operates very differently on these two kinds of starch. The
glutinous mass yielded by the potato starch, becomes in a very brief
period so tough that the pestle employed for stirring the mixture is
sufficiently agglutinated to the mortar, that the latter may be lifted
from the table by its means. Arrowroot, on the other hand, requires
from twenty-five to thirty minutes to acquire a like tenacity.

The _Lancet_ recently stated that, on a microscopical analysis of 50
samples of arrowroot, purchased indiscriminately of various London
tradesmen, 22 were found to be adulterated. In 16 cases this
adulteration consisted in the addition of a single inferior product
much cheaper in price, such as potato flour, sago meal, or tapioca
starch, while in other instances there was a combination of these
articles, potato flour being usually preponderant. Ten of the mixtures
contained scarcely a particle of the genuine Maranta or West India
arrowroot, for which they were sold. One consisted almost wholly of
sago meal; two of potato flour and sago meal; two of potato flour,
sago meal, and tapioca starch; one of tapioca starch; and four of
potato arrowroot, or starch entirely. The worst specimens were those
which were done up in canisters especially marked as "Genuine West
India arrowroot," or as being "warranted free from adulteration;" and
one, which contained a considerable quantity of potato flour, was
particularly recommended to invalids, and certified as the finest
quality ever imported into this country. The profits to the vendors of
the inferior compounds are to be estimated from the fact that the
price of sago meal and potato starch is about 4d. per lb., while the
genuine Maranta arrowroot is from 1s. to 3s. 6d. per lb.

The arrowroot of Bermuda has long borne a high reputation, being
manufactured on a better principle and being therefore of superior
quality to that produced in Antigua, St. Vincent, and other West
Indian islands. The process is tedious and requires a good deal of
labor. There is no doubt, however, that the quality of the water has a
great deal of influence on the fecula. Bermuda arrowroot is
necessarily made from rain water collected in tanks or reservoirs, and
the lime and the deposit from houses, &c., may alter its properties.
After the root is taken from the ground it is placed in a mill, and is
thereby cleansed of its exterior excrescences; it is then thoroughly
washed, when it is ready for the large machine, the principle of which
is similar to the "treadmill." A horse is placed on something like a
platform, and as he prances up and down, the machinery is set in play.
A person stands at the end, and places the root in the wheel of the
machine, which, after being ground, falls into a trough of water.
After going through this process, it is rewashed and then placed in
vessels to dry in the sun. It is packed in boxes lined with blue paper
or tin, and sent to the markets in England and America, where it
generally meets with ready sale.

At a meeting of the Agricultural Society of Bermuda, held in May,
1840, Mr. W.M. Cox submitted a new arrowroot strainer which he had
invented. It consists of two cloth strainers fixed to hoops from 15 to
20 inches in diameter. The strainers working one within the other, are
kept in motion by a lever, moved by hand. The whole apparatus is not
an expensive one, and is well adapted for aiding the manufacture of
arrowroot upon an expeditious and economical plan.

A simple method by which starch may be extracted from the fecula with
much purity consists in enclosing the flour in a muslin bag and
squeezing it with the fingers while submerged in clean water, by which
process the starch passes out in a state of white powder and subsides.
Two essential constituents of flour are thus separated from each
other; a viscid substance remains in the bag, which is called gluten,
and the white powder deposited is starch.

The principal quarters from whence the supply is derived, are the
Bermudas, St. Vincent, Barbados and Grenada, in the West Indies;
Ceylon, and some other parts of the East--and a few of our settlements
on the West coast of Africa. The annual imports for home consumption
average 500 tons.

The cultivation of arrowroot for the production of starch in St.
Vincent has increased enormously of late years. In 1835, the island
produced 41,397 lbs.; in 1845 it exported 828,842 lbs. The exports to
15th June, 1851, were, 2,934 barrels, 2,083 half barrels, 5,610 tins.
The culture is year by year extending, and as, unlike that of the
sugar cane, it may be carried on on a small scale with very little
outlay of capital, we may reasonably anticipate a still further
progressive extension for some years to come. Arrowroot, when once
established in virgin soil, produces several crops with very little
culture. In the first half of 1851, 25,027 lbs. were shipped from
Montego Bay, Jamaica. The quantity of arrowroot on which duty of 1s.
per cwt. was paid in the six years ending 1840, was as follows:--

               Cwts.
  1835         3,581
  1836         3,280
  1837         2,858
  1838         2,538
  1839         2,264
  1840         2,124

The imports in the last few years have been in

               Cwt.
  1847         8,040
  1848        10,580
  1849         9,252
  1850        15,980
  1851

About 500 cwt. are re-exported.

East India arrowroot is procured in part from _Curcuma angustifolia_,
known locally as Tikoor in the East, and a similar kind of starch is
yielded by _C. Zerumbet_, _C. rubescens_, _C. leucorhiza_, and
_Alpinia Galanga_, the Galangale root of commerce. _C. angustifolia_
grows abundantly on the Malabar coast, and is cultivated about the
districts of Patna, Sagur and the south-west frontier, Mysore,
Vizigapatam, and Canjam, Cochin and Tellicherry. It was discovered but
a few years ago growing wild in the forests extending from the banks
of the Sona to Nugpore.

The particles of East India arrowroot are very unequal in size, but on
the average are larger than those of West India arrowroot.

Dr. Taylor, in his Topography of Dacca, speaks of fecula or starch
being obtained from the Egyptian lotus (_Nymphæa lotus_), which is
used by the native practitioners as a substitute for arrowroot.

Chinese arrowroot is said to be made from the root of _Nelumbium
speciosum_.

The original Indian arrowroot is extracted at Travancore, according to
Ainslie, from the root of the _Curcuma angustifolia_. It is easily
distinguished by its form, which is sometimes ovoid, sometimes
elongated, of considerable size, rounded at one of the extremities,
and terminating in a point at the other, often resembling a grain of
rice.

The manufacture of arrowroot on the southern borders of the
Everglades, at Key West, Florida, bids fair to become as extensive and
as profitable as at Bermuda, whence, at present, we receive the bulk
of our supplies. The wild root, which the Indians call Compti, grows
spontaneously over an immense area of otherwise barren land. It is
easily gathered, and is first peeled in large hoppers ingeniously
contrived, and thrown into a cylinder and ground into an impalpable
pulp. It is then washed and dried in the sun, baked and broken into
small lumps, when it is ready for the market. The article is
extensively used in the Eastern woollen and cotton establishments, as
well as for family use. Arrowroot is cultivated in the interior of
East Florida with great success. It is also cultivated to a
considerable extent in Georgia, and is, I understand, a profitable
crop.

The following is the process of manufacture:--The roots, when a year
old, are dug up, and beaten in deep wooden mortars to a pulp; which is
then put into a tub of clean water, well washed, and the fibrous part
thrown away. The milky liquor being passed through a sieve or coarse
cloth, is suffered to settle, and the clean water is drawn off; at the
bottom of the vessel is a white mass, which is again mixed with clean
water, and drained; lastly the mass is dried in the sun, and is pure
starch. Arrowroot can be kept without spoiling for a very long time.

A considerable quantity of arrowroot is now produced in the Sandwich
Islands. In 1841 arrowroot to the value of 3,320 dolls. was shipped,
and in 1843, 35,140 lbs., valued at £1,405, was exported, principally
to Tepic and San Blas, where it is used as starch for linen.

A kind of arrowroot of very good quality was sent to the Great
Exhibition of 1851, by Sir R. Schomburgk, which is obtained in St.
Domingo from the stems of a species of Zamia, called there Guanjiga;
and the _Zamia Australis_, of Western Australia, yields even better
fecula. The taste was unpleasant and salt, as if it had been immersed
in lime. The other starch, from the Western Australian Zamia, in
quality rivalled arrowroot. This fecula hangs together in chains,
quite unlike the ordinary appearance of arrowroot when seen under the
microscope.

The following figures show the exports of arrowroot from Bermuda:--

             lbs.      Value of the exports.
  1830      18,174              --
  1831      77,153              --
  1832      34,833              --
  1833      44,651              --
  1834      54,471              --
  1835      65,500              --
  1836        --                --
  1841      91,230              --
  1842     136,610              --
  1843     151,757            £8,682
  1844     173,275            10,974
  1845     224,480             8,084
  1847        --               4,716
  1848        --               4,747
  1849        --               6,760
  1850     854,329              --

In the spring of 1851, 201,130 lbs. were shipped from Bermuda.

In 1843 the quantity of arrowroot in the rough state made in Bermuda
was 1,110,500 lbs.

          ARROWROOT EXPORTED FROM ANTIGUA TO

           Great Britain   B.N. America   B.W. Indies
               Boxes          Boxes          Boxes
  1835         1,075             20             --
  1836           581             43             --
  1837           100             42             --
  1838           472             20             --
  1839           682             --             32
  1840           453             --             30
  1841           289             --             10
  1842           582             --             --
  1843           744             --             --
  1844           376             --             --
  1845           402              5             --

Barbados exported in 1832, 16,814 lbs., value £469; in 1840, 387
packages; in 1843, 302; in 1844, 790 packages; in 1851, 306 packages;
these average about 30 lbs. each.

Ceylon now produces excellent arrowroot. In 1842, 150 boxes were
exported; in 1843, 200; in 1844, 300; in 1845, 600 boxes.

From Africa we now import a large quantity: 250 boxes were received in
1846. Not unfrequently arrowroot from Africa has been sent to the West
Indies in the ships with the liberated Africans, and thence
re-exported to England, as of St. Vincent or Bermuda growth. The duty
on arrowroot, under the new tariff, is equalised on all kinds to 4½d.
per lb.

The imports and home consumption of arrowroot have increased very
largely, as may be seen from the following figures:--

                         Retained for home
            Imports         consumption
              lbs.              lbs.
  1826       318,830           358,007
  1830       449,723           516,587
  1834       837,811           735,190
  1835       287,966           895,406
  1838       404,738           434,574
  1839       303,489           224,792
  1840       408,469           330,490
  1841          --             454,893
  1842       890,736           846,832
  1846       905,072           981,120
  1847     1,185,968         1,211,168
  1848       906,304           933,744
  1849     1,036,185         1,032,992
  1850     1,789,774         1,414,669
  1851     2,083,681         1,848,778
  1852     2,139,390         2,024,316

SALEP is the prepared and dried roots of several orchideous plants,
and is sometimes sold in the state of powder. Indigenous salep is
procured, according to Dr. Perceval from _Orchis mascula_, _O.
latifolia_, _O. morio_, and other native plants of this order. On the
continent it is obtained from _O. papilionaceo_, and _militaris_.
Oriental salep is procured from other orchideoe. Professor Royle states
that the salep of Kashmir is obtained from a species of Eulophia,
probably _E. virens_. Salep is also obtained from the tuberous roots
of _Tacca pinnatifida_, and other species of the same genus, which are
principally natives of the East Indies and the South Sea Islands.

The large fleshy tubers of tacca, when scraped and frequently washed,
yield a nutritious fecula resembling arrowroot.

Salep consists chiefly of bassorin, some soluble gum, and a little
starch. It forms an article of diet fitted for convalescents when
boiled with water or milk. The price of salep is about eight guineas
per cwt. in the London market. A little is exported from
Constantinople, as I noticed a shipment of 66 casks in 1842; excellent
specimens from this quarter were shown in the Egyptian department of
the Great Exhibition in 1851. It was formerly a great deal used, but
has latterly been much superseded by other articles.

Major D. Williams ("Journal of the Agri. and Hort. Soc. of India,"
vol. iv., part I), states that the tacca plant abounds in certain
parts of the province of Arracan, where the Mugs prepare the farina
for export to the China market.

After removing the peel, the root is grated on a fish-skin, and the
pulp having been strained through a coarse cloth, is washed three or
four times in water, and then dried in the sun.

According to a recent examination of the plant by Mr. Nuttall
("American Journal of Pharmacy," vol. ix., p. 305), the Otaheite salep
is obtained from a new species of tacca, which he names _T. oceanica_.

For many years we have obtained from Tahiti, and other islands of the
South Seas, this fecula, known by the name of Tahiti arrowroot,
probably the produce of _Tacca pinnatifida_. It is generally
spherical, but also often ovoid, elliptic, or rounded, with a
prolongation in the form of a neck, suddenly terminated by a plane.

The tacca plant grows at Zanzibar, and is found naturalised on the
high islands of the Pacific. The art of preparing arrowroot from it is
aboriginal with the Polynesians and Feejeeans.

At Tahiti the fecula is procured by washing the tubers, scraping off
their outer skin, and then reducing them to a pulp by friction, on a
kind of rasp, made by winding coarse twine (formed of the coco-nut
fibre) regularly round a board. The pulp is washed with sea water
through a sieve, made of the fibrous web which protects the young
frond of the coco-nut palm. The strained liquor is received in a
wooden trough, in which the fecula is deposited; and the supernatant
liquor being poured off, the sediment is formed into balls, which are
dried in the sun for twelve or twenty-four hours, then broken and
reduced to powder, which is spread out in the sun further to dry. In
some parts of the world cakes of a large size are made of the meal,
which form an article of diet in China, Cochin-Caina, Travancore, &c.,
where they are eaten by the natives with some acid to subdue their
acrimony.

Some twenty varieties of the Ti plant (_Diacaena terminalis_) are
cultivated in the Polynesian islands. There is, however, but one which
is considered farinaceous and edible. In Java the root is considered a
valuable medicine in dysentery.

Within the last three or four years, considerable quantities of a
feculent substance, called Tous les mois, have been imported from the
West Indies. It is cultivated in Barbados, St. Kitts, and the French
islands, and is said to be prepared by a tedious and troublesome
process from the rhizomes of various species of _Canna Coccinea_,
_Achiras_, _glauca_, and _edulis_. It approaches more nearly to potato
starch than to any other fecula, but its particles are larger. Like
the other amylaceous substances, it forms a valuable and nutritious
article of food for the invalid.

The large tuberous roots of the Canna are equal in size to the human
head. The plant attains in rich soils a stature of fourteen feet, and
is identical, it is supposed, with the Achira of Choco, which has an
esculent root highly esteemed; and my friend, Dr. Hamilton, of
Plymouth, has named it provisionally, in consequence, _Canna achira_.
The starch of this root, he asserts, is superior to that of the
_Maranta_.


ROOT CROPS.

Amongst tuberous rooted plants, which serve as food for man in various
quarters of the globe, the principal are the common potato, yam,
cocoes or eddoes, sweet potatoes, taro, tacca, arrowroot, cassava, or
manioc, and the Apios (_Arracacha esculenta_). There are others of
less importance, which may be incidentally mentioned. The roots of
_Tropæolum tuberosum_ are eaten in Peru, those of _Ocymum tuberosum_
in Java. In Kamschatka they use the root of the _Lilium Pomponium_ as
a substitute for the potato. In Brazil the _Helianthus tuberosus_. The
rhizomæ and seed vessels of the Lotus form the principal food of the
aborigines of Australia. As a matter of curious information, I have
also briefly alluded to many other plants and roots, furnishing
farinaceous substance and support in different countries.

The comparative amount of human food that can be produced upon an acre
from different crops, is worthy of great consideration. One hundred
bushels of Indian corn per acre is not an uncommon crop. One peck per
week will not only sustain life, but give a man strength to labor, if
the stomach is properly toned to the amount of food. This, then, would
feed one man 400 weeks, or almost eight years! 400 bushels of potatoes
can also be raised upon an acre. This would give a bushel a week for
the same length of time; and the actual weight of an acre of sweet
potatoes (_Convolvulus batatas_) is 21,344 lbs., which is not
considered an extraordinary crop. This would feed a man (six pounds a
day) for 3,557 days, or nine and two-third years!

To vary the diet we will occasionally give rice, which has been grown
at the rate of 93 bushels to the acre, over an entire field. This, at
45 lbs. to the bushel, would be 4,185 lbs.; or, at 28 lbs. to the
bushel when husked, 2,604 lbs., which, at two pounds a day, would feed
a man 1,302 days, or more than three-and-a-half years!


POTATOES.

The common English or Irish potato (_Solanum tuberosum_), so
extensively cultivated throughout most of the temperate countries of
the civilised globe, contributing as it does to the necessities of a
large portion of the human race, as well as to the nourishment and
fattening of stock, is regarded as of but little less importance in
our national economy than wheat or other grain. It has been found in
an indigenous state in Chili, on the mountains near Valparaiso and
Mendoza; also near Monte Video, Lima, Quito, as well as in Santa Fe de
Bogota, and more recently in Mexico, on the flanks of Orizaba.

The history of this plant, in connection with that of the sweet
potato, is involved in obscurity, as the accounts of their
introduction into Europe are somewhat conflicting, and often they
appear to be confounded with one another. The common kind was
doubtless introduced into Spain in the early part of the sixteenth
century, from the neighbourhood of Quito, where, as well as in all
Spanish countries, the tubers are known as papas. The first published
account of it we find on record is in "_La Cronica del Peru_," by
Pedro de Cieca, printed at Seville, in 1553, in which it is described
and illustrated by an engraving. From Spain it appears to have found
its way into Italy, where it assumed the same name as the truffle. It
was received by Clusius, at Vienna, in 1598, in whose time it spread
rapidly in the South of Europe, and even into Germany. It is said to
have found its way to England by a different route, having been
brought from Virginia by Raleigh colonists, in 1586, which would seem
improbable, as it was unknown in North America at that time, either
wild or cultivated; and besides, Gough, in his edition of Camden's
"Britannia," says it was first planted by Sir Walter Raleigh, on his
estate at Youghal, near Cork, and that it was cultivated in Ireland
before its value was known in England. Gerarde, in his "Herbal,"
published in 1597, gives a figure of this plant, under the name of
_Batata Virginiana_, to distinguish it from the _Batata edulis_, and
recommends the root to be eaten as a "delicate dish," but not as a
common food. "The sweet potato," says Sir Joseph Banks, "was used in
England as a delicacy, long before the introduction of our potatoes.
It was imported in considerable quantities from Spain and the
Canaries, and was supposed to possess the power of restoring decayed
vigor." It is related that the common potato was accidentally
introduced into England from Ireland, at a period somewhat earlier
than that noticed by Gerarde, in consequence of the wreck of a vessel
on the coast of Lancashire, which had a quantity on board. In 1663 the
Royal Society of England took measures for the cultivation of this
vegetable, with the view of preventing famine.

Notwithstanding its utility as a food became better known, no high
character was attached to it; and the writers on gardening towards the
end of the seventeenth century, a hundred years or more after its
introduction, treated of it rather indifferently. "They are much used
in Ireland and America as bread," says one author, "and may be
propagated with advantage to poor people."

The famous nurserymen, Loudon and Wise, did not consider it worthy of
notice in their "Complete Gardener," published in 1719. But its use
gradually spread as its excellencies became better understood. It was
near the middle of the last century before it was generally known
either in Britain or North America, since which it has been most
extensively cultivated.

The period of the introduction of the common potato into the British
North American colonies, is not precisely known. It is mentioned among
the products of Carolina and Virginia in 1749, and by Kalm as growing
in New York the same year.

The culture of this root extends through the whole of Europe, a large
portion of Asia, Australia, the southern and northern parts of Africa,
and the adjacent islands. On the American continent, with the
exception of some sections of the torrid zone, the culture ranges from
Labrador on the east, and Nootka Sound on the west, to Cape Horn. It
resists more effectually than the cereals the frosts of the north. In
the North American Union it is principally confined to the Northern,
Middle, and Western States, where, from the coolness of the climate it
acquires a farinaceous consistence highly conducive to the support of
animal life. It has never been extensively cultivated in Florida,
Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana, probably from the greater
facility of raising the sweet potato, its more tropical rival. Its
perfection, however, depends as much upon the soil as on the climate
in which it grows; for in the red loam, on the banks of Bayou Boeuf, in
Louisiana, where the land is new, it is said that tubers are produced
as large, savory, and as free from water as any raised in other parts
of the world. The same may be said of those grown at Bermuda, Madeira,
the Canaries, and numerous other ocean isles.

The chief varieties cultivated in the Northern States of America are
the carter, the kidneys, the pink-eyes, the mercer, the orange, the
Sault Ste. Marie, the merino, and Western red; in the Middle and
Western States, the mercer, the long red, or merino, the orange, and
the Western red. The yield varies from 50 to 400 bushels and upwards
per acre, but generally it is below 200 bushels.

Within the last ten years an alarming disease, or "rot," has attacked
the tubers of this plant, about the time they are fully grown. It has
not only appeared in nearly every part of America, but has spread
dismay, at times, throughout Great Britain and Ireland, and has been
felt more or less seriously in every quarter of the globe.

To the greater uncertainty attending its cultivation of late years,
must be attributed the deficiency of the United States crop of 1849,
as compared with that of 1839. This is one of the four agricultural
products which, by the last census, appears smaller than ten years
since.--("American Census Reports for 1850.")

The crops in Ireland, where the potato is the principal object of
culture, vary from 1½ to 10½ tons per acre, according to the season;
but in the average of three years ending 1849, the annual growth of
Great Britain and Ireland amounted to nine million tons, which, at £3
per ton, exhibits the value at £27,000,000 sterling. Ireland produced
in 1847 a little over two million tons, the yield being 7¼ tons per
acre. In 1848 the produce was 2,880,814 tons, averaging only four tons
to the acre. In 1849, 4,014,122 tons, averaging 5½ tons to the acre.
In 1850, 3,954,990 tons; and in 1851, 4,441,022 tons; the average
yield per acre not stated. In many parts of Scotland 24 tons to the
acre are raised. The sales of potatoes in the principal metropolitan
markets exceed 140,000 tons a year, which are irrespective of the
sales which take place at railway stations, wharfs, shops, &c. The
imports into the United Kingdom average about 70,000 tons annually.
Potatoes are exported to the West Indies, Mediterranean, and other
quarters. For emigrant ships, preserved or dried potato flour is now
much used.

The following quantities of potato flour were imported from France in
the last few years:--

             Cwts.
  1848      17,222
  1849       3,858
  1850      12,591
  1851       2,631

We also imported the following quantities of potatoes in the last
five years:--

                Cwts.
  1848          940,697
  1849        1,417,867
  1850        1,348,867
  1851          636,771
  1852          773,658

Thoroughly dried potatoes will always produce a crop free from
disease. Such is the positive assertion of Mr. Bollman, one of the
professors in the Russian Agricultural Institution, at Gorigoretsky.
In a very interesting pamphlet[47] by this gentleman, it is asserted,
as an unquestionable fact, that mere drying, if conducted at a
sufficiently high temperature, and continued long enough, is a
complete antidote to the disease.

The account given by Professor Bollman of the accident which led to
this discovery is as follows:--He had contrived a potato-setter, which
had the bad quality of destroying any sprouts that might be "on the
sets, and even of tearing away the rind. To harden the potatoes so as
to protect them against this accident, he resolved to dry them. In the
spring of 1850, he placed a lot in a very hot room, and at the end of
three weeks they were dry enough to plant. The potatoes came up well,
and produced as good a crop as that of the neighbouring farmers, with
this difference only, that they had no disease, and the crop was,
therefore, upon the whole, more abundant. Professor Bollman tells us
that he regarded this as a mere accident; he, however, again dried his
seed potatoes in 1851, and again his crop was abundant and free from
disease, while everywhere on the surrounding land they were much
affected. This was too remarkable a circumstance not to excite
attention, and in 1852 a third trial took place. All Mr. Bollman's own
stock of potatoes being exhausted, he was obliged to purchase his
seed, which bore unmistakable marks of having formed part of a crop
that had been severely diseased; some, in fact, were quite rotten.
After keeping them about a month in a hot room, as before, he cut the
largest potatoes into quarters, and the smaller into halves, and left
them to dry for another week. Accidentally the drying was carried so
far that apprehensions were entertained of a very bad crop, if any.
Contrary to expectation, however, the sets pushed promptly, and grew
so fast that excellent young potatoes were dug three weeks earlier
than usual. Eventually nine times the quantity planted was produced,
and although the neighbouring fields were attacked, no trace of
disease could be found on either the herbage or the potatoes
themselves.

This singular result, obtained in three successive years, led to
inquiry as to whether any similar cases were on record. In the course
of the investigation two other facts were elicited. It was discovered
that Mr. Losovsky (living in the government of Witebsk, in the
district of Sebege), had for four years adopted the plan of drying his
seed potatoes, and that during that time there had been no disease on
his estate. It was again an accident which led to the practice of this
gentleman. Five years ago, while his potatoes were digging, he put one
in his pocket, and on returning home threw it on the stove (poele),
where it remained forgotten till the spring. Having then chanced to
observe it, he had the curiosity to plant it, all dried up as it was,
and obtained an abundant, healthy crop; since that time the practice
of drying has been continued, and always with great success. Professor
Bollman remarks that it is usual in Russia, in many places, to
smoke-dry flax, wheat, and rye; and in the west of Russia, experienced
proprietors prefer, for seed, onions that have been kept over the
winter in cottages without a chimney. Such onions are called _dymka_,
which may be interpreted smoke-dried.

The second fact is this:--Mr. Wasileffsky, a gentlemen residing in the
government of Mohileff, is in the habit of keeping potatoes all the
year round, by storing them in the place where his hams are smoked. It
happened that in the spring of 1852 his seed potatoes, kept in the
usual manner, were insufficient, and he made up the requisite quantity
with some of those which had been for a month in the smoking place.
These potatoes produced a capital crop, very little diseased, while at
the same time the crop from the sets which were not smoke-dried was
extensively attacked by disease. Professor Bollman is of opinion that
there would have been no disease at all if the sets had been better
dried.

The temperature required to produce the desired result is not very
clearly made out. Mr. Bollman's room, in which his first potatoes were
dried, was heated to about 72 degrees, and much higher. By way of
experiment he placed others in the chamber of the stove itself, where
the thermometer stood at 136 degrees, and more. He also ascertained
that the vitality of the potato is not affected, even if the rind is
charred. Those who have the use of a malt-kiln, or even a lime-kiln,
might try the effect of excessive drying, for a month seems to be long
enough for the process.--(Gardener's Chronicle.)

A Mr. Penoyer, of Western Saratoga, Illinois, publishes the following,
which he recommends as a perfect cure and preventive of the potato
rot, having tested it thoroughly four years with perfect success;
while others in the same field, who did not use the preventive, lost
their entire crop by the rot. It not only prevents the rot, but
restores the potato to its primitive vigor, and the product is not
only sound, but double the size, consequently producing twice the
quantity on the same ground, and the vines grow much larger, and
retain their freshness and vitality until the frost kills them. Aside
from the cure of the rot, the farmers would be more than doubly
compensated for their trouble and expense in the increase and quality
of the crop. The remedy or preventive is as follows:--"Take one peck
of fine salt and mix it thoroughly with half a bushel of Nova Scotia
plaster or gypsum (the plaster is the best), and immediately after
hoeing the potatoes the second time, or just as the young potato
begins to set, sprinkle on the main vines, next to the ground, a
tablespoon full of the above mixture to each hill, and be sure to get
it on the main vines, as it is found that the rot proceeds from a
sting of an insect in the vine, and the mixture coming in contact with
the vine, kills the effect of it before it reaches the potato." I
cannot but consider Professor Bollman's as the most important of the
two remedies suggested.

The potato crop of the United States exceeds 100 million bushels,
nearly all of which are consumed in the country; the average exports
of the last eight years not having exceeded 160,000 bushels per annum.

According to the census returns of 1840, the quantity of potatoes of
all sorts raised in the Union, was 108,298,060 bushels; of 1850,
104,055,989 bushels, of which 38,259,196 bushels were sweet potatoes.

Last year (1852) there was under cultivation with potatoes in Canada,
the following extent of land:--

                   Acres.                 Bushels.
  Upper Canada     77,672     Produce     498,747
  Lower Canada     73,244     Produce     456,111

About 782,008 cwts. of potatoes are annually exported from the Canary
Islands. In Prussia, 153 million hectolitres of potatoes were raised
in 1849. In 1840 Van Diemen's Land produced 15,000 tons of potatoes,
on about 5,000 acres of land.

The potato is not yet an article of so much importance in France, as
in England or the Low Countries, but within the last twenty years its
cultivation has increased very rapidly. It is mostly grown where corn
is the least cultivated. The quantity raised in 1818, was 29,231,867
hectolitres, which had increased in 1835 to 71,982,814 hectolitres.
About 2,000,000 hectolitres of chesnuts are also annually consumed in
France, a portion of the rural population in some of the Central and
Southern Departments living almost entirely on them for half the year.

In Peru dried potatoes are thus prepared:--Small potatoes are boiled,
peeled, and then dried in the sun, but the best are those dried by the
severe frosts on the mountains. In the Cordilleras they are covered
with ice, until they assume a horny appearance. Powdered, it is called
_chimo_. They will keep for any length of time, and when used required
to be bruised and soaked. If introduced as a vegetable substance in
long sea voyages, the potato thus dried would be found wholesome and
nourishing. A large and profitable business is now carried on, in what
is called "preserved potatoes," for ships' use, prepared by Messrs.
Edwards and Co., which are found exceedingly useful in the Royal Navy,
in emigrant ships, for troops and other services, from their
portability, nutritious properties, and being uninjured by climate.

Few persons are probably aware of the quantity of potatoes used in
England, America and the Continent, in the manufacture of starch,
arrowroot, and tapioca, &c., A starch manufactory in Mercer, Maine,
United States, grinds from 16,000 to 24,000 bushels annually of
potatoes, and makes 140,000 to 240,000 lbs. of starch, which finds a
ready market at Boston, at four dollars the hundred pounds. The New
England manufacturers prefer it to Poland starch. Another starch
manufacturer, in Hampden, America, consumes 2,500 bushels per day. In
a single district in Bavaria, in Germany, 400,000 lbs. of sago and
starch are manufactured from potatoes; 100 lbs. of potatoes are said
to yield 12 lbs. of starch. From experiments made in America, with
three varieties of potatoes, the long reds, Philadelphia, and
pink-eyes, it was found that the former yielded the most starch, viz.,
about 6 lbs. to the bushel. A bushel of potatoes weighs about 64 lbs.
The following table from Accum, gives the rate of starch and component
parts per cent. in different varieties:--

  +-------------------+--------+-------+---------+------+---------+------+
  |       Sort.       |Fibrine.|Starch.|Vegetable| Gum. |Acids and|Water.|
  |                   |        |       | Albumen.|      |  Salts. |      |
  +-------------------+--------+-------+---------+------+---------+-------
  |Red potatoes       |   7.0  |  15.0 |   1.4   |  4.1 |   5.1   | 75.0 |
  |Ditto germinated   |   6.8  |  12.2 |   1.3   |  3.7 |         | 73.0 |
  |Potato sprouts     |   2.8  |   0.4 |   0.4   |  3.3 |         | 93.0 |
  |Kidney potatoes    |   8.8  |   9.1 |   0.8   |      |         | 81.3 |
  |Large red ditto    |   6.0  |  12.9 |   0.7   |      |         | 78.0 |
  |Sweet ditto        |   8.2  |  15.1 |   0.8   |                | 74.3 |
  |Potato of Peru     |   5.2  |  15.0 |   1.9   |     1.9        | 76.0 |
  |Ditto of England   |   6.8  |  12.9 |   1.1   |     1.7        | 77.5 |
  |Onion potato       |   8.4  |  18.7 |   0.9   |     1.7        | 70.3 |
  |Voigtland          |   7.1  |  15.4 |   1.2   |     2.0        | 74.3 |
  |Cultivated in the  |        |       |         |                |      |
  |  environs of Paris|   6.8  |  13.3 |   0.9   |  3.3 |   1.4   | 73.1 |
  +-------------------+--------+-------+---------+------+---------+------+

The first six varieties were analysed by Einhoff, the next four by
Lamped, and the last named by Henry.


YAMS.

The different species of yams have a wide range. In the West Indies
there are several varieties, having distinctive names, according to
quality, color, &c., as the white yam, the red yam, the negro yam, the
creole yam, the afoo yam, the buck yam (_Dioscorea triphylla_), which
is found wild in Java and the East; the Guinea yam, the Portuguese
yam, the water yam, and the Indian yam, &c. The last is considered the
most farinaceous and delicate in its texture, resembling in size the
potato; most of the other sorts are coarse, but still very nutritive
and useful. The common yam (_Dioscorea sativa_) is indigenous to the
Eastern Islands and West Indies. The Guinea yam (_D. aculeata_) is a
native of the East. The Barbados or winged yam (_D. alata_?) has a
widely extended range, being common to India, Java, Brazil, and
Western Africa. The yam species are climbing plants, with handsome
foliage, of the simplest culture, which succeed well in any light,
rich, or sandy soil, and are readily increased by dividing the
tuberous roots. The Indian, Barbados, and red yams are planted in the
West Indies early in May, and dug early in the January following. If
not bruised, they will keep well packed in ashes, the first nine, and
the second and last twelvemonths. The Portuguese and Guinea yams are
planted early in January and dug in September. Creole yams and Tanias
are dug in January. Sweet potatoes from January to March. In most of
our colonies large crops of the finest descriptions of yams, cocos,
&c., could be obtained, but the planting of ground provisions is too
much neglected by all classes. From the tubers of yams of all sorts,
and particularly the buck yam, starch is easily prepared, and of
excellent quality. Some varieties of the buck yam are purple-fleshed,
often of a very deep tint, approaching to black, and although this is
an objection, because it renders more washing necessary, yet even from
these the starch is at last obtained perfectly white.

As an edible root the buck yam, especially when grown in a light soil,
is equal to the potato, if not superior to it. It does not, however,
keep for any length of time, and therefore could not be exported to
Europe, unless the roots were sliced and dried.

Yams and sweet potatoes thrive well in the northern parts of
Australia; indeed the former are indigenous there, and constitute the
chief article of vegetable food used by the natives. The yam was
introduced into Sweden, where it succeeded well, and bread, starch,
and brandy were made from it, but it prefers a warmer climate.

Yams are occasionally brought to this country. When cooked, either by
roasting or boiling, the root is even more nutritious than the potato,
nor is it possessed of any unpalatable flavor, the pecularity being
between that of rice and the potato. Dressed in milk, or mashed, they
are absolutely a delicacy; and from the abundance in which they are
cultivated in the West Indies and other parts, they promise to become
a most economical and nutritious substitute for the potato.

The yam frequently grows to the enormous size of forty or fifty pounds
weight, but in this large state it is coarse-flavored and fibrous.

An acre of land is capable of producing 4½ tons of yams, and the same
quantity of sweet potatoes, within the twelve months, or nine tons per
acre for both, being nearly as much as the return obtained at home in
the cultivation of potatoes; and I have the authority of all
analytical chemists for saying that in point of value, as an article
of food, the superiority is as two to one in favor of the tropical
roots.

The kidney-rooted yam (_D. pentaphylla_), is indigenous to the
Polynesian islands, and is sometimes cultivated for its roots. It is
called _kawaii_ in the Feejee islands. _D. bulbifera_, a native of the
East, is also abundantly naturalised in the Polynesian islands, but is
not considered edible.

There are seven or eight kinds of yams grown in India. Two are of a
remarkably fine flavor, one weighing as much as eighteen pounds, the
other three pounds. These are found in the Tartar country.


COCOS OR EDDOES

_Arum esculentum_.--This root has not hitherto been considered of
sufficient importance to demand particular care in its cultivation,
except by those who are engaged in agricultural pursuits, and derive
their subsistence from the production of the soil. But though the
cultivation of the root is almost unknown to the higher classes in
society, and little regarded by planters in the colonies, it is a most
valuable article of consumption. Amongst the laboring population it is
the principal dependence for a supply of food. Long droughts may
disappoint the hopes of the yam crop, storms and blight may destroy
the plantain walks, but neither dry or wet weather materially injure
the coco; it will always make some return, and though it may not
afford a plentiful crop, it will yield a sufficiency until a supply
can be had from other sources. For this reason the laborer in the West
Indies always takes care to put in a good plant of cocos to his
provision ground as a stand by, and knowing their value, is perhaps
the only person who bestows any degree of care or attention upon them.
Previous to their emancipation, whole families of negroes lived upon
the produce of one provision ground, and the coco formed the main
article of their support. Where the soil is congenial to the white and
black Bourbon coco, the labor of one industrious person once a
fortnight will raise a supply sufficient for the consumption of a
family of six or seven persons. The coco begins to bear after the
first year, and with common care and cultivation the same plant ought
to give annually two or three returns for several years. In Jamaica, a
disease something similar to that affecting the potato, has been found
injurious to the coco root. This disease, which has baffled all
inquiry as to its origin, affects the plants in and after the second
year of their being planted. The first indication of it is the change
in the leaves, which gradually turn to a yellow hue, have a sickly
appearance, and at length drop off at the surface of the earth. The
stock or "coco head," as it is called, below ground, having become
rotten, nothing but a soft pulpy mass remains. In some fields every
third or fourth root is thus affected, in others much greater numbers
are destroyed, so much so that the field requires to be almost
entirely replanted, by which not only an expense is entailed, but a
heavy loss sustained, from the field being thrown out of its regular
bearing. The black coco seems to suffer less than the white.

Another species, the Taro (_Arum Colocasia_, _Colocasia esculenta_ and
_macrorhizon_), is an important esculent root in the Polynesian
islands. In the dry method of culture practised on the mountains of
Hawaii, the roots are protected by a covering of fern leaves. The
cultivation of taro is hardly a process of multiplication, for the
crown of the root is perpetually replanted. As the plant endures for a
series of years, the tuberous roots serve at some of the rocky groups
as a security against famine. It is also extensively cultivated in
Madeira and Zanzibar, and has even withstood the climate of New
Zealand. It is grown also in Egypt, Syria, and some of the adjacent
countries, for its esculent roots. A species is cultivated in the
Deccan, for the sake of the leaves, which form a substitute for
spinach. Farina is obtained from the root of _Arum Rumphii_ in
Polynesia.


SWEET POTATOES.

The batatas, or camote of the Spanish colonies (_Convolvulus batatas_,
Linn; _Batatas edulis_, of Choisy, and the _Ipomæa Batatas_ of other
botanists), belongs to a family of plants which has been split into
several genera. It is a native of the East Indies, and of
intertropical America, and was the "potato" of the old English writers
in the early part of the fourteenth century. It was doubtless
introduced into Carolina, Georgia, and Virginia soon after their
settlement by the Europeans, being mentioned as one of the cultivated
products of those colonies as early as the year 1648. It grows in
excessive abundance throughout the Southern States of America, and as
far north as New Jersey, and the southern part of Michigan. The
varieties cultivated there are the purple, the red, the yellow, and
the white, the former of which is confined to the South.

The amount of sweet potatoes exported from South Carolina in 1747-48,
was 700 bushels; that of the common potato exported from the United
States, 1820-21, 90,889,000 bushels; in 1830-31, 112,875,000 bushels;
in 1840-41, 136,095,000 bushels; in 1850-51, 106,342,000 bushels.

The sweet potato is cultivated generally in all the intertropical
regions, for the sake of its roots, and as a legume in temperate
countries. In the Southern States of North America, the culture ceases
in Carolina under latitude 36 degs.; in Portugal and Spain it reaches
to latitude 40 and 42 deg.; and as a legume its cultivation is
attempted to the vicinity of Paris. In India it is a very common crop;
its tubers are very similar to the potato, but have a sweeter taste,
whence the common name; but it must not be confounded with the
topinambur (_Helianthus tuberosus_), a native of Brazil, which is less
cultivated. The root contains much saccharine and amylaceous matter.

Several marked varieties of the sweet potato are raised in the
Polynesian groups. In some islands it forms the principal object of
cultivation.

It is grown in the Northern districts of New Zealand, at Zanzibar,
Monomoisy, Bombay, and other parts of the East Indies. They are
raised on the bare surface of the rock in some parts of the Hawaiian
islands, and a sourish liquor is procured from them. It was early
cultivated on the Western Coast of Africa, for the Portuguese Pilot
(who set out on his voyages to the colony at St. Thomas, in the Gulf
of Guinea) speaks of this plant, and states that it is called "batata"
by the aboriginals of St. Domingo. They are abundant at Mocha and
Muscat. Sweet potatoes form a principal and important crop in the
Bermudas.

A valuable addition has lately been made to the votaries of the sweet
potato in Alabama, supposed to be from Peru. A letter describing it
says:--"It is altogether different and equally superior to any variety
of this root hitherto known. It is productive, and attains a
prodigious size, even upon the poorest sandy land, and the roots
remain without change from the time of taking them out of the ground
until the following May. The plant is singularly easy of cultivation,
growing equally well from the slip or vine, the top or vine of the
full-grown plant being remarkably small; the inside is as white as
snow. It is dry and mealy, and the saccharine principle contained
resembles in delicacy of flavor fine virgin honey."

There is in general a great error in cultivating this root, as most
people still plant in the old way, two or three sets in the hole,
which is a great deal too close.

When a piece of land is to be planted in sweet potatoes, it should be
top-dressed with some manure, to be dug or ploughed under a week or
two before it is to be planted. Drills should be made two feet apart,
and the potatoes placed in the drill about one foot asunder. From
eight to twelve to the pound are the best size for planting. The
"white upright" kind, when intended for sets, should be taken up early
in March, and kept about a month, so as to be quite dry before
planting. Abundant crops can rarely be raised from the stem of the
"uprights;" the old potato, however, grows to a large size. I have
planted a potato weighing about an ounce, and dug it up in August,
weighing over two pounds. The drills can be made with a small plough
to great advantage, when a person understands it.

The best manure for the sweet potato is anything green, such as fresh
seaweed, green oats, bushes, or anything of the kind, put in in
abundance.

Care should be taken to get early and good strong slips. A slip with
about six joints is quite long enough; three or four joints to be put
under ground, and the rest above. For slips, the land must be prepared
as already described for the potatoes; this should be done before the
slips are ready to cut.

The best way to plant slips is to drill, the same way as for the
potatoes, only a little closer; then put the end of the slip in,
leaving about two joints out of ground, placing them one foot apart.
The drills can be made in dry weather, so as not to have any delay
when it rains; by this means a great many can be planted in a day.

The best land for sweet potatoes is the light sandy kind; a rich
friable black mould, or a rocky substratum; for hill sides, rocky
ravines, and places which would be called barren and unprofitable for
other crops, are found to yield a good return when planted with sweet
potatoes. The best time to plant slips to get stock from, is the
latter end of August or early in September, as the season may suit.

The sweet potato of Java, says Mr. Crawfurd, is the finest I ever met
with. Some are frequently of several pounds weight, and now and then
have been found of the enormous weight of 50 lbs. The sweetness is not
disagreeable to the palate, though considerable, and they contain a
large portion of farinaceous matter, being as mealy as the best of our
own potatoes. In Java it is cultivated in ordinary upland arable, or
in the dry season as a green crop in succession to rice.

A tuberous root (_Ocymum tuberosum_), an inhabitant of the hot plains,
is frequently cultivated in Java. It is small, round, and much
resembling in appearance the American potato, but has no great flavor.
Its local name is _kantang_.


CASSAVA OR MANIOC.

Of this plant, which is a shrub about six feet high, extensively grown
for its farinaceous root, there are several species, nearly all
natives of America, principally of Brazil, whence it derives one of
its common names of Manihot or Mandioc. Two species of Manihot have
been found indigenous in South Australia. The varieties commonly
cultivated for their roots, are the sweet and the bitter.

1. Sweet cassava (_Janiphi_ (or _Jatropha_,) _Loeflingii_, Kunth;
_Manihot Aipi_, of Pohl).--This species has a spindle-shaped root
brown externally, about six or seven ounces or more in weight, which
contains amylaceous matter, without any bitterness, and is used as
food, after being rasped and washed, so as to cleanse it from the
fibrous matter, in the same manner as arrowroot is prepared. It is
distinguished from the bitter cassava by a tough ligneous fibre, which
runs through the heart of the tuber. Manihot starch is sometimes
imported into Europe under the name of Brazilian arrowroot. The
cassava is known in Peru as _yucca_.

A dry mixed soil is best suited to its culture. So exhausting is this
crop, that it cannot be raised more than two or three times
successively on the same land. The roots arrive at maturity in eight
or nine months after planting, but may be kept in the ground a much
longer time without injury. Sweet cassava might be sliced, dried in
the sun, and sent to Europe in that state. In dry weather the process
succeeds remarkably well, and the dried slices keep for a considerable
time. Dr. Shier ascertained that when these sliced and dried roots
were first steeped and then boiled, they return to very nearly their
original condition, and make an excellent substitute for the potato.

The plant thrives on even the poorest soil; the mode of planting is
simple. It consists in laying cuttings a foot long in square pits a
foot deep, and covering them with mould, leaving the upper ends open.
From two to four pieces may be placed in each square. The planting
ought to be in the rainy season. The cuttings must be made from the
full-grown stem. A humid soil causes the root to decay, a dry soil is
therefore more adapted for its cultivation. As blossoms are
occasionally plucked from potato plants, so the manihot or cassava is
deprived of its buds to increase the size of its roots. The raw root
of the bitter species, when taken out of the ground, is poisonous--if
exposed, however, to the sun for a short time, it is innocuous, and
when boiled is quite wholesome.

The starch of the root of the manioc is prepared in the following
manner, as described by Dr. Ure:--" The roots are washed and reduced
to a pulp by means of a rasp or grater. The pulp is put into coarse
strong canvas bags, and thus submitted to the action of a powerful
press, by which it parts with most of its noxious juice. As the active
principle of this juice is volatile, it is easily dissipated by baking
the squeezed cakes of pulp upon a plate of hot iron. The pulp thus
dried concretes into lumps, which become hard and friable as they
cool. They are then broken into pieces, and laid out in the sun to
dry. In this state they are a wholesome nutriment. These cakes
constitute the only provisions laid in by the natives, in their
voyages upon the Amazon. Boiled in water, with a little beef or
mutton, they form a kind of soup similar to that of rice.

The cassava cakes sent to Europe are composed almost entirely of
starch, along with a few fibres of the ligneous matter. It may be
purified by diffusion in warm water, passing the milky mixture through
a linen cloth, evaporating the straining liquid over the fire, with
constant agitation. The starch, dissolved by the heat, thickens as the
water evaporates, but on being stirred it becomes granulated, and must
be finally dried in a proper stove.

2. Bitter cassava (_Janipha Manihot_, of Kunth; _Jatropha Manihot_, of
Linnæus; and _Manihot utilissima_, Pohl).--This species has a knotty
root, black externally, which is occasionally 30 lbs. in weight. In
the root there is much starchy matter deposited, usually along with a
poisonous narcotic substance, which is said to be hydrocyanic acid.
The juice of the plant, when distilled, affords as a first product a
liquor which, in the dose of thirty drops, will cause the death of a
man in six minutes. It is doubted whether this acid pre-exists in the
plant; some suppose it to be generated after it is grated down into a
pulp. It can be driven off by roasting, and then the starch is used in
the form of cassava bread. It is principally from the starch of the
bitter cassava that tapioca is prepared by elutriation and granulating
on hot plates. This serves to agglutinate it into the form of
concretions, constituting the tapioca of commerce. This being starch
very nearly pure, is often prescribed by physicians as an aliment of
easy digestion. A tolerably good imitation of it is made by beating,
stirring, and drying potato starch in a similar way.

The grated starch of the roots, floated in water, is spontaneously
deposited, and when repeatedly washed and dried in the sun, forms
cassava flour, called "Moussache" by the French.

The juice of the bitter cassava, mixed with molasses and fermented,
has been made into an intoxicating liquor, which is much relished by
the negroes and Indians.

The concentrated juice of the bitter cassava, under the name of
cassareep, forms the basis of the West India dish, "pepper pot." One
of its most remarkable properties is its highly antiseptic power,
preserving meat that has been boiled in it for a much longer period
than can be done by any other culinary process. Cassareep was
originally an Indian preparation.

The manioc or cassava is cultivated in America, on both sides of the
equator, to about latitude 30 degrees north and south. Among the
mountains of intertropical America, it reaches to an elevation of
3,200 feet. It is cultivated also in great abundance on the island of
Zanzibar, and among the negro tribes of Eastern Africa to the
Monomoesy, inclusive; on the west coast of Africa, in Congo and
Guinea. It appears not to have been introduced into Asia. The farina
of the manioc is almost the only kind of meal used in Brazil, at least
in the north, near the equator. An acre of manioc is said to yield as
much nutriment as six acres of wheat. Meyen states, "It is not
possible sufficiently to praise the beautiful manioc plant." The
Indians find in this a compensation for the rice and other cerealia of
the Old World. It has been carried from Brazil to the Mauritius and
Madagascar.

The following quantities of Brazilian arrowroot, or tapioca, were
imported in the undermentioned years:--

                Cwts.
  1833            942
  1834            888
  1835          1,663
  1836          3,735
  1837          2,142
  1838            462
  1839            402
  1840            983
  1841          1,870
  1843          2,325

St. Lucia grows a considerable quantity of manioc; it exported of
cassava flour in--

              Barrels.
  1827            8
  1828          814
  1829          279
  1830           99
  1831           59
  1834          713

The cassava root grows abundantly in most of the West India islands
and tropical America; the trouble of planting is inconsiderable, and
the profit arising from its manufacture, even by the common process of
hand-grating, is immense. I should be glad if I could induce the
enterprising of our colonial settlers to give this a fair trial, as
well as encourage the present growers to increase their crops and
improve the quality of the article, so as to render it suitable for
the English market. The manufacture of starch will one of these days
become a productive source of colonial wealth. Since cassava was first
grown in the West, its capabilities as a starch-producer have, to a
certain extent, been known, and for that purpose it has been in
limited use.

Mr. James Glen, of Haagsbosch plantation, Demerara, has recently
tested its value as an article of export, and added it to the other
industrial resources of that colony.

This gentleman, by erecting machinery on his plantation for grinding
the root and preparing the starch of the bitter cassava, has already
shipped the article in considerable quantities to Europe, and it has
been sold at a price which puts the profit upon sugar cultivation
completely to the blush. His agent in Glasgow writes, that any
quantity (like that already shipped) can command a ready sale at 9d.
per lb. Its use is co-extensive, or nearly so, with that of sugar. The
productive capabilities of the soil are not perhaps generally known;
nor is it necessary that, to pay the grower there, it should bring
even half that price. A sample of a ton, which was prepared at
Haagsbosch in 1841, was submitted for examination to Dr. Shier, at the
colonial laboratory, Georgetown, who admitted it to be a beautiful
specimen of starch, although it had undergone but _one_ washing. The
root from which it was made, was planted eight or nine months
previously, upon an acre of soil, which had never undergone any
preparation of ploughing, or been broken and turned up in any way. The
plants were never weeded after they had begun to spring, nor were they
tended or disturbed until they were ripe and pulled up. The expense of
planting the acre was five dollars, and reaping this crop would, I
suppose, amount to as much more, say £2 in all. The green cassava was
never weighed, but the acre yielded fully a ton of starch--equal, at
9d. per lb., to £84.

The experimental researches of Dr. Shier have led him to believe that
the green bitter cassava will give one-fifth its weight of starch. If
this be the case the return per acre would, under favorable
circumstances, when the land is properly worked, be enormous. On an
estate at Essequibo, a short time ago, an acre of cassava, grown in
fine permeable soil, was lifted and weighed; it yielded 25 tons of
green cassava. Such a return as this per acre would enable our West
India colonies to inundate Great Britain with food, and at a rate
which would make flour to be considered a luxury. Dr. Shier is
convinced that, in thorough drained land, where the roots could
penetrate the soil, and where its permeability would permit of their
indefinite expansion, a return of 25 tons an acre might uniformly be
calculated upon. What a blessing, not only for those colonies, but for
the world, would the introduction be of this cheap and nutritious
substitute for the potato.


NEW TUBEROUS PLANTS RECOMMENDED AS SUBSTITUTES FOR THE POTATO.

In the present disturbed state of the grain markets of Europe, the
advantage of cultivating plants which directly or indirectly can form
a substitute for the potato, admits of no doubt. It appears to me,
moreover, that when the way is once opened up, even under ordinary
circumstances, the tropical colonies of Great Britain, without
diminishing the quantity of sugar and coffee they produce, could
advantageously supply the British market with the purest starches, and
possibly also with various other articles of farinaceous food.
Anything that will lead the planters to a more varied cultivation than
the present uniform and persistent one, will be advantageous to our
colonies; and the growth of farinaceous root crops for exportation,
cannot fail to produce most beneficial effects on that class of the
peasantry in the British possessions, who are owners of small lots of
land, which at present they either totally neglect, or cultivate most
imperfectly.

In 1846, Dr. A. Gesner, one of my correspondents, called attention, in
my "Colonial Magazine," to two indigenous roots of North America,
which he thought deserving special attention. These were _Apios
tuberosa_, and _Claytonia acutiflora_, _or Virginiana_.

1. _A. tuberosa_ (Boerhave), or _Glycine Apios_.--This plant is common
throughout the Northern and Southern States of America, and is also
met with in the lower British North American Provinces. It is known
under the native name of _Saa-ga-ban_ by the Micmac Indians, by whom
the pear-shaped roots are used as an article of food. Like the
_Arachis hypogæa_, it belongs to the Leguminosæ family. The fruit and
flower resemble those of the wood vetch. It is thus described in
Professor Eaton's "Manual of Botany for North America," published in
1836:--"Color of corolla, blue and purple; time of flowering, July
(and August in Nova Scotia), perennial; stem, twining; leaves,
pinnate, with seven lance-ovate leaflets; racemes shorter than the
leaves, axillary; root, tuberous. Root very nutritive; ought to be
generally cultivated."

The average size of the tubers is that of cherries, but a few are
found of much larger dimensions. In their appearance they resemble the
common potato, having apparently the peculiar indentations called
eyes. The skin of the tuber is of a rusty or blackish brown color. The
interior is very white, and the root has the taste and odor of the
common potato. The Indians state that the roots, if kept either in a
dry or moist state, will not suffer any decay for a lengthened period.
They are very farinaceous, and contain a large per centage of starch,
which resembles that of wheat; by being dried the tuber shrinks a
little, but it immediately expands on being thrown into warm water. It
contains much nutritive matter, is wholesome, and I have no doubt, if
properly cultivated, it will prove to be very prolific. The tubers are
situated a few inches below the surface of the soil, and are strung
together like beads by a strong ligament.

A similar kind of earth-nut, or tuberous root, probably the _Glycine
subterranea_ of Linnæus, the Voandzou of Madagascar, is extensively
cultivated in various parts of Africa.

2. _Claytonia acutiflora_ or _Virginiana_, the Musquash of the Micmac
Indians, is found throughout the Northern and Southern States of North
America. It is thus described by Prof. Eaton, "Man. Bot. N.A."--"Color
of corolla, white and red; situation, alpine, perennial; leaves,
linear, lance-ovate; petals, obovate, retuse; leaves of the calyx,
somewhat acute; root, tuberous. It blossoms in May. The seed is ripe
in June, when the plant disappears."

These roots may be collected along the sea coasts and principal lakes
and rivers of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward's Island,
although they are not plentiful, for they are greedily devoured by
some of the wild animals, and wherever swine have been permitted to
run at large they have been destroyed.

Dr. Gesner shipped several bushels of the saa-ga-ban to the principal
agricultural societies in Great Britain, also to Halifax, and Nova
Scotia. The ordinary potato of this country does not yield more than
14 per cent. of starch, and it contains 76 per cent. of water. From
the best saa-ga-ban Dr. Gesner obtained 21 per cent. of starch, and
the quantity of water is reduced to 50 per cent. It also contains
vegetable albumen, gum, and sugar. From these facts it is evident that
the saa-ga-ban is much more nutritive than the potato, and the weight
of the tubers, in their wild state, compared with the weight of the
slender vine in the best samples, is equal in proportion to the common
cultivated potato in its ordinary growth. The starch is very white,
and closely resembles that made from the arrowroot. It is not
improbable that the quantity of water in the tuber will be increased
by cultivation; yet the fibrous parenchyma will be reduced, and taken
altogether, the nutritive properties will be increased; if the plant
improve as much by cultivation as the potato and many others have
done, its success is certain.

The North American Indians have several wild roots which they dig up
for sustenance when other food is exhausted. Among these are--1st, the
mendo, or wild sweet potato; 2nd, the tip-sin-ah, or wild prairie
turnip; 3rd, the omen-e-chah, or wild bean. The first is found
throughout the valleys of the Mississippi and St. Peter's, about the
basis of bluffs, in rather moist but soft and rich ground. The plant
resembles the sweet potato, and the root is similar in taste and
growth. It does not grow so large or long as the cultivated sweet
potato, but I should have thought it the same, were it not that the
wild potato is not affected by the frost. A woman will dig from a peck
to half a bushel a day.

The Indians eat them, simply boiled in water, but prefer them cooked
with fat meat.

The wild potato, of the north-west of America, is a general article of
food; it is called by them wabessepin; it resembles the common potato,
is mealy when boiled, and grows only in wet clay ground, about one and
a half feet deep. The crane potato, called sitchauc-wabessepin, is of
the same kind, but inferior in quality. The Indians use these for food
as well as the memomine, and another long and slender root called
watappinee. Probably it is the first of these that is referred to by
Nicollet, as the prairie potato. "All the high prairies (he says)
abound with the silver-leafed _Psoralia_, which is the prairie turnip
of the Americans, the _pomme des prairies_ of the Canadians, and
furnishes an invaluable food to the Indians." There are several
species of _Psoralia_, viz., _esculenta_, _argophylla_, _cuspidata_,
and _lanceolata_.

The prairie turnip grows on the high dry prairies, one or two
together, in size from that of a small hen's egg to that of a goose
egg, and of the same form. They have a thick black or brown bark, but
are nearly pure white inside, with very little moisture. They are met
with four to eight inches below the surface, and are dug by the women
with a long pointed stick, forced into the ground and used as a lever.
They are eaten boiled and mashed like a turnip, or are split open and
dried for future use. In this state they resemble pieces of chalk. It
is said that when thus dried they may be ground into flour, and that
they make a very palatable and nutritious bread. M. Lamare Picot, a
French naturalist, has lately incurred a very considerable expense to
obtain the seed, which he has carried to France, believing that it is
capable of cultivation, and may form a substitute both for potato and
wheat.

The wild bean is found in all parts of the valleys where the land is
moist and rich. It is of the size of a large white bean, with a rich
and very pleasant flavor. When used in a stew, I have thought it
superior to any garden vegetable I had ever tasted. The Indians are
very fond of them, and pigeons get fat on them in spring. The plant is
a slender vine, from two to four feet in height, with small pods two
to three inches long, containing three to five small beans. The pod
dries and opens, the beans fall to the ground, and in spring take root
and grow again. The beans on the ground are gathered by the Indians,
who sometimes find a peck at once, gathered by mice for their winter
store.

There are also several kinds of edible roots growing in the ponds or
small lakes, which are gathered by the Indians for food.

The _psui-cinh-chah_, or swamp potato, is found in mud and water,
about three feet deep. The leaf is as large as the cabbage leaf. The
stem has but one leaf, which has, as it were, two horns or points. The
root is obtained by the Indian women; they wade into the water and
loosen the root with their feet, which then floats, and is picked up
and thrown into a canoe. It is of an oblong shape, of a whitish
yellow, with four black rings around it, of a slightly pungent taste,
and not disagreeable when eaten with salt or meat.

The _psui-chah_, with a stem and leaf similar to the last, has a root
about the size of a large hickory-nut. They grow in deep water, and
being smaller are much more difficult to get, but the Indians prefer
them; they have an agreeable taste, and are harder and firmer when
cooked. Both these roots are found in large quantities in the musk-rat
lodges, stored by them for winter use.

The _ta-wah-pah_, with a stem, leaf, and yellow flower, like the
pond-lily, is found in the lakes, in water and mud, from four to five
feet deep. The Indian women dive for them, and frequently obtain as
many as they are able to carry. The root is from one to two feet in
height, very porous; there are as many as six or eight cells running
the whole length of the root. It is very difficult to describe the
flavor. It is slightly sweet and glutinous, and is generally boiled
with wild fowl, but is occasionally roasted.

In his exploring expedition into the interior of Guiana, in the region
of the Upper Essequibo, Sir E. Schomburgk notices the discovery of a
variety of Leguminosæ, whose tubers grow to an enormous size, fully
equal to the largest yam. These roots were not, at the time he was
there, in full perfection, but their taste was somewhat between the
yam and the sweet potato. The Taruma Indians called them Cuyupa. The
roots are considered fit for use when the herb above ground dies. Sir
Robert brought a few of the seeds of the plant with him on his return
to Demerara.

Two interesting productions have been recently introduced into the
Jardin des Plantes, at Paris, from the Ecuador, by M. Bourcier,
formerly Consul-General of France in that country. One is the red and
yellow _ocas_, which is of the form of a long potato, and has the
taste of a chesnut; the other is the _milloco_, which has the taste
and form of our best potatoes. These two roots, which are found in
great abundance in the neighbourhood of Quito, grow readily in the
poorest land. The _oca_ is cultivated in the fields of Mexico, but
only succeeds in the warmer districts. From the bulbous roots of the
cacomite, a species of _Tigridia_, a good flour is also prepared
there.

Stevenson ("Travels in South America," vol. ii., p. 55) says, a root
called the oca is cultivated in several of the colder provinces of
Peru. "This plant," he states, "is of a moderate size, in appearance
somewhat like the acetous trefoil; the roots yellow, each about five
or six inches long, and two in circumference. They have many eyes, and
the roots, several of which are yielded by one plant, are somewhat
curved. When boiled it is much sweeter than the camote or batata;
indeed it appears to contain more saccharine matter than any root I
ever tasted; if eaten raw it is very much like the chesnut. The roots
may be kept for many months in a dry place. The transplanting of the
oca (he adds) to England, where I am persuaded it would prosper, would
add another agreeable and useful esculent to our tables."

The Brussels paper, _L'Emancipation_, mentions that a root has been
discovered by the Director of the Museum of Industry, in that place,
destined to take the place of the potato. It is the _Lathyrus
tuberosus_, called by the peasants the earth mouse, on account of its
form, and the earth chesnut on account of its taste. This plant exists
only in some localities of Lorraine and Burgundy. The Lathyrus has
never been cultivated, and it is thought that it will attain, with
cultivation, the size of the potato. The French peasants have a
prejudice against cultivating it, because they say it walks under
ground, and leaves the place it is planted in to go into the
neighbouring field. The fact is, that it grows in a chaplet, of which
the bulbs are arranged along a root running horizontally, of which the
two extremities are very rarely found, so that on taking up the
hinder tubercles it continues its growth in front, which gives rise to
the saying that if the plant had only time enough, it would make the
tour of the world.

The bulb of _Gastrodia sesamoides_ (R. Brown), a curious herbaceous
species of orchis, native of New Holland, is edible, and preferred by
the aborigines to potatoes and other tuberous roots. Some of my
accredited informants believe it might be turned to profitable
account, but being a parasitic plant, it could scarcely be
systematically cultivated. It flourishes in its wild state on loamy
soil in low or sloping grounds. The first indication of its vegetation
in the spring, is the appearance of a whitish bulb above the sward, of
an hemispherical shape, and about the size of a small egg. The dusky
white covering resembles a fine white net, and within it is a pellucid
gelatinous substance. Again within this is a firm kernel, about as
large as a Spanish nut, and from this a fine fibrous root descends
into the soil. It is known in Van Diemen's Land, and other parts of
Australia, by the common name of native bread. Captain Hunter, in his
Journal of the Transactions at Port Jackson on the first settlement of
the Convict Colony, speaks of finding large quantities of "wild yams,"
on which the natives fed, but the roots were not bigger than a walnut;
therefore it was probably this plant.

_Arracacha esculenta_, of Bancroft and Decandolle (_Conium
Arracacha_).--This perennial herb is a native of South America, which,
from its salubrious qualities, is extensively cultivated in the
mountains of Venezuela and other parts of tropical and Southern
America, for culinary purposes. It is propagated by planting pieces of
the tuberous root, in each of which is an eye or shoot. The late Baron
de Shack introduced it into Trinidad, from Caraccas, and it has thence
been carried to the island of Grenada. It throve there remarkably
well, but has been unaccountably neglected. He also sent roots of this
valuable plant to London, Liverpool, and Glasgow. Although it bears
cold better than the potato, it requires a warmer and more equal
temperature than most of the countries of Europe afford. It would,
however, make an excellent addition to the culinary vegetables of many
tropical countries, uniting the taste of the potato and parsnip, but
being superior to both.

The arracacha has been introduced into the South of Europe, not as a
substitute for, but as a provision against a failure of the potato
crop. It is highly recommended by the Rev. J.M. Wilson, in the "Rural
Encyclopædia."

Stevenson ("Travels in South America," vol. ii., p. 383) says the
yucas (cassava), camotes (sweet potatoes), and yams cultivated at
Esmeraldas and that neighbourhood, were the finest he ever saw. "It is
not uncommon for one of these roots to weigh upwards of twenty pounds.
At one place I saw a few plants of the yuca that had stood upwards of
twenty years, the owner having frequently bared the bottom of the
plants and taken the ripe roots, after which, throwing up the earth
again, and allowing a sufficient time for new roots to grow, a
continual succession of this excellent nutritious food was procured."

The Aipi grows in Brazil, and according to T. Ashe, may be eaten raw,
and, when pressed, yields a pleasant juice for drink; or being
inspissated by the heat of the sun, is kept either to be boiled and
eaten, or dissolved and drank. The tapinambar grows in Chili, and is
used by the Indians.

The tapioca, or bay rash, a plant which grows about the out-islands of
the Bahamas group, was found of great use as a food plant to the
inhabitants of Long Island, during a scarcity of food occasioned by
the drought in 1843. This root grows in the form of a large beet, and
is from twelve to sixteen inches in length. It is entirely
farinaceous, and, when properly ground and prepared, makes good bread.
It fetches there four to six cents a pound.

The root of the kooyah plant (_Valeriana edulis_) is much used by some
of the North American Indians as food. The root is of a very bright
yellow color, with a peculiar taste and odor, and hence is called
"tobacco root." It is deprived of its strong poisonous qualities by
being baked in the ground for about two days. A variety of other roots
and tubers furnish them with food. Among these are kamas root
(_Camassia esculenta_), which is highly esteemed; the bulb has a sweet
pleasant flavor, somewhat of the taste of preserved quince. It is a
strikingly handsome bulbous plant, with large beautiful purple
flowers. Yampah root (_Anethum graveolens_) is a common article of
food with the Indians of the Rocky Mountains.

The roots of a thistle (_Cersium virginianium_, or _Carduus
virginianus_), which are about the ordinary size of carrots, are also
eaten by them. They are sweet and well flavored, but require a long
preparation to fit them for use.

The people of Southern India and Ceylon have for many hundred years
been in the habit of eating the bulb or root, which is the first shoot
from the Palmyra nut, which forms the germ of the future tree, and is
known locally as _Pannam kilingoes_. It is about the size of a common
carrot, though nearly white. It forms a great article of food among
the natives for several months in the year; but Europeans dislike it
from its being very bitter. Recent experiments have proved that a
farina superior to arrowroot can be obtained from it, prepared in the
same way; and 100 roots, costing 2½d., yield one and a-half to two
pounds of the flour.

From the boiled inner bark of the Russian larch, mixed with rye flour,
and afterwards buried a few hours in the snow, the hardy Siberian
hunters prepare a sort of leaven, with which they supply the place of
common leaven when the latter is destroyed, as it frequently is by the
intense cold. The bark is nearly as valuable as oak bark. From the
inner bark the Russians manufacture fine white gloves, not inferior to
those made of the most delicate chamois, while they are stronger,
cooler, and more pleasant for wearing in the summer.

The fruit of the _Cycas angulata_ forms the principal food of the
Australian aborigines during a portion of the year. They cut it into
thin slices, which are first dried, afterwards soaked in water, and
finally packed up in sheets of tea-tree bark. In this condition it
undergoes a species of fermentation; the deleterious properties of the
fruit are destroyed, and a mealy substance with a musty flavor
remains, which the blacks probably bake into cakes. They appear also
to like the fruit of the _Pandanus_, of which large quantities were
found by Dr. Leichardt in their camps, soaking in water, contained in
vessels formed of stringy bark.

The flour obtained from the seeds of Spurry (_Spergula sativa_), when
mixed with that of wheat or rye, produces wholesome bread, for which
purpose it is often used in Norway and Gothland. In New Zealand,
before the introduction of the potato, the roots of the fern were
largely consumed.

Many species of _Bolitus_ are used as food by the natives in Western
Australia, according to Drummond.

The thick tuberous roots of a climbing species of bean (_Pachyrhizus
angulatus_, or _Dolichos bulbosus_) are cultivated and eaten in some
parts of the Polynesian islands. The bulbous roots of some species of
Orchideæ are eagerly sought after in New South Wales by the natives,
being termed "boyams," and highly esteemed as an article of food for
the viscid mucilage which they contain. The root of the Berar
(_Caladium costatum_) is eaten by the natives of the Pedir coast
(Achin), after being well washed.

The pignons or edible seeds of _Pinus Pinea_ are consumed occasionally
in Italy. In Chili the cone or fruit of the _pehuen_, or _pino de la
tierra_, are considered a great delicacy. The _pinones_ are sometimes
boiled, and afterwards, by grinding them on a stone, converted into a
kind of paste, from which very delicate pastry is made. The pine is
cultivated in different parts of this province on account of its
valuable wood and the pinones. The seeds from the cones of the
Auracanean pine, collected in autumn, furnish the Pawenches (from
_pawen_ pine) and Auracanians with a very nutritious food. When
cooked, the flavor is not unlike that of the chesnut, and as they will
keep for some time, they constitute, when the gathering season has
been favorable, a great part of their diet.

The seeds of the cones of the nut pine (_Pinus monophyllus_), a new
species described by Dr. Torrey, and alluded to by Col. Fremont in his
exploring expedition to the Rocky Mountains, are largely used by the
North American Indians. The nut is oily, of a most agreeable flavor,
and must be very nutritious as it constitutes the principal
subsistence of many of the native tribes.

The cone of another magnificent pine (_Auracaria Bidwillii_),
indigenous to the Eastern coast of Australia, about the Moreton Bay
district, is frequently met with twelve inches in diameter, and
containing 150 edible seeds as large as a walnut. The aborigines
roast these seeds, crack the husk between two stones, and eat them
hot. They taste something like a yam or hard dry potato. The trees
bear cones only once in four years, during a period of six months.
This season is held as a great festival by the aborigines of that
locality, called by them Bunga Bunga, and they congregate in greater
numbers than is known in any other part of Australia, frequently
coming from a distance of 300 miles. They grow sleek and fat upon this
diet. An Act has been passed by the legislature of the colony,
prohibiting, under heavy pains and penalties, the demolition of those
trees, being the natural food of the natives.

The common people eat the seeds of the red sandal wood (_Adenanthera
Pavonina_) in the South of India. The pulp of the fruit of the
_Adansonia digitata_, or monkey bread, is also used as an article of
food.

SINGHARA OR WATER NUTS.--The large seeds of _Trapa bicornis_, a native
of China, and of _T. bispinosa_ and _natans_, species indigenous to
India, are sweet and eatable, and the aquatic plants which furnish
them are hence an extensive article of cultivation. In Cashmere and
other parts of the East they are common food, and known under the name
of Singhara nuts. In Cashmere the government obtains from these nuts
£12,000 of annual revenue. Mr. Moorcroft mentions that Runjeet Sing
derived nearly the same sum. From 96,000 to 128,000 loads of this nut
are yielded annually by the lake of Ooller alone. The nut abounds in
fecula. In China the kernel is used as an article of food, being
roasted or boiled like the potato. The seeds of various species of
_Nelumbium_, natives of the East Indies, Jamaica, and the United
States, also form articles of food. The fruit of _N. speciosum_ is
supposed to be the Egyptian bean of Pythagoras. The petioles and
peduncles contain numerous spiral vessels, which have been used for
wicks of candles. The fruit of _Willughbeia edulis_, a native of the
East, as its name implies, is eatable. The kernel of the mango can be
reduced to an excellent flour for making bread.

Not only from the Lichen tribe, but also from the Algæ, fungi, mosses
and ferns man derives nutriment and valuable products. Some of the
cryptogamic plants form considerable articles of commerce,
particularly as food plants, affording gelatinous and amylaceous
matter, and being useful in medicine and the arts.

_Nostoe eduli_ is used in China as food; _Gelidium corneum_ enters
into the formation of the edible swallows' nests of the Japanese
islands. Agar-agar moss is shipped from Singapore to the extent of
13,000 tons a-year. Irish moss, Iceland moss, Ceylon moss, and some
others, are also of some importance. Iodine and kelp are prepared to a
considerable extent from sea weeds; one species (_Fucus tenax_)
furnishes large supplies of glue to the Canton market, and the
orchilla weed is of great importance to the dyer. It is principally as
food that I have to speak of them in this section.

In some of the islands off the Scotch coasts, sea-wrack (_Fucus
vesiculosus_) forms the chief support of horses and cattle in the
winter months. _F. serratus_ is similarly employed in Norway.

The _Laminaria saccharina_ is interesting from the fact of its
containing sugar. It is highly esteemed in Japan, where it is
extensively used as an article of diet, being first washed in cold
water and then boiled in milk or broth.

CARRAGEEN, or IRISH ROCK MOSS, _Sphæroccus_ (_Chondus_) _crispus_,
abounds on the Western Coast of Ireland, round the Orkneys, Hebrides,
Scilly Islands, &c. It is purplish white, and nearly transparent, and
is largely imported to feed cattle and pigs in Yorkshire. It is also
used for dressing the warp of webs in the loom, and mixing with the
pulp for sizing paper in the vat. It swells up like tragacanth in
water; and, by long decoction, affords a considerable quantity of a
light, nutritious, but nauseous jelly. It is sometimes sold as pearl
moss, and is employed in the place of gelatine or isinglass for
preparing blanc-manges, jellies, &c. It fetches about £7 the ton.

AGAR-AGAR, a sort of edible seaweed, or tripe de roche, is found
growing on the rocks about the eastern islands that are covered by the
tide. It is much used for making a kind of jelly, which is highly
esteemed both by Europeans and natives for the delicacy of its flavor.
The first quality is worth about 30s. the picul (133 lbs.). An
inferior kind is collected on the submerged banks in the neighbourhood
of Macassar (Celebes), by the Bajow Laut, or Sea Gipsies. It is also
collected on the rocks about the settlement of Singapore, for export
to China, where it is much used as a size for stiffening silks and for
making jellies. It constitutes the bulk of the cargoes of the Chinese
junks on their return voyage. The quantity shipped from Singapore is
about 10,000 piculs (12,500 tons) annually.

ICELAND MOSS (_Cetraria islandica_) combines valuable alimentary and
medicinal properties. It is imported in bags and barrels from Hamburg
and Gothenburg, and is said to be the produce of Norway and Iceland.
The quantity consumed varies; in 1836, 20,599 lbs. paid duty; in 1840,
6,462 lbs. In Carniola, swine, oxen, and horses, are fattened on it.
Boiled in water or milk, and flavored to the palate with sugar, wine,
and aromatics, it forms a very agreeable diet for invalids.

CEYLON MOSS (_Gracelaria_, or _Gigartina, lichenoides_), a small and
delicate fucus, is well known for the amylaceous property it
possesses, and the large proportion of true starch it furnishes. The
fronds are filiform; the filaments much branched, and of a light
purple color. It grows abundantly in the large lake or back-water
which extends between Putlam and Calpentyr, Ceylon. It is collected by
the natives principally during the south-west monsoon, when it becomes
separated by the agitation of the water. The moss is spread on mats
and dried in the sun for two or three days. It is then washed several
times in fresh water, and again exposed to the sun, which bleaches it,
after which it is collected in heaps for exportation.

Professor O'Shaughnessy has given the best analysis of this moss,
which he described under the name of _Fucus amylaceus_; 100 grains
weight yielded the following proportions:--

  Vegetable jelly                  54.50
  True starch                      15.00
  Ligneous fibre                   18.00
  Sulphate and muriate of soda      6.50
  Gum                               4.00
  Sulphate and phosphate of lime    1.00

  Total                            99.00
  With a trace of wax and iron.

I observe among the imports into New Orleans, 911 bushels of Spanish
moss in 1849, and 1,394 bushels in 1848. I do not know precisely its
use, or from whence derived, but I believe it is chiefly used for
stuffing cushions, mattresses, &c.

FERN.--The rhizome of _Pteris esculenta_ is used as food in Australia,
and that of _Marattia alata_ in the Sandwich Islands. The trunks of
the _Alsophila_, or tree fern, of the western side of Van Diemen's
Land, and of the common tree fern, _Cibotium Billardieri_ (the
_Dicksonia antarctica_, of Labillardiere), contain the edible pith or
bread-fruit eaten by the natives. Many other species of ferns are
esculent. Typha bread is prepared in Scinde from the pollen of the
flowers of the _Typha elephantina_, and in New Zealand from another
species of bulrush (_Typha utilis_).

"It must not be supposed, as some have believed, that the fern root,
wherever it grows, is fit for food. On the contrary, it is only that
found in rich loose soils which contains fecula in sufficient quantity
for this purpose: in poorer ground the root contains proportionally
more fibre. We were now encamped on an alluvial flat in the valley of
the river, thirty or forty feet below the general level of the plain;
and I observed that, even in this favourable spot, a great deal of
discrimination was used in selecting the best roots, which was
discoverable by their being crisp enough to break easily when bent:
those which would not stand this test being thrown aside. Here a
quantity sufficient for several days was procured, and was packed in
baskets, to last till another spot equally favourable could be
reached.

"The process of cooking fern root is very simple; for it is merely
roasted on the fire, and afterwards bruised by means of a flat stone
similar to a cobbler's lap-stone, and a wooden pestle. The long fibres
which run like wires through the root are then easily drawn out; and
the remainder is pounded till it acquires the consistence of tough
dough, in which state it is eaten, its taste being very like that of
cassava bread. Sometimes it is sweetened with the juice of the 'tutu.'

"The natives consider that there is no better food than this for a
traveller, as it both appeases the cravings of hunger for a longer
period than their other ordinary food, and renders the body less
sensible to the fatigue of a long march. It is in this respect to the
human frame, what oats or beans are to the horse. They have a song in
praise of this root, which I have once or twice heard chanted on
occasions of festivals, by a troop of young women who carry baskets of
the food intended for the guests."--("Shortland's New Zealand.")

I ought not to omit noticing the _Tuber cibarium_, a plant of the
mushroom family, growing under ground, which furnishes the famous
truffle, so celebrated in the annals of cooking, of which immense
quantities are imported, chiefly from the South of France. It is
common also in Italy and Germany, and is often found in
Northamptonshire, and some other of our own counties. The "kemmayes,"
a desert plant of the truffle kind, is a great favorite with the
Arabs.

In Terra del Fuego the only vegetable food of the natives, besides a
few berries of a dwarf arbutus, is a species of globular bright yellow
fungus (_Cyttaria Darwinii_), which grows in vast numbers on the beech
trees. In its tough and mature state it is collected in large
quantities by the women and children, and eaten uncooked. It has a
slightly sweet mucilaginous taste, with a faint smell like that of a
mushroom.




SECTION III.

SPICES, AROMATIC CONDIMENTS, FRAGRANT WOODS, &c.


The various spices and condiments which form so large an item in our
commercial imports, are obtained from the barks, the dried seeds, the
fruit, flower-buds, and root-stocks, of different plants. The chief
aromatic barks comprise the cinnamon, cassia lignea, cascarilla, and
canella alba. The medicinal barks will be noticed elsewhere. The seeds
and fruits include pepper, pimento, cardamoms, anise, nutmegs,
chillies. The flower-buds of some furnish cloves and cassia buds; the
roots supply ginger, galangale, turmeric, and ginseng. A few other
useful substances, such as vanilla, the costus, or putchuk, mace, soy,
and some of the odoriferous woods I have included under this section.


CINNAMON.

The true cinnamon of commerce is obtained from the inner bark of
_Cinnamonum verum_, R. Brown; or _C. zeylanicum_; the _Laurus
cinnamonum_, of Linnæus, a handsome looking tree, native of the East
Indies. The island of Ceylon is the chief seat of its cultivation, and
for a long time the Dutch depended solely for their supply of this
bark for the home market on the produce of the wild cinnamon trees in
the King of Kandy's territories there. At last, from the increasing
demand, they resorted to the growth and more careful culture of the
tree themselves. About the year 1794, the cultivation had succeeded so
well that they were enabled to meet the demand for the spice from
trees of their own growth, independent of any supplies from the
Kandian monarch's territory.

In 1796, when this island fell into our hands, the local government
endeavoured, after the former fashion of the Dutch, to restrain the
production of this article of commerce within due bounds, by
destroying all above a certain quantity.

General Maitland, in 1805, and his successors in the government,
seeing the folly of such a ridiculous policy, very wisely fostered and
promoted the extended cultivation of cinnamon plantations.

In the island of Java, and in Cochin-China, cinnamon culture has
within the last few years made considerable progress.

The leaves of the cinnamon tree are more or less acuminated, from five
to eight inches long, by about three broad, growing in pairs opposite
each other. They have three principal ribs, which come in contact at
its base, but do not unite. The leaves, when first developed, are of a
bright red hue, then of a pale yellow, and lastly of a dark shining
green; when mature, they emit a strong aromatic odor if broken or
rubbed in the hands, and have the pungent taste of cloves. The young
twigs of the true cinnamon tree are not downy, like those of the
cassia bark. The plant blooms in January and February, and the seeds
ripen in July and August.

The blossoms grow on slender foot-stalks, of a pale yellow color, from
the axillæ of the leaves and the extremity of the branches. They are
numerous clusters of small white flowers, having a brownish shade in
the centre, about the same size as the lilac, which it resembles. The
fruit is a drupe, about the size of a small hedge strawberry,
containing one seed, and of the shape of an acorn, which when ripe is
soft and of a dark purple color.

The roots are fibrous, hard, and tough, covered with an odoriferous
bark; on the outside of a greyish brown, and on the inside of a
reddish hue. They strike about three feet into the earth, and spread
to a considerable distance. Many of them smell strongly of camphor,
which is sometimes extracted from them.

The trees in their wild state will grow ordinarily to the height of 30
feet. The trunk is about three feet in circumference, and throws out a
great number of large spreading horizontal branches, clothed with
thick foliage. When cultivated for their bark, the trees are not
permitted to rise above the height of ten feet.

The true cinnamon tree (according to Mr. Crawfurd) is not a native of
the islands of the Eastern Archipelago; but Marshall, in his
description and history of the tree ("Annals of Philos," vol. x.)
assigns very extensive limits to its cultivation. He asserts that it
is found on the Malabar coast, in Cochin-China, and Tonquin, Sumatra,
the Soolo Archipelago, Borneo, Timor, the Nicobar and Philippine
Islands. It has been transplanted, and grows well in the Mauritius,
Bourbon and the eastern coast of Africa; in the Brazils, Guiana, in
South America, and Guadaloupe, Martinique, Tobago, and Jamaica; but
produces in the West a bark of very inferior quality to the Oriental.

Rumphius has remarked, that the trees which yield cinnamon, cassia,
and clove bark (_Cinnamonum Culilaban_), though so much alike, are
hardly ever found in the same countries.

The term clove bark has been applied to the barks of two different
trees belonging to the natural order _Laurineæ_. One of these barks is
frequently called "Culilaban bark." It consists of almost flat
pieces, and is obtained from _Cinnamonum Culilaban_, a tree growing in
Amboyna, and probably other parts of the Moluccas.

The other bark, known as clove bark, occurs in quills, which are
imported from South America. Murray says it is produced by the _Myrtus
carophyllata_, a tree termed by Decandolle _Syzgium carophyllæum_. It
appears, however, that this is an error, for both Nees and Von Martius
declare it to be the produce of _Dicypellium caryophyllatum_; and the
last quoted authority states that this tree is the noblest of all the
laurels found in the Brazils, where it is called "Pao Cravo." It grows
at Para and Rio Negro.

Cinnamon may be propagated by seeds, plants, or layers; roots also, if
carefully transplanted, will thrive in favorable localities, and yield
useful shoots in twelve months. It is usually cultivated from suckers,
which should not have more than three or four leaves, and require
continual watering. If raised from seed, the young plants are kept in
a nursery for a year or two, and then transplanted; but the trees from
seeds are longer arriving at maturity. The plants are kept well
earthed about the roots to retain the moisture, and coco-nut husks are
placed above them, which in time form an excellent compost.

A cinnamon plantation, even in a favorable locality, seldom yields
much return until eight or nine years have elapsed.

The mode of cultivation pursued by the natives differs from that
followed in the plantations of the Europeans. The native system is to
allow the cinnamon to grow large before cutting; the European practice
is to cut it young. The result is that the native produces quantity,
but coarse; the European produces quality, but less in quantity. I
have found, in conversation with the native growers, that they
consider the bush or tree decidedly weakened by its being kept down by
constant cutting twice a year; and that their plants are stronger and
better. It is not absolutely an original opinion, but I think the two
systems might be judiciously blended. In cutting the cinnamon sticks
for peeling, as the Europeans do it twice a year, there is always risk
of losing much valuable young wood, which is destroyed in slashing
into the bushes with _catties_ (bill-hooks) to take out that which is
in a fit state for peeling, all of which is so much loss from the next
cutting; and on this ground I should be inclined to advocate cutting
once a year. There are, I know, other considerations than the mere
growth of the sticks to be taken into account. Of these may be named
the time when the bark peels best from the stick, which of course must
depend upon age as well as season, the excited or unexcited state of
the shoots, and their several effects upon the quality of the spice.

Weeding the plantations does not seem to be of so much consequence, if
the shrub gets plenty of free air all round it.

Cinnamon land continues to yield abundantly crop after crop, not for
years, but for scores of years. The greater portion of the late
preserved plantations in Ceylon were planted by the Dutch, one hundred
years ago, and the bushes are stated to be as vigorous as ever, and
quite likely to go on yielding crops till the year 2000. This
productiveness can only be accounted for on Liebig's principle of
returning to the soil a portion of what we take from it. In the
operation of peeling cinnamon, the tops and lateral branches are cut
off, and left by the peelers on the ground close to the bushes. These,
no doubt, furnish a considerable quantity of manure to the plants.

The general appearance of the plantation is that of a copse, with
laurel leaves and stems, about the thickness of hazel; occasionally a
tree may be seen which, having been allowed to grow for seed, has
reached a height of forty or fifty feet, with a trunk eighteen inches
in diameter. When in full bloom, the cinnamon bushes have a very
beautiful appearance, the small white petals affording a most
agreeable contrast with the flame-colored extremities of the upper,
and the dark green of the inferior foliage, with the blossoms of
various lovely parasitical plants.

The cinnamon tree flourishes only in a small portion of the island of
Ceylon. It is chiefly confined to the south-west angle, formed by the
sea coast, from Tangalle in the south to Chilaw on the west. It is in
a climate of agreeable temperature, which is at once hot and moist;
hot from its tropical position, and moist from the frequency and
plentifulness of rains. The general level of the country is low, in
the midst of fresh-water lakes, divided from the sea by a narrow
riband of land. And the water in the soil of the cinnamon gardens is
of extraordinary purity, so as to be for that reason much in request
in the neighbouring city as a beverage. This exact combination of
influences does not occur anywhere else in the island, at least not in
the same degree.

The cultivation principally centres round Colombo, the capital and
principal port.

On the hills and valleys, in the neighbourhood of Kandy, which have a
temperate climate, the tree flourishes well; a rather elevated
situation, with shelter, contributing to the luxuriance of the plants.
The best soil for it appears to be a pure quartz sand, which in some
places rests on black moss or mould. From the surface to the depth of
a few inches, this sand is as fine in its nature and as pearly white
in its appearance as the best table salt; but below that depth, and
near the roots of the bushes, the sand is greyish.

A specimen of this soil being carefully dried by Dr. Davy, was found
to consist of 98.5 silicious sand, 0.5 vegetable matter, and 1.1
water--in 100 parts. This circumstance impresses one very strongly on
visiting the cinnamon gardens; it seems so strange to see a plain of
pure quartz sand whitened in the sun, and yet covered over with a
luxuriant growth of trees. In richer soils the aroma does not seem to
develop itself in the same concentrated form.

A mixture of loam and peat, with sand, is said, however, to form a
good soil in some localities. These plantations may well suggest a
doubt as to the truth of the proposition so unqualifiedly laid down by
some authors, that "earth destitute of organic matter cannot sustain
vegetation." Certainly it is not organic matter which supports the
cinnamon trees of Colombo.

_Peeling_.--The best cinnamon is obtained from the stalks or twigs,
which shoot up in a cluster of eight or ten together from the roots,
after the parent bush or tree has been cut down. These shoots are cut
once in about three years, close to the ground. Great care is
requisite, both as to the exact size and age; for if the bark is too
young, it has a green taste, if too old it is rough and gritty. These
shoots yield an incomparably fine cinnamon bark. When cut for peeling
they are of various sizes and lengths, depending on the texture of the
bark. These rods afford the hazel-like walking-sticks so much esteemed
by strangers, and which, though difficult to be procured during the
prevalence of the oppressive cinnamon regulations, may now be very
easily obtained from proprietors of grounds producing that spice.
Cinnamon is barked at two periods of the year, between April and
December. Those suckers which are considered fit for cutting, are
usually about three-fourths of an inch in diameter, and five feet or
more long. The first operation is to strip them of the outside
pellicle of bark. The twigs are then ripped up lengthwise with the
point of a knife, and the liber or inner bark gradually loosened, till
it can be entirely taken off. While drying they are cut up into long
narrow rolls, called "quills," then stuck into one another, so as to
form pipes about three or four feet long, which are afterwards made up
in round bundles.

During the first day the cinnamon is suspended under shelter upon open
platforms, and on the second day it is placed on wicker-work shelves,
and exposed to the sun until sufficiently dry to be examined and
sorted for shipment.

It is brought home in bags or bales of 80 or 90 lbs. weight, and
classed before export into three sorts; first, second, and third
quality. The different kinds of cinnamon bark may be thus classified,
according to quality--

1. That which ranks above all others in quality, is known by the
Singhalese name of _penne_ or _rasse kuroondu_, sharp sweet, or honey
cinnamon.

2. _Naya kuroondu_, snake cinnamon.

3. _Kapoorn kuroondu_, camphorated cinnamon, from the very strong
smell of camphor which it possesses. This variety is principally
obtained from the plantations of the interior.

4. _Kahate_ or _canalle kuroondu_, astringent cinnamon. In this
species the bark peels off very easily, and smells agreeably when
fresh, but it has a bitter taste.

5. _Savel kuroondu_, mucilaginous or glutinous cinnamon. This sort
acquires a very considerable degree of hardness, which the chewing of
it sufficiently proves. It has otherwise little taste, and an
ungrateful smell; but the color is very fine, and it is often mixed
with the first and best sort; the color being much alike, excepting
only that in the good sort some few yellowish spots appear towards the
extremities.

6. _Dawool kuroondu_, or drum cinnamon. The wood of this tree, when
grown hard, is light and tough, and the natives make some of their
vessels and drums of it. The bark is of a pale color.

7. _Nika kuroondu_, wild cinnamon, whose leaf resembles that of the
nicasol (_Vitex Negundo_). The bark of this tree has neither taste or
smell when peeled, and is made use of by the natives only in physic,
and to extract an oil from to anoint their bodies.

8. _Mal kuroondu_, flowering cinnamon, because this tree is always in
blossom. The substance of the wood never becomes so solid and weighty
in this as in the other named species, which are sometimes nine or ten
feet in circumference. If this ever-flowering cinnamon be cut or
bored, a limpid water will issue out of the wound; but it is of use
only for the leaves and bark.

9. _Toupat kuroondu_, trefoil cinnamon, of which there are three
varieties, which grow in the mountains and valleys of the interior
about Kandy.

10. _We kuroondu_, white ant's cinnamon.

The first-named four of these are, however, alone varieties of the
_Cinnamonum verum_.

Good cinnamon is known by the following properties:--It is thin and
rather pliable; it ought to be about the substance of royal paper, or
somewhat thicker. It admits of a considerable degree of pressure, and
bends before it breaks; the fracture is then splintering. It is of a
light color, approaching to yellow, bordering but little upon the
brown; it possesses a sweetish taste, at the same time it is not
stronger than can be borne without pain, and is not succeeded by any
after-taste. The more cinnamon departs from these characteristics, the
coarser and less serviceable it is esteemed; and it should be rejected
if it be hard, and thick as a half-crown piece; if it be very dark
colored or brown; if it be very pungent and hot on the tongue, with a
taste bordering upon that of cloves, so that it cannot be suffered
without pain. Particular care should be taken that it is not
false-packed, or mixed with cinnamon of a common sort.

The following remarks, by Mr. Dunewille, of Malacca, as to the
suitability of the Straits' Settlements for cinnamon culture, are
interesting, although in some instances a repetition of previous
observations:--

    It appears, from experience, that the soil of Ceylon is more
    favorable to the growth of cinnamon than to that of any other
    aromatic plant, and I find the climate of Ceylon, if at all, differs
    but in a very slight degree from that of the Straits. I therefore
    conclude that the spice, if cultivated in the Straits, will prove
    superior to that of Ceylon, if one may judge from the various spices
    that grow here almost wild, and it would moreover yield a better
    return than in Ceylon. My supposition is confirmed from having seen
    the spice which was prepared last year in Pringet by the Honorable
    Resident Councillor of Malacca, and which I found to be equally as
    good in every respect as that grown and cultivated in the maritime
    provinces in Ceylon.

    A sandy soil is that which is generally selected for cinnamon, but
    other soils may be chosen also, such as a mixture of sandy with red
    soil, free from quartz, gravel, or rock, also red and dark brown
    soils. Such land in a flat country is preferable to hilly spots,
    upon which, however, cinnamon also grows, and are known by the name
    of the "Kandyan Mountains." The soil that is rocky and stony under
    the surface is bad, and not adapted for the cultivation of cinnamon,
    as the trees would neither grow fast, nor yield a remunerative
    return.

    When a tract of land of the above description is selected, the whole
    of the ground should be cleared, leaving a few trees for shade, to
    which the laborers might return for rest and relaxation; these may
    be from 50 to 60 feet apart. The trees felled should be well lopped,
    burnt and cleared away, the stumps should be removed with roots,
    after which they may be allowed to remain, in order to save expense
    of carriage, merely by observing some degree of order in the
    disposition, by forming regular rows, of which the intervening
    spaces are planted with cinnamon. The ground being thus cleared,
    holes may be dug at eight to ten feet apart, and of one foot square;
    the distance from each plant will depend upon the nature of the
    soil--that is, the poorer the soil, the nearer to each other should
    the trees be planted, and _vice versa_.

    When this operation is over, should the holes be intended for
    cinnamon roots, or stumps, the latter must be carefully removed with
    as much earth as can be carried up with them and placed in the
    holes, taking care not to return the earth removed originally in
    digging the holes, which are to be filled with the soil scraped from
    the surface, which has been previously burnt, exposed, and formed
    into manure. Should no rain have fallen after the placing of the
    roots in the holes, the stumps should be well covered, and watered
    morning and evening, until such time as the sprouts shoot out fresh
    buds, which will be in a fortnight or so from the time they were
    transplanted, when the watering may be discontinued. In a month the
    new shoots will be three or four inches high; this much depends upon
    the weather.

    If the holes be intended for young plants or seedlings, the plants
    must be removed with boles of earth from the nurseries, and placed
    in the holes, taking the same care as with the stumps, both in
    watering and covering, in the event of its being dry weather. When
    the seedlings take root, the coverings should not be removed until
    the plants throw out a new pair of leaves from the buds, which is a
    sign of their having taken root.

    When a plantation is formed of old stumps, all the branches should
    be cut down within six inches from the ground; this should be done
    with one stroke of a sharp instrument, in order to avoid the
    splitting of the stem. From these stumps cinnamon may be cut and
    peeled within eighteen months from the time of transplanting. Often
    this is done after the lapse of twelve months from the time of
    transplanting.

    From seedlings one cannot expect to gather a crop before two or
    three years from the time the plants were transplanted, when there
    will be but one or a single tree, which, when cut down as already
    shown, four or six inches to the ground, ought to be covered with
    fresh earth gathered from the space between the rows, and formed in
    a heap round the plant. The next crop will be three or four times as
    much as the first, from the number of sprouts the stem will throw
    out, and so on every year, the crop increasing according to the
    number of sprouts each stem will throw out yearly from the cuttings.
    In the course of seven or eight years, the space left between the
    rows will only admit the peelers and others to go round the bushes,
    weed, clear and remove cuttings, as the branches from each bush will
    almost touch each other at their ends.

    It is essentially necessary to take every care not to allow any
    creepers or other weeds to grow, the former interfere with the
    growth of the bushes by entangling, because it not only takes out so
    much of the support feeding the cinnamon trees, but interferes with
    the peelers during the cutting season, and prevents the branches
    growing up straight with a free circulation of air. The plantation
    ought to be kept clean and free from weeds; the cinnamon requires no
    manuring, but when the plantation is weeding the bushes should be
    covered with the surface soil and raising the ground round the bush
    by making a heap of the earth, which answers well in lieu of manure.
    This operation must be attended to as soon as the cinnamon sticks
    are removed for peeling. The plantation requires weeding three or
    four times a year during the first two or three years, then twice a
    year will answer the purpose; as by that time the trees will form
    into bushes and destroy the seeds of the weeds on the ground.

    The forming of a nursery is necessary, for which a space of ground,
    say an acre, should be selected in a rich bit of soil free from
    stones. Clear the whole brushwood, only leaving the large trees for
    shade, remove all stones, stumps, and roots, dig the place well six
    or eight inches deep, then form into long beds of three or four feet
    wide, put the seeds down nine or twelve inches apart, cover them
    eight or twelve inches above the ground by a platform, and water
    them every other day until the seeds grow up and give one pair of
    leaves, then leave off watering (unless great dry weather prevail,
    then it ought to be continued) but not uncover until the plants grow
    up six or eight inches high, and can bear the sun; these seedlings
    will be ready for transplanting after three months from the time
    they were sown.

    The forming of nurseries is done at the close of the year, before
    December. When this is done first, the party commences clearing and
    preparing the land during the dry season, which is from the
    beginning of December up to the end of March following. April will
    set in with heavy rain (it is generally so in Ceylon), and it will
    continue wet weather till the end of August, very often till
    September and October, and you have the benefit of four or five
    months rain.

    The cinnamon seeds are to be gathered when they are fully ripe, they
    must be heaped up in a shady place, to have the outside red pulp
    rotted, when it turns quite black, then have the seeds trampled or
    otherwise freed from the decomposed pulp, without injuring the
    seeds, and well washed in water (just as is done to cherry coffee,
    before they are made into parchment in the whole shell). Finally,
    have the seeds[48] well dried in the air without exposing them to
    the sun, and then put them in on the ground prepared for their
    reception. In washing the seeds, those that float on the surface
    should be rejected.

    There are five different sorts of cinnamon, viz.:--

  1st is called Panny  Meers Carundoo.
  2nd           Tittha   "      "
  3rd           Kahatte  "      "
  4th           Wallee   "      "
  5th           Savell   "      "

    Of these, the first kind is the best of all, the 2nd and 3rd,
    although inferior, are peeled likewise, the 4th and 5th are
    spurious.

    The distinction in the cinnamon can be known both by taste, the
    shape of the leaves on the tree, and an experienced "Challya" man
    will judge the cinnamon by first sight.

    The quality of the bark depends upon its situation in the branch,
    that peeled from the middle of the bush or branch being the _most
    superior_, and classed as 1st sort, that taken from the upper end is
    the 2nd quality, while the bark removed from the base of the branch,
    or the thickest end, is the inferior, and called the 3rd sort.

    From the cinnamon bark refused in the sorting store of all kinds, in
    separating the first, second and third qualities and in making bales
    for exportation, the refuse is collected, and by a chemical process
    cinnamon oil is extracted, which sells very high, with an export
    duty of 3s. or l½ rupees on each ounce, exclusive of the British
    duties payable in England for importation, which is at present one
    shilling and three pence per pound.[49] Of the cinnamon roots
    camphor is made, which sells well both in Ceylon and other parts of
    the world.

Cinnamon, as a medicine, is a powerful stimulant, but it is not much
used alone. It is generally united with other tonics and stimulants,
but its ordinary use is to mask the disagreeable odor and taste of
other medicines. The oil of cinnamon is prepared by being grossly
powdered and macerated in sea water for two days and two nights, and
both are put into the still. A light oil comes over with the water,
and floats on its surface; a heavy oil sinks to the bottom of the
receiver, four hours before the light oil separates from the water,
and whilst the heavy oil continues to be precipitated for ten,
twelve, or sometimes fourteen days. The heavy oil, which separates
first, is about the same color as the light oil, but sometimes the
portion which separates last has a browner shade than the supernatant
oil. The same water can be used advantageously in a second
distillation. Professor Duncan informs us that 80 lbs. of
newly-prepared cinnamon yield about 2½ ozs. of oil, which floats upon
the water, and 5½ of heavy oil. The same quantity of cinnamon, if kept
in store for many years, yields 2 ozs. of light oil and 5 ozs. of
heavy oil.

Cinnamon oil is obtained from the fragments of bark which remain after
peeling, sorting, and packing. It is distilled over with difficulty,
and the process is promoted by the addition of salt water, and the use
of a low still. The oil thus obtained by distillation is at first of a
yellow color, but soon assumes a reddish brown hue. It has an odor
intermediate between that of cinnamon and vanilla, but possesses in a
high degree both the sweet burning taste and the agreeable aromatic
smell of cinnamon. It is heavier than water, its specific gravity
being 1.035.

The ripe fruit of this tree yields a concrete oil called cinnamon
suet, which was formerly employed to make candles for the Kandian
kings. An oil, called clove oil, is also distilled from the leaf,
which is said to be equal in aromatic pungency to that made from the
clove at the Moluccas.

The following were the quantities sold, and the average prices
realised during the Dutch rule in Ceylon:--

                               s.  d.
  1690    3,750  bales sold at  4   8  all round.
  1709    3,750        "        4   6      "
  1710    3,500        "        4   4      "
  1720    5,000        "        4   4      "
  1740    4,000        "        9   3      "
  1760    5,000        "        8   5      "
  1780    2,500        "       12   6      "
  1784    2,500        "       17   4      "

The last quotation appears to have been the highest ever obtained for
cinnamon, for 17s. 8d. average would give about 22s. for the first
sort. In later years we find the deliveries and prices to have been as
follows:--

                                  s.  d.
  1824      5,934  bales sold at  6   6  all round.
  1828      3,918        "        6   0      "
  1830      5,849        "        7   8      "
  1842      1,018        "         ---       "
  1845      3,245        "         ---       "

The comparative exports of cinnamon from Ceylon in the first six
months of 1853, as compared with the same period last year, are as
follows:--

                                    1853.          1852.
                                     lbs.           lbs.
  Quarter ending 5th January       99,778         93,291
             "    5th April        73,815        135,248

  Total                           173,593        228,539

The diminished export was caused by the prospective abolition of the
export duty, which came into operation on the 1st July last. The
quantity that will be sent to the English market by the close of the
year (1853) will be something prodigious compared with the average
consumption. From October 10, 1852, to July 22, 1853, the shipments
were 406,326 lbs.

  RETURN OF CINNAMON EXPORTED FROM CEYLON, SHOWING THE QUANTITY AND
  VALUE.

               Quantity.     Value.
  Year.           lbs.         £
  1836          724,364       --
  1837          558,110       --
  1838          398,198       --
  1839          596,592       --
  1840          389,373       --
  1841          317,919     24,857
  1842          121,145     15,207
  1843          662,704     66,270
  1844        1,057,841    105,784
  1845          408,211     40,821
  1846          491,656     49,165
  1847          447,369     44,736
  1848          491,688     49,168
  1849          733,782     73,378
  1850          644,857     64,485
  1851          500,518     50,051
  1852          427,667     42,766

The question of the export duty on cinnamon has, during the last
twenty years, occupied a considerable space in Ceylon correspondence
and the Island journals. This duty was first imposed in 1832, on the
abolition of the Grovernment monopoly, and was then fixed at the rate
of 3s. per lb. on all qualities. From the 19th April, 1835, it was
fixed at 3s. per lb. on the best, and 2s. on the second quality. It
was reduced in January, 1837, to 2s. 6d. on the first and second
sorts, and 2s. on the third; and in June, 1841, to 2s. on all
qualities; in 1843, to 1s.; and in September, 1848, to 4d. per lb.
Such a rate of export duty could be maintained only on an article for
which there was a considerable demand, and which could not be supplied
from other places, and this was for a long time the case. The
circumstances are now different, and the abolition of the duty, which
has so repeatedly been brought under the notice of the Treasury, has
at length been determined on. The quantity of cinnamon, &c., taken for
consumption in the United Kingdom, scarcely amounts to 2,800 bales per
annum. The sale and consumption is nearly stationary, and cinnamon is
only in demand for those finer purposes for which cassia, its
competitor, cannot be used. Whilst we imported the large amount of
700,095 lbs. in 1850, only 28,347 lbs. went into consumption. The
consumption has declined in the last two years to about 21,500 lbs.
Cinnamon is now imported into the United Kingdom duty free.

The land under cultivation with cinnamon in Ceylon is about 13,000
acres, principally in the western and southern provinces. The number
of gardens being eleven at Kaderane, seven at Ekelli, seven at
Morotto, six at Marandham, and two at Willisene. Several enterprising
planters have recently commenced the cultivation of this spice at
Singapore and Malacca. The plants already promise well. Indeed there
can be little doubt of its thriving, as the tree has been long grown
in gardens and pleasure grounds in those settlements, as an ornamental
plant, and has always flourished.

The Ceylon article is being supplanted in the continental markets by a
cheaper one, of China and Malabar growth. The Javanese, tempted by the
fatally high prices caused by the excessive duties on our Colonial
spice, smuggled a quantity of seed, and with it a cinnamon cultivator,
out of the island, and have since paid considerable attention to its
growth. The Dutch have at present more than five millions of plants,
equal to upwards of 5,000 acres, the greater part of which are in
tolerably full bearing.

The cinnamon trees in Java begin to blossom in the month of March.
They do not all flower at the same time, but in succession. The fruit
begins to ripen in October in the same manner, so that the crop lasts
from October to February. In Ceylon the blossom begins to appear in
November. The seeds when plucked ought to be fully ripe, and after
being separated from the outer pulpy covering, should be dried in the
shade. They can be kept for two or three months in dry sand or ashes,
but must not be exposed to the sun, as they would split, and thus be
rendered useless.

The plants in nurseries must be well sheltered from the sun and heavy
rains, but the plants are strengthened by the covers being removed at
night when heavy rains are not expected to fall, and in the day time
when only light rains prevail. The mode of planting out, cultivation,
preparing the bark, &c., appears to be the same in Java as that
practised in Ceylon. The only difference is, that while in Ceylon the
cinnamon, when ready for market, is packed in "gunny" or canvass bags,
in Java it is put into boxes, made of wood free from any smell or
flavor which would injure the spice. The inferior cinnamon, however,
is packed in straw mats.

The following is a return of the extent of cinnamon culture in Java
:--

                                                  In 1840.      In 1841.
  Residencies in which cinnamon is cultivated           10            10
  Number of plantations                                 48            49
     "      families devoted to this culture         7,901         9,688
     "      paid _budjans_                        294           345
  Extent of ground occupied by the cultivation,
    in _bahus_ of 71 decametres                 1,690         1,880

  Cinnamon trees of which the bark can be taken  1,106,566     1,407,213
  Young trees in the parks                       2,478,427     2,565,774
  For renewing                                     307,000        86,800

  Total                                          3,891,998     4,059,787

  Cinnamon crop, in Dutch lbs.                      57,074        38,219
     "           refuse                             23,283        82,803

The number of trees peeled in 1842 was taken at 1,824,599, and the
crop reckoned at 108,905 lbs.

In the residency of Bantam, four trees suffice to produce a pound of
cinnamon, whilst in the other residencies eleven trees must generally
be stripped to furnish the same quantity; in 1839 one pound could
scarcely be obtained from thirteen trees.

This cultivation increases each year, and the quality of the produce
improves, whilst the expenses diminish. However, the Dutch Government
has judged it proper not to extend it, although the soil of Java
appears favorable to this culture.

From 200,000 to 300,000 lbs. of true cinnamon, not freed from its
epidermis, is exported annually from Cochin-China.

  JAVA CINNAMON SOLD IN HOLLAND.

                    lbs.
  In 1835           2,200
   " 1836           1,300
   " 1837           1,600
   " 1838           2,100
   " 1839           4,700
   " 1840           7,900
   " 1841          23,900
   " 1842          13,000
   " 1843          23,000
   " 1844         101,400
   " 1845         134,500
   " 1848         250,550


             STATISTICS OF PACKAGES IN LONDON.

                  1842.       1843.      1844.        1845.
  Imported        2,196       4,458      9,197        8,909
  Exported        3,661       3,964      6,712        6,081
  Duty paid         838         738        801        1,012
  Stock           2,709       2,622      4,230        5,549


CASSIA BARK.

_Cinnamonum Cassia_, or _aromaticum_, the _Laurus cassia_ of Linnæus,
seems to be the chief source of the "cassia lignea" of commerce. It
differs from the true cinnamon tree in many particulars. Its leaves
are oblong-lanceolate; they have three ribs, which coalesce into one
at the base; its young twigs are downy, and its leaves have the taste
of cinnamon.

Malabar cassia appears to be the produce of another species of
_Cinnamonum_, probably _C. eucalyptoides_, or _Malabatrum_.

Dr. Wight, of the Madras Medical Service, in a report to the East
India Company, expresses his belief that the cassia producing plants
extend to nearly every species of the genus. "A set of specimens (he
observes) submitted for my examination, of the trees furnishing cassia
on the Malabar coast, presented no fewer than four distinct species;
including among them the genuine cinnamon plant, the bark of the older
trees of which, it would appear, are exported from the coast as
cassia. Three or four more species are natives of Ceylon, exclusive of
the cinnamon proper, all of which greatly resemble the cinnamon plant,
and in the woods might easily be mistaken for it and peeled, though
the produce would be inferior. Thus we have from Western India and
Ceylon alone, probably not less than six plants producing cassia; add
to these nearly twice as many more species of _Cinnamonum_, the
produce of the more eastern states of Asia, and the Islands of the
Eastern Archipelago, all remarkable for their striking family
likeness; all, I believe, endowed with aromatic properties, and
probably the greater part, if not the whole, contributing something
towards the general result, and we at once see the impossibility of
awarding to any one individual species the credit of being the source
whence the _Cassia lignea_ of commerce is derived; and equally the
impropriety of applying to any one of them the comprehensive specific
appellation of cassia, since all sorts of cinnamon-like plants,
yielding bark of a quality unfit to bear the designation of cinnamon
in the market, are passed off as cassia."

The cassia tree, according to Mr. Crawfurd, is found in the more
northern portion of the Indian isles, as in the Philippines,
Majindanao, Sumatra, Borneo, and parts of Celebes. It is also grown on
the western coast of Africa. The principal seat of its culture is,
however, the Malabar coast, and the provinces of Quantong and Kingse,
in China.

The famous cassia of China is incomparably superior in perfume and
flavor to any spice of its class. Its native place is unknown, though
supposed to be the interior provinces of China. The market price is
said to be £5 per lb.

The Malabar sort brought from Bombay is thicker, darker colored, and
coarser than that from China, and is more subject to foul packing. A
small quantity of cassia is brought from Mauritius and Brazil, and a
large amount from the Philippine Islands.

Cassia bark fetches from 80s. to 105s. per cwt. in the London market,
according to quality. The imports appear on the decline. In 1843 and
1844 we imported nearly two millions of pounds. The quantity imported
and retained for home consumption in the past four years are shown in
the following figures:--

             Imported.      Retained for consumption.
               lbs.                   lbs.
  1848       510,247                76,152
  1849       472,693                83,500
  1850     1,050,008                97,178
  1851       267,582                82,467

The cheaper Indian barks, as well as the cinnamon of the East, seemed
at one time to be fast driving out of the market the superior class
cinnamon of Ceylon.

In 1841 Java exported 400 cwts. of cinnamon; and the quantity of
cassia imported into the United Kingdom from India and the Philippine
Islands, in the five years ending with 1844, was--

                lbs.
  1840        329,310
  1841      1,261,648
  1842      1,312,804
  1843      2,470,502
  1844      1,278,413

40,000 lbs. were received from India in 1848; and 3,795 arrobas of
cassia were exported from Manila in 1847. In 1852, 2,806 cwts. of
cassia were received at Singapore from China, and 1,380 cwts. exported
from that settlement to the Continent, against 903 cwts. shipped in
the previous year.

What the Ceylon spice-grower wants, is an extended field of
operation--a larger class of consumers to take off his cinnamon, and
this can only be obtained by bringing it within the means of the great
mass of cassia buyers.

Look at the quantity of cinnamon exported by the Dutch in the middle
of the eighteenth century. Eight or nine thousand bales a year were
exported, and now, after a lapse of a hundred years, Ceylon hardly
sends away half that quantity. Yet the consumption of spice must have
kept pace with the increased population of countries using it, and so
it has. But the difference is made up, and more than made up, by
cassia from China, Java, Sumatra, Malabar Coast, &c., and though the
new article is not equal to the cinnamon of Ceylon, yet the vast
difference in the price obtains for it the preference. Now what the
Ceylon planter wants, is to be allowed to produce a spice on equal
terms, and of a superior quality to cassia, which might be done under
an _ad valorem_ export duty of 5 per cent. Spice of this description
of course could not afford the high cultivation bestowed on the fine
qualities, neither would it be required. In fact little or no
cultivation need be given it. At present anything inferior to the
third sort is not worth producing, because it cannot stand the
shilling export duty. But under a more enlightened system of things,
with a low duty such as I suggest, myriads of bushes would spring up
on those low, sandy, and at present unprofitable wastes that skirt the
sea-coast of the western province, around Negombo and Chilaw.

The difference of duty would be more than made up by the diffusion of
capital in planting, the employment of vast numbers of laborers, the
purchase from Government of many thousand acres of now valueless
flats, and all the attendant benefits arising out of the development
of a new field of operation for the colonial industrial resources.[50]
The cassia tree grows naturally to the height of 50 or 60 feet, with
large, spreading, horizontal branches. The peelers take off the two
barks together, and separating the rough outer one, which is of no
value, they lay the inner bark to dry, which rolls up and becomes the
_Cassia lignea_ of commerce. It resembles cinnamon in taste, smell and
appearance. The best is imported from China, either direct from
Canton, or through Singapore, in small tubes or quills, sometimes the
thickness of the ordinary pipes of cinnamon and of the same length;
but usually they are shorter and thicker, and the bark itself coarser.
It is of a tolerably smooth surface and brownish color, with some cast
of red, but much less so than cinnamon. The exports from China are
said to be about five million pounds annually; price about 32s. per
cwt. In 1850, 6,509 piculs of cassia lignea (nearly one million
pounds), valued at 87,850 dollars, were shipped from the single port
of Canton. Cassia bark is of a less fibrous texture, and more brittle,
and it is also distinguished from cinnamon by a want of pungency, and
by being of a mucilaginous or gelatinous quality.

CASSIA BUDS are the dried flower buds (perianth and ovary) of the
cassia tree, and are mostly brought from China. They bear some
resemblance to a clove, but are smaller, and when fresh have a rich
cinnamon flavor. They should be chosen round, fresh, and free from
stalk and dirt. They are used chiefly in confectionery, and have the
flavor and pungency of cassia. The exports from Canton in 1844 were
21,500 lbs.; in 1850, 44,140 lbs., valued at 7,400 dollars. The
average quantity of cassia buds imported into the United Kingdom, in
each of the thirteen years ending with 1842, was 40,231 lbs.; the
average quantity entered for home consumption in these years was 6,610
lbs., and the average annual amount of duty received was £312.

Cassia bark yields a yellow volatile oil, called oil of cassia, the
finer kind of which differs but little in its properties from that of
cinnamon, for which it is generally substituted; it has a specific
gravity of 1071. The best is manufactured in China, where the wood,
bark, leaves and oil are all in request. The cassia oil is rated at
150 dollars per picul, and the trade in this article reaches about
250,000 dollars.

CANELLA ALBA, or wild cinnamon, is a valuable and ornamental tree,
growing about fifteen feet high, which is cultivated in South America
and the West Indies for its pungent bark, which is shipped to this
country in bales or cases, in long quills and flat pieces, something
like cinnamon. Large old cuttings root readily in the sand. It is
grown chiefly in the Bahama Islands, from whence we derive our
supplies.

By the Caribs, the ancient natives of the West Indies, and the
negroes, it was first employed as a condiment. In this country it is
chiefly used as an aromatic stimulant and tonic, ranking between
cinnamon and cloves. The bark possesses, however, no other quality
than its hot spicy flavor and strong aromatic odor when exposed to the
action of heat.

CASCARILLA BARK is obtained chiefly from the _Croton cascarilla_, a
small shrub growing at St. Domingo, the Bahama Islands, and the
Antilles. The chief portion comes from Eleuthera. In Hayti a pleasant
kind of tea is made from the leaves. Other species of the family
supply some of the bark of commerce.

From its strong and aromatic properties it has been found very
efficacious in all febrile diseases, and vies with the Jesuits' bark;
as a tonic it has very wholesome qualities, a pleasant and strong
bitterness, and was for some time held in considerable repute among
the faculty.

About twenty years ago, large shipments were made from the Bahamas.
It was found, upon adulteration with hops, to reduce the cost of that
article, and for the encouragement of the hop grower a prohibitory
impost was laid upon it by the Home Government, consequently it became
an unsaleable product.

The sea-side balsam, or sweet wood (_Croton Eleuteria_), from which
some cascarilla bark is obtained, grows in the Bahama Islands and
Jamaica, but almost all the bark imported comes from Nassau, New
Providence. In 1840, 15,000 lbs. were imported for home consumption.

This bark produces the combined effect of an aromatic and of a
moderately powerful tonic; but it does not possess any astringency. It
has been employed as a substitute for cinchona. When burned it gives
out a musky odor, and is often used in pastiles.

The value of this bark ranges, according to quality, from 17s. 6d. to
43 s. per cwt.


CLOVES.

The cloves of commerce are obtained from the flower buds of
_Caryophyllus aromaticus (Eugenia caryophyllata_), which was
originally a native of the Moluccas, but is now cultivated in several
parts of the East and West Indies. They have the form of a nail, and
when examined are seen to consist of the tubular calyx with a roundish
projection, formed by the unopened petals. It is a very handsome tree,
growing to the height of about twenty feet. The trunk is straight, and
rises four or five feet before it throws out branches. The bark is
smooth, thin, of a grey color, and the wood of the trunk too hard for
ordinary cabinet work.

The leaves are opposite, smooth, narrow, pointed, of a rupous color
above, and green on the under side. They have a very aromatic odor
when bruised between the fingers. The flowers produced in branched
peduncles, at the extremity of the bough, are of a delicate peach
color. The elongated calyx, forming the seed vessel, first changes to
yellow, and, when ripe, red, which is from October to December, and in
this state it is fit to gather. If left for a few weeks longer on the
trees, they expand, and become what are termed "mother cloves," fit
only for seed or for candying. The ground under the tree is first
swept clean, or else a mat or cloth is spread. The nearest clusters
are taken off with the hand, and the more distant by the aid of
crooked sticks. Great care should be taken not to injure the tree, as
it would prevent future bearing.

The cloves are then prepared for shipment by smoking them on hurdles
near a slow wood fire, to give them a brown color, after which they
are further dried in the sun. They may then be cut off from the flower
branches with the nails, and will be found to be purple colored
within, and fit to be baled for the European market. In some places
they are scalded in hot water before being smoked, but this is not
common. The tree may be propagated either from layers or seed. Layers
will root in five or six months if kept moist.

A strong dark loam, a gravelly, sandy, or clayey soil, but one not
retentive of moisture, seems that best suited for its successful
culture.

It does not thrive well near the sea, nor in the higher mountains, the
spray of the sea and the cold being found injurious. The plants at
first require the shade of other trees, such as the mango, coco-nut,
&c. Although generally a hardy plant, it suffers from excessive
drought. They should be planted about twenty feet apart. In its native
country the tree begins to yield fruit in the sixth year, but a crop
can seldom be looked for in other quarters under eight years. It is
very long lived, sometimes attaining the age of 130 years.

There appears, according to Mr. Crawfurd, to be five varieties of the
clove, viz.--the ordinary cultivated clove; a kind called the female
clove by the natives, which has a pale stem; the kiri or loory clove;
the royal clove, which is very scarce, and the wild clove. The three
first are equally valuable as spices, the female clove being
considered fittest for the distillation of essential oil. The wild
clove, having scarcely any aromatic flavor, is valueless.

The produce which may be expected from the tree seems to be uncertain;
it may, however, be averaged at five or six pounds. A clove tree, well
weeded and taken care of, will produce from five to twenty pounds. On
the other hand, a tree that is neglected will not give above two or
three pounds. At intervals of from three to six years they usually
produce one extraordinary crop, but then a year now and then
intervenes, when they yield none at all; in others they will afford a
double harvest.

The clove tree was originally confined to the five principal Molucca
islands, and chiefly to Machean. From these it was conveyed to
Amboyna, a very short time only before the arrival of the Portuguese.
By them the cultivation was strictly restricted to Amboyna, every
effort being made to extirpate the plant elsewhere.

It has now, however, spread to Java, Singapore, and the Straits'
Settlements, Ceylon, the Mauritius and Seychelles, Bourbon, Zanzibar,
Cayenne, Dominica, Martinique, St. Kitts, St. Vincent, and Trinidad.

Cloves contain a volatile oil, associated with resinous, gummy, and
astringent matter, which is yielded in larger proportion than by any
other plant. Neuman obtained by distillation two ounces and two
drachms from sixteen ounces of cloves. On an average cloves yield from
17 to 22 per cent. of oil, including the heavy and light oils. The oil
is aromatic and acrid, and has been used as a condiment and a
stimulant carminative. It is also extensively used by distillers and
soap makers.

It is said that the clove does not thrive well on the soil of Java,
the plantations of which trial had been made not having succeeded to
the extent expected, although they were directed by skilled persons
from Amboyna; the places they made choice of did not differ materially
as to soil and climate from those of the Moluccas.

M. Teysman, Director of the Botanical Gardens at Batavia, seems to
have bestowed much attention on the subject. The exports however from
the island have been considerable. In 1830, there were 803 piculs
shipped; in 1835, 4,566; in 1839, 2,334; in 1843, 2,027 piculs of 133
lbs.

M. Buee, who introduced the culture of the clove in the island of
Dominica, about 1789, thus describes the results of his experience,
which may be useful to other experimental cultivators. He obtained a
few plants from Cayenne, and raised 1,600 trees from seed, which, in a
year from the first sowing, were transplanted. The seeds were sown at
about six inches apart from each other, in beds; over these beds small
frames were erected about three feet from the ground, and plantain
leaves were spread on the top, in order to shelter the young plants
from the sun. The leaves were allowed gradually to decay, and at the
end of nine months the young plants, which by that time were strong,
were permitted to receive the benefit of the sun; but if not protected
from it when very young, they were found to droop and die.

When transplanted, the trees were placed at sixteen feet apart from
each other. They grew very luxuriantly, and at the end of fifteen
months after their removal, attained the height of from three to four
feet. The ground wherein they were planted had been a coffee
plantation during forty years. The coffee trees had decayed, and an
attempt had been made to replace them; but they refused to grow;
whereas the clove plants flourished as if on congenial soil, and a
crop was gathered on some of them when they were not more than six
years old, which period is two or three years earlier than the usual
time for gathering.

The cloves sent from St. Vincent to England in 1800, were obtained
from trees eight feet high, having a stem only two inches in diameter.
Trial was made in that island of the relative growth of the plant on
different soils; it grew sickly on land which was not manured, but on
land which had received this preparation it flourished.

In Singapore, about ten years ago, there were then about 15,000 clove
trees planted out, a few of which only had come in bearing. If these
plantations had proved equally productive with those of the sister
settlement of Pinang, it would have been able to export 60,000 lbs. of
cloves, its own produce; but this expectation, it will be seen, has
not been realised. In the season of 1841-42, there was 1000 piculs of
cloves shipped from Pinang, but none were exported in the two previous
years.

The quantity of land under cultivation with cloves there, in 1843, was
463 orlongs in Prince of Wales Island, and 517 in Province Wellesley.
The number of trees planted out in the former island was 72,779; in
the latter province 7,639. There were in the island 25,161 plants in
nursery.

The trees in bearing were--In Prince of Wales Island, 28,739; not
bearing, 44,040; produce in 1843, 87 piculs, 50 catties; gross value,
3,399 dollars; estimated produce of cloves for 1844, 469 piculs. In
Province Wellesley--Trees in bearing, 1,073; not bearing, 6,566;
produce in 1843, 1 picul, 13 catties; gross value 45 dollars.

The export of cloves from Pinang was, in 1849, 24,000 lbs.; in 1850,
52,400; in 1851, 27,866; in 1852, 45,087.

From tabular statements drawn up in 1844, by Mr. F.S. Brown, Chairman
of the Pinang Chamber of Commerce, it appears that there were, in
1843, in that island and Province Wellesley adjoining, 96 clove
plantations, containing 80,418 clove trees; besides many young trees
in nurseries ready to be planted out. The produce of cloves there, in
1842, was 11,813 lbs., and this was a very short crop, it having that
year proved a complete failure; the average crop for some years
previous had been 46,666 lbs. Pinang only began to export this spice
in 1832. Of the clove trees in Pinang there were then only 29,812 in
bearing, leaving 75,767 in that settlement alone to come to maturity;
estimated to yield about 300,000 lbs.

No success has attended repeated trials of cloves in Singapore. Until
the trees reach the age of bearing, they grow and look extremely well;
but any expectation of a crop that may have been raised by their
hitherto fine condition, ends in disappointment, for just then the
trees assume the appearance of sudden blight, as if
lightning-stricken, and then die. 125 clove plants and 350 seedlings
were sent to Singapore from Bencoolen, by Sir T. Raffles, in the close
of 1819; but although every care was paid them--while the nutmegs
which accompanied them throve amazingly well--little or no progress
has been made with clove culture. Two or three hundred-weight were
shipped in 1845, but since then hardly any mention is made of the
spice.

In a petition presented by the spice planters of Pinang and Province
Wellesley, to the authorities at home, in 1844, praying that the duty
on British Colonial nutmegs, mace, and cloves might be reduced to 1s.
9d., 1s. 3d., and 3d. respectively, on importation into England, in
order to compete with foreign produce, it was stated that a few years
hence Prince of Wales Island might be expected to produce 600,000 lbs.
of nutmegs, 200,000 lbs. of mace, and 300,000 lbs. of cloves; whilst
Singapore, if equally successful in the culture of the same, would
yield yearly 137,000 lbs. of nutmegs, 45,000 lbs. of mace, and 60,000
lbs. of cloves. In short, the planters needed only encouragement to
produce in the course of a few years a full supply of those valuable
spices for the whole consumption of Great Britain.

Dr. Ruschenberger, who visited Zanzibar in 1835, thus speaks of the
clove plantations there:--"As far as the eye could reach over a
beautifully undulated land, nothing was to be seen but clove trees of
different ages, varying in height from five to twenty feet. The form
of the tree is conical, the branches grow at nearly right angles with
the trunk, and they begin to shoot a few inches above the ground. The
plantation contains nearly four thousand trees, and each tree yields
on an average six pounds of cloves a year; they are carefully picked
by hand, and then dried in the shade; we saw numbers of slaves
standing on ladders gathering the spice, while others were at work
clearing the ground of dead leaves. The whole is in the finest order,
presenting a picture of industry and of admirable neatness and beauty.
They were introduced into Zanzibar in 1818, from Mauritius, and are
found to thrive so well that almost everybody in the island is now
clearing away the cocoa nut to make way for them. The clove bears in
five or six years from the seed; of course time enough has not yet
elapsed for the value and quantity of Zanzibar cloves to be generally
known; they are worth, however, in the Bombay market, about 30s. the
Surat maund of 39¼ lbs.; the price for Molucca cloves in the Eastern
market is from 28 to 30 dollars per picul of 133 lbs.; for those of
Mauritius, 20 to 24 dollars per picul."

The average annual consumption of cloves in the United Kingdom, in the
four years ending 1841, was 49,000 lbs. The largest quantity of cloves
imported during the past twenty-five years was 1,041,171 lbs., in
1847. The quantities imported and entered for home consumption in the
last five years have been as follows:--

                 Imports.       Home consumption.
                   lbs.               lbs.
  1848           117,433             126,691
  1849           274,713             133,713
  1850           749,646             159,934
  1851           253,439             138,132
  1852           313,949             175,287

In 1848 we received 60,000 lbs. of cloves from British India.


THE NUTMEG.

_Myristica moschata_, _M. officinalis_, or _aromatica_.--This tree is
of a larger growth than the clove, attaining a height of thirty feet,
and has its leaves broader in proportion to their length; the upper
surface of these is of a bright green, the under of a greyish color.
It is a dioecious plant, having male or barren pale yellow flowers upon
one tree, and female or fertile flowers upon another. The fruit is
drupaceous, and opens by two valves when ripe, displaying the
beautiful reticulated scarlet arillus, which constitutes mace. Within
this is a hard, dark brown, and glossy shell, covering the kernel,
which is the nutmeg of the shops.

The kernels of _M. tomentosa_ are also used as aromatics, under the
name of wild or male nutmegs.

Lindley describes two other species, _M. fatua_, a native of Surinam,
with greenish white flowers, and _M. sebifera_ or _Virola sebifera_, a
native of Guiana, with yellowish green flowers.

By expression, nutmegs are made to yield a concrete oil, called
_Adeps Myristicæ_, or sometimes erroneously oil of mace. A volatile
oil is also procured by distillation. Nutmegs and mace are used
medicinally as aromatic stimulants and condiments. In large doses they
have a narcotic effect. The fleshy part of the fruit is used as a
preserve.

Dr. Oxley has given such an admirable account of the nutmeg and its
cultivation, as the result of 20 years experience in Singapore, that I
shall draw largely from his valuable paper, which is contained in the
second volume of "The Journal of the Indian Archipelago," page 641.

The nutmeg tree, like many of its class, has a strong tendency to
become monoecious, and planters in general are well pleased at this
habit, thinking they secure a double advantage by having the male and
female flowers on the same plant. This is, however, delusive, and
being against the order of nature, the produce of such trees is
invariably inferior, showing itself in the production of double nuts
and other deformities. It is best, therefore, to have only female
trees, with a due proportion of males.

The female flowers, which are merely composed of a tripid calyx and no
corolla, when produced by a tree in full vigor are perfectly
urceolate, slightly tinged with green at the base, and well filled by
the ovary, whereas the female flowers of weakly trees are entirely
yellow, imperfectly urceolate, and approach more to the staminiferous
flowers of the male.

The shape of the fruit varies considerably, being spherical, oblong,
and egg-shaped, but the nearer they approach sphericity of figure, the
more highly are they prized.

There is also a great variety in the foliage of different trees, from
elliptic, oblong and ovate, to almost purely lanceolate-shaped leaves.
This difference seems to indicate in some measure the character of the
produce; trees with large oblong leaves appearing to have the largest
and most spherical fruit, and those with small lanceolate leaves being
in general more prolific bearers, but of inferior quality.

Whilst its congener the clove has been spread over Asia, Africa, and
the West Indies, the nutmeg refuses to flourish out of the Malayan
Archipelago, except as an exotic, all attempts to introduce it largely
into other tropical countries having decidedly failed. The island of
Ternate, which is in about the same latitude as Singapore, is said to
have been the spot where it was truly indigenous, but no doubt the
tree is to be found on most of the Moluccas. At present the place of
its origin is unproductive of the spice, having been robbed of its
rich heritage by the policy of the Dutch, who at an early period
removed the plantations to the Banda isles for better surveillance,
where they still remain and flourish. But although care was formerly
taken to extirpate the tree on the Moluccas, the mace-feeding pigeons
have frustrated the machinations of man, and spread it widely through
the Archipelago of islands extending from the Moluccas to New Guinea.
Its circle of growth extends westward as far as Pinang, or Prince of
Wales Island, where, although an exotic, it has been cultivated as a
mercantile speculation with success for many years. Westward of Pinang
there are no plantations, looking at the subject in a mercantile point
of view. The tree is to be found, indeed, in Ceylon, and the West
Coast of India, but to grow it as a speculation out of its indigenous
limits, is as likely to prove successful as the cultivation of apples
and pears in Bengal.

In the Banda Isles, where the tree may be considered as indigenous, no
further attention is paid to its cultivation than setting out the
plants in parks, under the shade of large forest trees, with long
horizontal branches, called "Canari" by the natives. There it attains
a height of 50 feet and upwards, whereas from 20 to 30 feet may be
taken as a fair average of the trees in the Straits' Settlements; but
notwitstanding our pigmy proportions (adds Dr. Oxley), it does not
appear, from, all I could ever learn, that we are relatively behind
the Banda trees, either in quantity or quality of produce, and I am
strongly impressed with the idea that the island of Singapore can
compete with the Banda group on perfectly even terms. Our climate is
quite unexceptionable for the growth of the nutmeg, being neither
exposed to droughts or high winds; and although we may lose by
comparison of soils, we again gain by greater facilities of sending
our products to market, by the facility of obtaining abundant supplies
of manure, and any amount of free and cheap labor.

A nutmeg plantation, well laid out and brought up to perfection, is
one of the most pleasing and agreeable properties that can be
possessed. Yielding returns, more or less daily, throughout the year,
there is increasing interest, besides the usual stimulus to all
agriculturists of a crop time, when his produce increases to double
and quadruple the ordinary routine.

Trees having arrived at fifteen years growth, there is no incertitude
or fear of total failure of crop, only in relative amount of produce,
and this, as will be seen, is greatly in the planter's own power to
command. It is against reason to suppose that a tree in flower and
fruit will not expend itself if left to unaided nature: it must be
supplied with suitable stimuli to make good the waste, therefore he
who wants nuts must not be sparing of manure.

The first requisite for the planter is choice of location. It is true
that the nutmeg tree, aided by manure, will grow in almost any soil
where water does not lodge, but it makes a vast difference in the
degree of success, whether the soil be originally good, or poor and
improved by art. The tree does not thrive in white or sandy soils, but
prefers the deep red and friable soils formed by the decomposition of
granite rocks and tinged with iron, and the deeper the tinge the
better. I am therefore inclined to think, that iron in the soil is
almost necessary for the full development of the plant. If under the
before-mentioned soil there be a rubble of iron-stone at four or five
feet from the surface (a very common formation in Singapore), forming
a natural drainage, the planter has obtained all that he can desire
in the ground, and needs only patience and perseverance to secure
success. The form of the ground ought to be undulating, to permit the
running off of all superfluous water, as there is no one thing more
injurious to the plant than water lodging around its roots, although,
in order to thrive well, it requires an atmosphere of the most humid
sort, and rain almost daily. Besides the form of the ground, situation
is highly desirable, particularly as regards exposure. A spot selected
for a nutmeg plantation cannot be too well sheltered, as high winds
are most destructive to the tree, independently of the loss occasioned
by the blowing off of fruit and flower.

At present there is abundant choice of land in Singapore, the greater
portion of the island being as yet uncultivated, and much answering to
the above description. The land can be purchased from Government at
the rate of from 10s. to 20s. per acre in perpetuity. I would advise
the man who wishes to establish a plantation, to select the virgin
forest, and of all things let him avoid deserted gambier plantations,
the soil of which is completely exhausted, the Chinese taking good
care never to leave a spot until they have taken all they can out of
it. A cleared spot has a great attraction for the inexperienced, and
it is not easy to convince a man that it is less expensive to attack
the primitive forest, than to attempt to clear an old gambier
plantation, overrun with lalang grass; but the cutting down and
burning of large forest trees is far less expensive than the
extirpation of the lalang, and as the Chinese leave all the stumps of
the large trees in the ground, it is almost more difficult to remove
them in this state than when you have the powerful lever of the trunk
to aid you in tearing up the roots, setting aside the paramount
advantage that, in the one case you possess a fresh and fertile soil,
in the other an effete and barren one.

Forest land, or "jungle," as it is called in the East, can be cleared
for about 25 to 30 dollars (£5 to £6) per acre, by contract, but the
planter had better be careful to have every stump and root of tree
removed, ere he ventures to commence planting, or the white ants,
attracted by the dead wood, will crowd into the land, and having
consumed the food thus prepared for them, will not be slow in
attacking the young trees. Whilst the planter is thus clearing the
ground, he may advantageously at the same time be establishing
nurseries; for these the ground ought to be well trenched and mixed
with a small quantity of thoroughly decomposed manure and burned
earth, making up the earth afterwards into beds of about three feet
wide, with paths between them for the convenience of weeding and
cleaning the young plants. Of course if the planter can obtain really
good plants, the produce of well-selected seed, it will be a great
saving of time and expense to him, but unless the seed be carefully
chosen, I would prefer beginning my own nurseries, and in the
selection of seed would recommend the most perfectly ripe and
spherical nuts. Oval long nuts are to be rejected, particularly any
of a pale color at one end.

The planter having selected his seed, which ought to be put in the
ground within twenty-four hours after being gathered, setting it about
two inches deep in the beds already prepared, and at the distance of
twelve to eighteen inches apart, the whole nursery to be well shaded
both on top and sides, the earth kept moist and clear of weeds, and
well smoked by burning wet grass or weeds in it once a week, to drive
away a very small moth-like insect that is apt to infest young plants,
laying its eggs on the leaf, when they become covered with yellow
spots, and perish if not attended to speedily.

Washing the leaves with a decoction of the Tuba root is the best
remedy I know of, but where only a few plants are affected, if the
spots be numerous, I would prefer to pluck up the plant altogether,
rather than run the risk of the insect becoming more numerous, to the
total destruction of the nursery. The nuts germinate in from a month
to six weeks, and even later, and for many months after germination
the seed is attached to the young plant, and may be removed apparently
as sound as when planted, to the astonishment of the unlearned, who
are not aware of the great disproportion in size between the ovule and
albumen, the former of which is alone necessary to form the plant. The
plant may be kept in nursery with advantage for nearly two years.
Should they grow rapidly, and the interspaces become too small for
them, every second plant had better be removed to a fresh nursery; and
set out at a distance of a couple of feet from each other. When
transplanted, either in this way or for their ultimate position in the
plantation, care should be taken to remove them with a good ball of
earth, secured by the skin of the plantain, which prevents the ball of
earth falling to pieces. The nurseries being established, the ground
cleared and ready, the next proceeding is to lay out and dig holes
about 26 or 30 feet apart, and as the quincunx order has so many
advantages, it is the form I would recommend for adoption. The holes
should be at least six feet in diameter, and about four feet deep, and
when refilled the surface soil is to be used, and not that which is
taken out of the hole. Each hole should be filled up about one foot
higher than the surrounding ground, to allow for the settling of the
soil and the sinking of the tree, which, planted at this height, will
in a few years be found below the level. Over each hole thus filled
up, a shed, made of Attap leaves or other shelter, closed on two
sides, east and west, and proportioned to the size of the plant, is to
be erected. It is not a bad plan to leave an open space in the centre
of the top of each shed, about twelve inches wide, by which the young
plant can obtain the benefit of the dew and gentle rains, which more
than compensates for the few rays of sun that can only fall upon it
whilst that body is vertical. After the sheds have been completed,
each hole should have added to it a couple of baskets of well
decomposed manure, and an equal quantity of burned earth, when all is
ready for the reception of the plant, which, having been set out, if
the weather be dry will require watering for ten days or a fortnight
after, in fact until it takes the soil.

The planter having set out all his trees must not deem his labors
completed, they are only commencing. To arrive thus far is simple and
easy, but to patiently watch and tend the trees for ten years after,
requires all the enthusiasm already mentioned. About three months
after planting out, the young trees will receive great benefit if a
small quantity of liquid fish manure be given them. In the first six
years they ought to be trenched round three times, enlarging the
circle each time, the trenches being dug close to the extremities of
the roots, which generally correspond to the ends of the branches, and
each new trench commencing where the old one terminated. They must of
course greatly increase in size as the circle extends, requiring a
proportionate quantity of manure, but the depth ought never to be less
than two feet.

The object of trenching is to loosen the soil and permit the roots to
spread, otherwise the tree spindles instead of becoming broad and
umbrageous. Manure is beyond all other considerations the most
important to the welfare of the estate; it is that which gives
quantity and quality of produce, and without it a plantation cannot be
carried on. The want of it must limit the cultivation in the Straits'
Settlements, and will arrest many a planter, who, having got his
plantation to look well up to the eighth year with very little manure,
thinks he can go on in the same manner. The nutmeg tree likes well all
sorts of manures, but that which is best suited for it seems to be
well-rotted stable and cow-yard manure, mixed with vegetable matter,
and when the tree is in bearing the outer covering of the nut itself
is about one of the very best things to be thrown into the dung-pit.
Dead animals buried not too near the roots, also blood, fish, and oil
cakes are beneficial. Guano is of no use.

But although manuring is the chief element in successful cultivation,
there are many other matters for the planter to attend to during the
period that the trees are growing. All obnoxious grasses must be
carefully kept out of the plantation, at least from between the trees,
and the harmless grasses rather encouraged, as they keep the surface
cool. The trunk of the tree ought to be carefully washed with soap and
water once a year to keep it clear of moss; this has been ridiculed as
a work of supererogation, but let those who think so omit the
operation.

Parasitical plants of the genus Loranthus are very apt to attach
themselves to the branches, and if not removed do great injury.

The insect enemies of the tree are not very numerous, but it has a
few, white ants among the number. They seldom attack a vigorous plant;
it is upon the first symptoms of weakness or decay that they commence
their operations. Their nests may be dislodged from the roots of the
plant by a dose of solution of pig dung, to which they have a great
aversion.

There are several species of insects which lay their eggs on the
leaves, and unless carefully watched and removed, they commit great
havoc amongst the trees. For this purpose it is necessary to wash the
leaves with a decoction of Tuba root, and syringe them by means of a
bamboo with lime and water, of the consistence of whitewash; this
adheres to the leaves, and will remain even after several heavy
showers.

Another nuisance is the nest of the large red ant; these collect and
glue the leaves together, forming a cavity for the deposition of their
_larvæ_. The best mode of destroying them is to hang a portion of some
animal substance, such as the entrails of a fowl, fish, &c., to the
end of a pole, thrust through and protruding from the branches; the
ants will run along the pole and collect in immense quantities around
the bait, when, by a lighted faggot, they can be burned by thousands.
This repeated once or twice a day for a week or so, will soon rid the
tree of the invaders.

The number of men to be kept on an estate to preserve it in first-rate
order after it has come into bearing, must depend of course upon the
size of the plantation, but in general one man for every one hundred
trees will be found sufficient, provided there be some four or five
thousand trees. On a small scale the proportion must be greater.

The nutmeg planter is under the necessity of keeping up nurseries
throughout the whole of his operations for the replacement of bad
plants and redundant males. Of the latter ten per cent. seems to be
about the best proportion to keep, but I would have completely
dioecious trees. No person can boast to get a plantation completely
filled up and in perfect order much sooner than fifteen years. Of the
first batch planted, not more than one-half will turn out perfect
females, for I do not take into account monoecious trees, which I have
already condemned. The tree shows flower about the seventh year, but
the longer it is before doing so, the better and stronger will it be.
I cannot refrain from a smile when a sanguine planter informs me with
exultation that he has obtained a nut from a tree only three or four
years planted out; so much the worse for his chance of success, too
great precocity being incompatible with strength and longevity.

The best trees do not show flower before the ninth year, and one such
is worth a score of the others. This will be evident when it is stated
that I have seen several trees yield more than 10,000 nuts each in one
year, whereas I do not believe that there is a plantation in the
Straits' that averages 1,000 from every tree. This very great
disparity of bearing shows plainly that the cultivation of the plant
is not yet thoroughly understood, or greater uniformity would prevail,
and I think it clearly enough points out that a higher degree of
cultivation would meet its reward.

The tree has not been introduced into the Straits' sufficiently long
to determine its longevity, but those introduced and planted in the
beginning of the present century, as yet show no symptoms of decay.
The experiment of grafting the trees, which at first view presents so
many advantages, both in securing the finest quality of nut and the
certainty of the sex, has still to be tried in this cultivation. Some
three years ago (continues Dr. Oxley), I succeeded in grafting several
plants by approach; these are not sufficiently old for me to decide
whether it be desirable or not, for although the plants are looking
well and growing, they as yet have thrown out their branches in a
straggling irregular manner, having no leaders, and consequently they
cannot extend their branches in the regular verticles necessary for
the perfect formation of the tree, without which they must ever be
small and stunted, and consequently incapable of yielding any quantity
of produce. The grafts have succeeded so far as stock and scion
becoming one, and in time a perpendicular shoot from the wood may
appear. If after that it should increase in size and strength, so as
to form a tree of full dimensions, the advantage gained would be worth
any trouble, the quality of some nuts being so far above that of
others, it would make a difference beyond present calculation; in
short, 1,000 such picked trees at the present prices would yield
something equivalent to £4,000 a year, for £4 per tree would be a low
estimate for such plants. If this ever does occur, it will change the
aspect of cultivation altogether, and I see no good reason why it
should not, except that those possessing trees of the quality alluded
to, would not very willingly permit others to graft from them, so it
is only the already successful planter who can try the experiment
properly.

An acre of land contains on an average 92 trees, and it is calculated
an outlay of 300 dollars is required upon every acre to bring the tree
to maturity; but as not more than one-half of the trees generally turn
out females, and as many others are destroyed by accident and diseases
to which this plant is very liable, it makes the cost of each tree, by
the time it yields fruit, about eight dollars. The nutmeg tree begins
to bear when about eight years old, but it gives no return for several
years longer; and therefore to the expense of cultivation must be
added the interest of the capital sunk. The plant being indigenous in
the Moluccas, the expense of cultivation there is greatly less, and
this consequently forms a strong ground of claim to the British
planter for protective duties to their spices from the British
Government.

The planter having his tree arrived at the agreeable point of
producing, has but slight trouble in preparing his produce for market.
As the fruit is brought in by the gatherers, the mace is carefully
removed, pressed together and flattened on a board, exposed to the sun
for three or four days, it is then dry enough to be put by in the
spice-house until required for exportation, when it is to be screwed
into boxes, and becomes the mace of commerce. The average proportion
of mace yielded in Singapore is one pound for every 433 nuts.

The nutmeg itself requires more care in its curing, it being necessary
to have it well and carefully dried ere the outer black shell be
broken. For this purpose the usual practice is to subject it for a
couple of months to the smoke of slow fires kept up underneath, whilst
the nuts are spread on a grating about eight or ten feet above. The
model of a perfect drying-house is easily to be obtained. Care should
be taken not to dry the nuts by too great a heat, as they shrivel and
lose their full and marketable appearance. It is therefore desirable
to keep the nuts, when first collected, for eight or ten days out of
the drying-house, exposing them at first for an hour or so to the
morning sun, and increasing the exposure daily until they shake in the
shell. The nuts ought never to be cracked until required for
exportation, or they will be attacked and destroyed by a small
weasel-like insect, the larvæ of which is deposited in the ovule, and,
becoming the perfect insect, eats its way out, leaving the nut bored
through and through, and worth less as a marketable commodity. Liming
the nuts prevents this to a certain extent, but limed nuts are not
those best liked in the English market, whereas they are preferred in
that state in the United States. When the nuts are to be limed, it is
simply necessary to have them well rubbed over between the hands with
powdered lime. By the Dutch mode of preparation, they are steeped in a
mixture of lime and water for several weeks. This no doubt will
preserve them, but it must also have a prejudicial effect on the
flavor of the spice.

After the nuts are thoroughly dried, which requires from six weeks to
two months smoking, they cannot be too soon sent to market. But it is
otherwise with the mace; that commodity, when fresh, not being in
esteem in the London market, seeing that they desire it of a golden
color, which it only assumes after a few months, whereas at first when
fresh it is blood red; now red blades are looked upon with suspicion,
and are highly injurious to the sale of the article.

This is one of those peculiar prejudices of John Bull, which somewhat
impugns his wisdom; but it must be attended to, as John is very ready
to pay for his caprice; therefore those who provide for him have no
right to complain, although they may smile.

The nutmeg tree was sent from Bencoolen to Singapore, the latter end
of 1819, so that thirty-four years have elapsed since its first
introduction. Sir Stamford Raffles shipped to the care of the resident
commandant, Major Farquhar, 100 nutmeg plants, 25 larger ditto, and
1,000 nutmeg seeds, which were committed to the charge of Mr. Brooks,
a European gardener, who was specially engaged by the East India
Company to look after their embryo spice plantations here. Some of
these plants were set out in rather a bad soil and locality, but
several of them are at present, and have been for the last ten years,
fine fruitful trees. 315 of the trees in the Government garden
yielded, in 1848, 190,426 nuts, or at the average of 604 for each
tree; but of these not over 50 were of the old stock, most having been
planted since 1836; so that a planter may safely calculate on having a
better average than is here set forth, provided he attends to his
cultivation, and his trees are brought up to the age of fifteen
years. If a plantation be attended to from the commencement after the
manner I have endeavoured to explain, and the trees be in a good
locality, the planter will undoubtedly obtain an average of 10 lbs. of
spice from each tree from the fifteenth year; this, at an average
price of 2s. 6d. per lb., is 25s. per annum. He can have about seventy
such trees in an acre, so that there is scarcely any better or more
remunerative cultivation when once established. But the race is a long
one, the chances of life, and a high rate of interest in the country,
make it one of no ordinary risk, and it is one that holds out no
prospect of any return in less than ten years.

A person commencing and stopping short of the bearing point, either by
death or want of funds, will suffer almost total loss, for the value
of such a property brought into a market where there are no buyers
must be purely nominal. Again, if the property has arrived at the
paying point, almost any person of common honesty can take charge of
and carry it on, for the trees after twelve years are remarkably
hardy, and bear a deal of ill treatment and neglect; not that I would
recommend any person to try the experiment. But it is some consolation
for the proprietor to know that stupidity will not ruin him, and that
even at the distance of thousands of miles he can give such
directions, as, if attended to, will keep his estate in a flourishing
and fruitful state.

The total number of nutmeg trees in Singapore in 1848 was 55,925, of
which 14,914 only were in bearing. The produce of that year was
4,085,361 nutmegs, or 33,600 lbs. in weight. The greater number of the
trees, it will be perceived, have not come into full bearing, but the
produce is increasing rapidly, and in 1849 it amounted to fully 66,670
lbs.

Among the principal growers in that island are Dr. Oxley, Mr. C.R.
Prinsep, and Mr. W. Montgomerie, who have each large plantations, with
from 2,000 to 5,000 bearing trees on them. Others, as Sir. J.
d'Almeida, Mr. Nicol, and one or two more, have planted extensively,
but have not yet got their trees to the bearing point.

A large supply of nutmeg and clove plants arrived at Pinang in 1802,
from the Molucca Islands. There were 71,266 nutmeg and 55,264 clove
plants; allowing one half of the former to have been male trees, there
would only have been 35,633 useful nutmeg plants. It is believed that
a mere fraction of these ever reached maturity, but they served to
introduce the cultivation permanently. Plants were likewise sent to
Ceylon and Cape Comorin. It does not appear that the climates of these
two localities suit the nutmeg tree, as it requires rain, or at least
a very damp climate throughout the year. The East India Company's
spice plantations in Pinang were sold in 1824, and the trees were
dispersed over the island.

The spice cultivators of the Straits' Settlements have for some time
sought a further protective duty on nutmegs, and the extension of a
similar protection to mace and cloves, the produce of these
settlements; for singularly enough the present tariff affords no
protection to mace, the growth of British possessions. From tabular
statements, furnished by the Chamber of Commerce of Pinang, drawn up
apparently with great care, it appears that in 1843 there were 3,046
acres cultivated with spice trees in Pinang and province Wellesley,
containing 233,995 nutmegs, and 80,418 clove trees, besides 77,671
trees in nurseries ready to be planted out; and by a similar statement
from Singapore, which is however not so complete, that 743 acres are
cultivated, containing 43,544 nutmeg trees. The island of Pinang is
estimated to contain 160 square miles, nearly the whole of which, with
the exception perhaps of summits of the hills, is well adapted to
spice growing. Province Wellesley is of much greater extent, and the
soil of it has already been proved to be equally well fitted for that
kind of cultivation; and the settlements of Malacca and Singapore are
said to be admirably suited, in many places, for that species of
produce, the latter of which has already several plantations fast
approaching to maturity.

The cultivation is capable of great extension; encouragement is only
required to be held out, and new plantations will be rapidly formed in
these settlements. The same tables show that the produce in 1842 was,
in Pinang and Province Wellesley, 18,560,281 nutmegs, 42,866 lbs. of
mace, and 11,813 lbs. of cloves[51]; and in Singapore, 842,328
nutmegs, and 1,962 lbs. of mace. Thus making the produce from the two
settlements 19,408,608 nutmegs in number (or in weight 147,034 lbs.),
44,822 lbs. of mace, and 11,813 lbs. of cloves. Now the consumption of
these spices in Great Britain was, on an average of four years ending
1841, as follows:--Nutmegs, 121,000 lbs.; mace, 18,000 lbs.; cloves,
92,000 lbs. Showing, therefore, that the Straits' Settlements already
produce more than sufficient of the two former to supply the home
market.

In the course of four or five years more, Pinang alone will more than
double the present quantity of nutmegs and mace produced in the
Straits, and the produce of cloves will be more than tripled.

I have been able, from several elaborate papers in my "Colonial
Magazine," to condense details, showing the progress of spice
plantations in Prince of Wales Island and Province Wellesley. In the
close of 1843 there were 64,902 nutmeg trees in bearing in the island;
39,209 male trees, 103,982 not bearing; making a total of 208,093
trees planted out, besides 52,510 plants in nursery. The quantity of
ground under cultivation was 2,282 orlongs. The produce in 1842 was
15,116,591 good nuts, 1,461,229 inferior nuts, and 38,260 lbs. of
mace. The gross value of the produce in 1843, reckoning the good nuts
at five dollars per thousand, and the inferior at one dollar, was
76,944 dollars. The estimated number of nuts in 1843 was 12,458,762;
in 1844, 25,429,000.

In Province Wellesley there were 247 orlongs under cultivation with
the nutmeg, on which were 10,500 bearing trees, 8,095 male trees, and
7,307 not yet bearing, making in all 25,902 trees planted out. The
produce was in 1842, 1,969,619 good nuts, 18,842 inferior ditto, and
4,500 lbs. of mace. The value of the produce of nutmegs was 9,867
dollars. The estimated number of nuts in 1843 was 1,980,000; in 1844,
2,958,000. There were in all 423 nutmeg plantations on the island and
main land.

There were annually exported in the four years ending 1850, 48,000
lbs. of nutmegs from Pinang, and 57,400 lbs. of mace.

The French at an early period cultivated the nutmeg at the Mauritius,
and from thence they carried it to Cayenne. In Sumatra it appears to
have been grown successfully, and according to Sir S. Raffles, there
was in 1819 a plantation at Bencoolen of 100,000 nutmeg trees,
one-fourth of which were bearing. Attempts have been made in Trinidad
and St. Vincent to carry out the culture, but for want of enterprise
very little progress seems to have been made in the matter.

Under the new duties which came into operation this year, nutmegs,
instead of standing at 1s. per pound all round, have been classified,
and the so-called "wild" nutmegs of the Dutch islands are to pay only
5d per pound. This deprives the Straits' produce of its last
protection against that of the Banda plantations, where the tree grows
spontaneously, while it gives the long Dutch nut a high protection. If
an alteration in this suicidal measure is not speedily obtained, the
Straits' planters will be ruined. The Dutch have the power of
inundating the market with the long aromatic nut. If the original plan
of putting all British and all foreign nutmegs on the same footing had
been adhered to, the Straits' planters would not have complained, as
they would have trusted to their superior skill and care to compensate
for the grand advantage the Dutch have in their rich soils.

On observing this alteration of duty, Mr. Crawfurd and Mr. Gilman
immediately prepared the following memorandum for the Chancellor of
the Exchequer, which however failed to influence that Minister:--

    "MEMORANDUM ON THE DUTIES ON NUTMEGS.

    "The duty proposed to be levied on nutmegs is 1s. per pound for
    cultivated, and 5d. per pound for those commonly called wild. The
    ground on which this distinction is founded, is said to be that the
    market value of the one is but half that of the other, and that the
    Customs can readily distinguish between them.

    Now it is admitted, on all sides, that there is but one species of
    culinary nutmeg, the _Myristica Moschata_ of botanists, although at
    least a score of the same genus, all unfit for human food. The
    parent country of the aromatic nutmegs extends from the Molucca
    Islands to New Guinea, inclusive. In this they grow with facility
    and even in the Banda Islands, where there are parks of them, they
    hardly undergo any cultivation, and may truly be said, even there,
    to be a wild product. It is only when grown as exotics, as in the
    British settlements of Pinang and Singapore, that they require
    cultivation, and that a more careful and expensive one than any
    other produce of the soil.

    Aromatic nutmegs are sometimes large and sometimes small--sometimes
    round, sometimes oblong, and sometimes long, and this will be found
    the case whether cultivated or uncultivated. How, then, the Customs
    are able to distinguish them it is difficult to understand. In the
    ordinary Prices Current no mention whatever is made of the wild and
    cultivated, the lowest quality being quoted in the most recent at
    2s. per pound, and the highest at 3s. 10d.,--the best of what are
    called wild fetching a higher price than the lower qualities of what
    are called cultivated.

     But suppose the distinction could be made with the most perfect
     certainty, to make it would be a palpable departure from the
     principle adopted with every other commodity, of charging a
     uniform rate of duty on quality. To give an example, the present
     price of black pepper is 3-5/8d. to 4d. per pound, while that of
     white pepper is 8½d. to 1s. 2d. per pound, both paying the same
     duty of 6d.; yet nothing can be more easily distinguished than
     these two commodities, which, except as to curing, are the same
     article.

    Tea is a still more striking example. The duty is the same on all
    qualities, though prices range from 1l½d. to 3s. 6d. per pound. It
    was the very circumstance of the difficulty of distinguishing
    between the different kinds of tea, especially between Bohea and
    Congou, which, after an eighteen months trial, overthrew the system
    of rated duties of 1s. 6d., 2s., and 3s., adopted on the abolition
    of the East India Company's monopoly in 1833.

    Unless the duty on nutmegs is equalised there will be no end of
    trouble and disputes, and however expert the Customs may be, they
    will certainly be outwitted, and long-shaped and small nutmegs,
    although really cultivated, will be introduced at the lower duty, by
    unscrupulous traders, as wild ones.

    It may be added that duties of 12d. and 5d. do not, even if a
    departure from the principle of charging on quality were
    justifiable, represent the just proportional rates which ought to be
    levied upon what are supposed to be, respectively, cultivated and
    wild, as they are represented in the ordinary Price Current by the
    highest and lowest prices, which are 3s. 10d. and 2s. The just
    proportional duty ought to be on the lowest, not 5d., but 7d. The
    duty, as first proposed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, of 1s.
    per pound on nutmegs, without distinction, was perfectly
    satisfactory to the planters, merchants, and the trade in general.

    It is a mistake to suppose that a duty of 1s. would exclude the
    so-called wild nutmegs. They would be imported in large quantities,
    as the cost is low. In quantity it was 17 Spanish dollars per picul,
    and there is no reason to suppose it would be more now. The finest
    picked cost say 34 Spanish dollars.

    In Pinang and Singapore for cultivated the price is 65 to 70
    dollars.

    The planters for the most part do not sell on the spot, but consign
    here for sale on their own account.

    London, May 23rd, 1853.


    NUTMEGS IMPORTED AND EXPORTED TO AND FROM SINGAPORE.

                                            Value of the
         Imported.  Exported.  Growth of    native growth.
         piculs.    piculs.    Singapore.        £
  1841   227½      412       184½        3,323
  1842   258          809       551            9,897
  1843   150½      249        98½        1,760
  1844    52          282       230            4,131
  1845    41          383       342            6,143
  1846    79          331       252            4,526
  1847   139          416       277            4,275


     NUTMEGS EXPORTED FROM JAVA.

               Nutmegs.       Mace.
               piculs.       piculs.
  1830          1,304           177
  1835          5,022         1,606
  1839          5,027         1,581
  1843          2,133           486


                   IMPORTS INTO THE UNITED KINGDOM.
    NUTMEGS, WILD AND CULTIVATED. |              MACE.
           Imports. Home consump. |           Imports. Consumption.
             lbs.        lbs.     |            lbs.       lbs.
  1847     367,936     150,657    |  1847     60,265     18,821
  1848     336,420     167,143    |  1848     47,572     19,712
  1849     224,021     178,417    |  1849     45,978     20,605
  1850     315,126     167,683    |  1850     77,337     21,997
  1851     358,320     194,132    |  1851     77,863     21,695
  1852     357,940     239,113    |  1852     61,697     21,480


  MACE EXPORTED--ACTUAL GROWTH OF SINGAPORE.
         Quantity--piculs.   Value--£
  1841        25½               583
  1842        72              1,616
  1843        40¾               943
  1844        16½               359
  1845        71              1,616
  1846         8                179
  1847        75              1,661

109 piculs of imported mace were also re-shipped in 1847.

40,000 lbs. of mace were imported into the United Kingdom from India
in 1848.


GINGER, GALANGALE, AND CARDAMOMS.

The rhizome of _Zingiber officinale_ (_Amomum Zingiber_), constitutes
the ginger of commerce, which is imported chiefly from the East and
West Indies. It is also grown in China. In the young state the
rhizomes are fleshy and slightly aromatic, and they are then used as
preserves, or prepared in syrup; in a more advanced stage the aroma is
fully developed, their texture is more woody, and they become fit for
ordinary ginger. The inferior sorts, when dried after immersion in hot
water, form black ginger. The best roots are scraped, washed, and
simply dried in the sun with care, and then they receive the name of
white ginger. The rhizome contains an acid resin and volatile oil,
starch and gum. It is used medicinally as a tonic and carminative, in
the form of powder, syrup, and tincture.

The root stocks of _Alpinia racemosa_, _A. Galanga_, and many other
plants of the order, have the same aromatic and pungent properties as
ginger.

The consumption of ginger is about 13,000 or 14,000 cwt. a year. Of
16,004 cwt. imported in 1840, 5,381 came from the British West Indies,
9,727 from the East India Company's possessions and Ceylon, and 896
cwt. from Western Africa.

The difference between the black and white ginger of the shops is
ascribed by Dr. P. Browne and others to different methods of curing
the rhizomes; but this is scarcely sufficient to account for them, and
I cannot help suspecting the existence of some difference in the
plants themselves. That this really exists is proved by the
statements of Rumphius ("Herb. Amb.," lib. 8, cap. xix., p. 156), that
there are two varieties of the plant, the white and the red. Moreover
Dr. Wright ("Lond. Med. Journal," vol. viii.) says that two sorts are
cultivated in Jamaica, viz., the white and the black; and, he adds,
"black ginger has the most numerous and largest roots."

The rhizome, called in commerce ginger root, occurs in
flattish-branched or lobed palmate pieces, called _races_, which do
not exceed four inches in length. Several varieties, distinguished by
their color and place of growth, are met with. The finest is that
brought from Jamaica. A great part of that found in the shops has been
washed in whiting and water, under the pretence of preserving it from
insects.

The dark colored kinds are frequently bleached with chloride of lime.
Barbados ginger is in shorter flatter races, of a darker color, and
covered with a corrugated epidermis. African ginger is in smallish
races, which have been partially scraped, and are pale colored. East
India ginger is unscraped; its races are dark ash colored externally,
and are larger than those of the African ginger. Tellichery ginger is
in large plump races, with a remarkable reddish tint externally.

Jamaica black ginger is not frequently found in the shops. The Malabar
dark ginger is in unscraped short pieces, which have a horny
appearance internally, and are of a dirty brown color both internally
and externally.

Ginger is imported in bags weighing about a hundred-weight.

The Malabar ginger exported from Calicut is the produce of the
district of Shernaad, situated in the south of Calicut; a place
chiefly inhabited by Moplas, who look upon the ginger cultivation as a
most valuable and profitable trade, which in fact it is. The soil of
Shernaad is so very luxuriant, and so well suited for the cultivation
of ginger, that it is reckoned the best, and in fact the only place in
Malabar where ginger grows and thrives to perfection. Gravelly grounds
are considered unfit; the same may be said of swampy ones, and whilst
the former check the growth of the ginger, the latter tend in a great
measure to rot the root; thus the only suitable kind of soil is that
which, being red earth, is yet free from gravel, and the sod good and
heavy. The cultivation generally commences about the middle of May,
after the ground has undergone a thorough process of ploughing,
harrowing, &c.

At the commencement of the monsoons, beds of ten or twelve feet long
by three or four feet wide are formed, and in these beds small holes
are dug at three-fourths to one foot apart, which are filled with
manure. The roots, hitherto carefully buried under sheds, are dug out,
the good ones picked from those which are affected by the moisture, or
any other concomitant of a half-year's exclusion from the atmosphere,
and the process of clipping them into suitable sizes for planting
performed by cutting the ginger into pieces of an inch and a half to
two inches long. These are then buried in the holes, which have been
previously manured, and the whole of the beds are then covered with a
good thick layer of green leaves, which, whilst they serve as manure,
also contribute to keep the beds from unnecessary dampness, which
might otherwise be occasioned by the heavy falls of rain during the
months of June and July. Rain is essentially requisite for the growth
of the ginger; it is also however necessary, that the beds be
constantly kept from inundation, which, if not carefully attended to,
the crop is entirely ruined; great precaution is therefore taken in
forming drains between the beds, and letting water out, thus
preventing a superfluity. On account of the great tendency some kinds
of leaves have to breed worms and insects, strict care is observed in
the choosing of them, and none but the particular kinds used in
manuring ginger are taken in, lest the wrong ones might fetch in
worms, which, if once in the beds, no remedy can be resorted to
successfully to destroy them; thus they in a very short time ruin the
crop. Worms bred from the leaves laid on the soil, though highly
destructive, are not so pernicious to ginger cultivation as those
which proceed from the effect of the soil. The former kind, whilst
they destroy the beds in which they once appear, do not spread
themselves to the other beds, be they ever so close, but the latter
kind must of _course_ be found in almost all the beds, as they do not
proceed from accidental causes, but from the nature of the soil. In
cases like these, the whole crop is oftentimes ruined, and the
cultivators are thereby subjected to heavy losses.

Ginger is extensively diffused throughout the Indian isles, it being
especially indigenous to the East, and of pretty general use among the
natives, who neglect the finer spices. The great and smaller varieties
are cultivated, and the sub-varieties distinguished by their brown or
white colors. There is no production which has a greater diversity of
names. This diversity proves, as usual, the wide diffusion of the
plant in its wild state. The ginger of the Indian Archipelago is
however inferior in quality to that of Malabar or Bengal. In the
cultivation of ginger great improvement may be adopted and expense
saved. The garden plough and small harrow should be used.

The present mode of preparing the land for this crop in the West
Indies, is by first carefully hoeing off all bush and weeds from the
piece you intend to plant; the workmen are then placed in a line, and
dig forward the land to the full depth of the hoe, cutting the furrow
not more than from five to six inches thick. The land is then allowed
to pulverise for a short time; you then prepare it for receiving the
plants by opening drills with the hoe, from ten to twelve inches
apart, and the same in depth, chopping or breaking up any clods that
may be in the land. Two or three women follow and drop the plants in
the drills, say from nine to ten inches apart. The plants or sets are
the small knots or fingers broken off the original root, as not worth
the scraping. The plants are then covered in with a portion of the
earth-bank formed in drilling. It requires great care and attention in
keeping them clean from weeds until they attain sufficient age. It
throws out a pedicle or foot stalk in the course of the second or
third week, the leaves of which are of similar shape to that of the
Guinea grass.

Ginger is a delicate plant, and very liable to rot, particularly if
planted in too rich a soil, or where it may be subject to heavy rains.
The general average of yield is from 1,500 to 2,000 lbs. per acre in
plants, although I have known as much as 3,000 lbs. of ginger cured
from an acre of land. The planting season generally commences in
Jamaica in February and March, and the crop is got in in December and
January, when the stalks begin to wither. The ginger is taken from the
ground by means of the hoe, each laborer filling a good-sized basket,
at the same time breaking off the small knots or knobs for future
planting.

A good scraper of ginger will give you from 30 to 40 lbs. of ginger
per day. It is then laid on barbacues (generally made of boards) to
dry. It takes from six to ten days to be properly cured. The average
yield in weight is about one-third of what is scraped. When intended
for preserving, the roots must be taken up at the end of three or four
months, while the fibres are tender and full of sap.

The ginger grown in the West Indies is considered superior in quality
to that of the East, doubtless because more care is paid to the
culture and drying of the root, but it is of less importance to
commerce. The quantities imported from these two quarters is however
becoming more equal, and Africa is coming into the field as a
producer, 1,545 casks and packages having arrived from the western
coast in 1846. The annual average export of ginger from Barbados
between the years 1740 and 1788, was 4,667 bags; between 1784 and
1786, 6,320 bags; in 1788, 5,562 cwt. were shipped; in 1792, 3,046
bags and barrels. In 1738, so widely was the culture of this root
diffused in Jamaica, that 20,933 bags, of one cwt. each, and 8,864
lbs. in casks were shipped. The exports may now be taken on an average
at 4,000 cwt.; but, like all the other staple products of the island,
this has fallen off one-half since the emancipation of the negro
population.

In the three years which preceded the abolition of slavery, 5,719,000
lbs. of ginger were shipped from Jamaica. In the three years ending
with 1848, the quantity shipped had decreased 2,612,186 lbs., as will
be seen by the following returns:--

                     GINGER SHIPPED.
                   lbs.                          lbs.
  1830          1,748,800   |   1846          1,462,000
  1831          1,614,640   |   1847          1,324,480
  1832          2,355,560   |   1848            320,340
                ---------   |                 ---------
                5,719,000   |                 3,106,820

In 1843 there were shipped from Jamaica 3,719 casks and bags; in 1844,
3,692 casks and 1730 bags; in 1845, 3,506 casks, valued at £4 10s.
each, and 1,129 bags, valued at £2 each, equal in all to £18,037.
From the island of Hayti 8,769 lbs. of ginger were exported in 1835,
and 15,509 lbs. in 1836. 39 packages of ginger were shipped from
Barbados in 1851.

In Maranham and one or two other provinces of Brazil, ginger of an
excellent quality is grown, and a good deal is exported. It was very
early an article of culture in South America. According to Acosta, it
was brought to America by one Francisco de Mendoza, from Malabar, and
so rapidly did its cultivation spread, that as far back as 1547,
22,053 cwt. were shipped to Europe. Southey, in his "History of
Brazil" (vol. i., p. 320), says, "Ginger had been brought from the
island of St. Thomas, and throve so well that in the year 1573, 4,000
arrobas of 25 lbs. each were cured; it was better than what came from
India, though the art of drying it was not so well understood. Great
use was made of this root in preserves, but it was prohibited, as
interfering with the Indian trade in that wretched species of policy
which regards immediate revenue as its main object."

Ginger was worth in the London market 25s. to 60s. the cwt. in bond;
middling and fine qualities, 80s. to 160s. The duty is 5s. per cwt.

Amount of imports of ginger into the United Kingdom, with the
quantities entered for home consumption:--

        West India      Entered for      East India      Entered for
          ginger.    home consumption.    ginger.     home consumption.
           cwts.           cwts.           cwts.            cwts.
  1831     3,551           4,709             849               79
  1832     5,947           6,795           2,508              213
  1833     6,064           6,570          10,049            1,099
  1834     9,913           9,918          10,004            1,638
  1835     8,321           8,982           4,489            1,647
  1836    10,226           6,304          13,589            3,524
  1837    10,933           9,905          23,876            3,386
  1838    13,366           9,944          25,649            1,431
  1839     8,996           7,213          29,624              914
  1840     5,381           7,935           9,719            1,568
  1841     4,446           5,523           5,292            1,177
  1842     4,671           5,068           3,680            1,956
  1843     4,013           5,953           4,106            3,254
         casks, &c.        casks.          bags.            bags.
  1844     4,619           3,128           5,101            6,964
  1845     6,033           4,000           8,165            7,938



               Total               Retained for
          ginger imported.       home consumption.
               cwts.                   cwts.
  1846        24,370                  15,937
  1846        20,010                  15,163
  1847        12,995                   9,744
  1848        13,748                  10,454
  1849        28,015                  12,880
  1850        33,953                  16,543
  1851        35,678                  19,855
  1852        20,297                  18,691

GALANGALE ROOT is a good deal used in China, and forms an article of
commerce, fetching in the London market 12s. to 16s. per cwt. in
bond. It is the rhizoma of _Alpinia Galanga_. Its taste is peppery and
aromatic. Externally the color of the root-stocks is reddish brown,
internally pale reddish white.

1,280 cwt. of galangale root, valued at 2,880 dollars, was exported
from Canton in 1850.


CARDAMOMS.

Cardamoms are the production of various species of plants of the same
tribe as the ginger, and might be profitably cultivated with that
aromatic root, as well as the Turmeric (_Curcuma longa_), which see.

Various species of _Alpiniæ_, _Amomum_, _Elettaria_, _and Renealmia_,
appear to furnish the cardamoms of the shops, which consist of the
oval, trivalvular capsules containing the seeds. The bright yellow
seeds are used in medicine as aromatic tonics and carminatives; and
for curries, ketchups, soups, &c. Their active ingredient is a pungent
volatile oil. The least dampness injures the finer sorts. About 688
cwts. of cardamoms, and 5,000 cwts. of bastard cardamoms are annually
exported from Siam, "We imported about 300 tons in 1849. The price
ranges from 1s. 6d. to 3s. the pound. The estimated value of the
cardamoms and pepper shipped from Ceylon in the past few years was as
follows:--1846, £208; 1847, £246; 1848, £205; 1849, £454; 1850, £960;
1851, £771; 1852, £590. The" following are some of the plants from
which cardamoms are procured.

1. _Amomum Cardamomum_, a Java plant, supplies the round cardamoms. It
has pale brown flowers. The fruit varies in size from that of a black
currant to a cherry.

_2. A. angustifolium_ (Pereira), a plant having red blossoms;
furnishes the large Madagascar cardamoms, and also supplies some of
the seeds called "Grains of Paradise," which are, however, larger than
those imported under that name.

This species is found in Abyssinia, according to my friend Mr. Chas.
Johnston, author of "Travels in Abyssinia," who favored me with some
specimens. The seeds are pale olive brown, devoid of the fiery peppery
taste of the grains of paradise.

3. _A. maximum_, the great winged amomum, produces the Java cardamoma
of the London market, and is also grown extensively in Ceylon, the
Malay islands, Nepaul, Sumatra, and other islands of the Eastern
Archipelago. There were exported from Ceylon in 1842, 5,364 lbs.; in
1843, 9,632 lbs.; 1844, 7,280 lbs.; and in 1845, 11,812 lbs. The pods
are large and long, and dark colored, approaching to black, the taste
nauseous and disagreeable, not the least resembling that of the
Malabar cardamoms. It is propagated by cuttings of the rhizoma. The
plants yield in three years, and afterwards give an annual crop. They
are not used here, but sent to the continent.

4. _Alpinia Cardamomum_.--This is the source of the clustered
cardamoms, and furnishes the best known sort. Its produce is in great
request throughout India, fetching as much as £30 the candy of 600
Lbs. About 192 candies are grown annually in Travancore, and the usual
crop in Malabar is reckoned at 100 candies annually. It flourishes on
the mountainous parts of the Malabar coast, and among the western
mountains of Wynaad. The bulbous plants, which grow three or four feet
high, are produced in the recesses of the mountains by felling trees,
and afterwards burning them, for wherever the ashes fall in the
openings or fissures of the rocks, the plant naturally springs up. In
the third year the plants come to perfection, bearing abundantly for a
year or two, and then die. In Soonda Balagat, and other places where
cardamoms are planted, they are much inferior to those grown in the
wild state. It may be propagated by cuttings or divisions of the
roots. Not more than one-hundredth part of the cardamoms raised in
Malabar are used in the country. They are sent in large quantities to
the ports on the Red Sea, and the Persian Gulf, up the Indus to
Scinde, to Bengal and Bombay. The price of Malabar cardamons at
Madras, in June, 1853, was about £3 the maund of 25 lbs. They fetch in
the Bombay market £4 10s. the maund of 40 lbs. Cardamoms form a
universal ingredient in curries, pillaus, &c. The seed capsules are
gathered as they ripen, and when dried in the sun are fit for sale.
They should be chosen full, plump, and difficult to be broken; of a
bright yellow color, and piercing smell; with an acrid bitterish,
though not very unpleasant taste, and particular care should be taken
that they are properly dried.

_5. Amomum Grana-Paradisi_, which is indigenous to the islands of
Madagascar and Ceylon, yields an inferior sort of cardamoms, known by
the names of grains of paradise, or Meleguetta pepper. These are worth
in the English market only from 1s. 2d. to 1s. 4d. per pound, while
the long and Malabar cardamoms fetch 2s. 8d. to 3s. 3d. the pound.
This plant is a native of Guinea, and the western parts of Africa
about Sierra Leone. We imported from thence in 1841, 7,911 pounds.

The taste of these Guinea grains is aromatic and vehemently hot or
peppery. They are imported in casks from Africa, and are principally
used in veterinary medicine, and to give an artificial strength to
spirits, wine, beer, &c. The average quantity on which duty was paid
in the six years ending with 1840, was 16,000 lbs. per annum. They are
esteemed in Africa the most wholesome of spices, and generally used by
the natives to season their food.

Dr. Pereira, from a careful examination and close inquiry, is of
opinion that the _Amomum Grana-Paradisi_ of Smith, and the _Amamum
Melegueta_ of Roscoe, are identical species.

In the second volume of the "Pharmaceutical Journal," Dr. Pereira
states that the term "grains of paradise," or Melegueta, has been
applied to the produce of no less than six scitamineous plants. At the
present time, and in this country, the term is exclusively given to
the hot acrid seeds imported into England from the coast of Guinea,
and frequently called Guinea grains; and by the Africans Guinea
pepper.

_Elettaria Cardomomum_, Don.--The fruit of this species constitutes
the true, small, officinal Malabar cardamoms. It is an ovate oblong,
obtusely triangular capsule, from three to ten lines long, rarely
exceeding three lines in breadth, coriaceous, ribbed, greyish or
brownish yellow. It contains many angular, blackish or reddish brown
rugose seeds, which are white internally, have a pleasant aromatic
odor, and a warm agreeable taste. 100 parts of the fruit yield 74
parts of seeds, and 26 parts of pericarpal coats.

This seems to be identical with _Amomum Cardamomum_.

_Elettaria major_, is a perennial, native of Ceylon, which grows in
shady situations in a rich mixed soil. The dried capsules are known in
commerce as wild or Ceylon cardamoms, and are of less value in the
market than those of Malabar (_Elettaria Cardamomum_, Maton). It is
chiefly grown about the Kandyan district; and in the eight years
ending with 1813, the average export was nine and a-half candies per
annum. The seeds in taste resemble our carraways, and are used for
seasoning various dishes.

Ceylon cardamoms are now worth in the London market (Sept., 1853) 1s.
to 1s. 3d. per lb.; Malabar ditto, 2s. 3d. to 3s.


PEPPER.

The black pepper of commerce is obtained from the dried unripe fruit
(drupes) of _Piper nigrum_, a climbing plant common in the East
Indies, and of the simplest culture, being multiplied with facility by
cuttings or suckers. The ripe fruit, when deprived of its outer fleshy
covering by washing, forms the white pepper of the shops. The dried
fruiting spikes of _P. longum_, a perennial shrub, native of Malabar
and Bengal, constitute long pepper. The fruit of _Xylopia aromatica_
is commonly called Ethiopian pepper, from being used as pepper in
Africa. The seeds of some species of fennel-flower (_Nigella sativa_
and _arvensis_), natives of the south of Europe, were formerly used
instead of pepper, and are said to be still extensively employed in
adulterating it. In Japan, the capsules of _Xanthoxylum piperitum_, or
_Fagara Piperita_, are used as a substitute for pepper, and so is the
fruit of _Tasmannia aromatica_ in Van Diemen's Land. According to Dr.
Roxburgh, _P. trioicum_ is cultivated in the East, and yields an
excellent pepper.

The pepper vine rises about two feet in the first year of its growth,
and attains to nearly six feet in the second, at which time, if
vigorous and healthy, the petals begin to form the corolla or blossom.
All suckers and side shoots are to be carefully removed, and the vines
should be thinned or pruned, if they become bushy at the top. Rank
coarse weeds and parasitical plants should be uprooted. The vine would
climb, if permitted, to the elevation of twenty feet, but is said to
bear best when kept down to the height of ten or twelve feet. It
produces two crops in the year. The fruit grows abundantly from all
the branches, in long small clusters of from 20 to 50 grains; when
ripe it is of a bright red color. After being gathered, it is spread
on mats in the sun to dry, when it becomes black and shrivelled. The
grains are separated from the stalks by hand rubbing. The roots and
thickest parts of the stems, when cut into small pieces and dried,
form a considerable article of commerce all over India, under the name
of _Pippula moola_.

Almost all the plants of the family _Piperaceæ_ have a strong aromatic
smell and a sharp burning taste. This small group of plants is
confined to the hottest regions of the globe; being most abundant in
tropical America and in the East Indian Archipelago, but more rare in
the equinoctial regions of Africa. The common black pepper, _P.
nigrum_, represents the usual property of the order, which is not
confined to the fruit, but pervades, more or less, the whole plant. It
is peculiar to the torrid zone of Asia, and appears to be indigenous
to the coast of Malabar, where it has been found in a wild state. From
this it extends between the meridians of longitude 96 deg. and 116
deg. S. and the parallels of latitude 5 deg. S. and 12 deg. N., beyond
which no pepper is found. Within these limits are the islands of
Sumatra and Borneo, with the Malay peninsula and part of Siam. Sumatra
produces by far the greatest quantity of pepper. In 1842, the annual
produce of this island was reckoned at 30,000,000 lbs., being more
than the amount furnished by all the other pepper districts in the
world.

A little pepper is grown in the Mauritius and the West India Islands,
and its cultivation is making some progress on the Western Coast of
Africa, as we imported from thence 2,909 bags and casks in 1846, and
about 110,000 lbs. in 1847.

Mr. J. Crawfurd, F.R.S., one of the best authorities on all that
relates to the commerce and agriculture of the Eastern Archipelago,
recently estimated the produce of pepper as follows:--

                                                lbs.
  Sumatra (West Coast)                       20,000,000
     "    (East Coast)                        8,000,000
  Islands in the Straits of Malacca           3,600,000
  Malay Peninsula                             3,733,333
  Borneo                                      2,666,667
  Siam                                        8,000,000
  Malabar                                     4,060,000

  Total                                      50,000,000

  If we add to this

  Western Coast of Africa and B.W. Indies        53,000
  Java                                        4,000,000
  Mauritius and Ceylon                           80,000

  It gives                                   54,133,000
  as the total produce of the world

Black pepper constitutes a great and valuable article of export from
the Indian Islands; which, as we have seen, afford by far the largest
portion of What is consumed throughout the world. In the first
intercourse of the Dutch and English with India, it constituted the
most considerable and important staple of their commerce. The
production of pepper is confined in a great measure to the western
countries of the Eastern Archipelago, and among these to the islands
in the centre and to the northern quarter, including the Peninsula. It
is obtained in the ports on both sides of the coast of the latter, but
particularly the north-eastern coast. The principal quarters
(according to Mr. Crawfurd, my authority on this subject), are Patani,
Tringanu, and Kalantin. In the Straits a large quantity is produced in
the island of Singapore, and above all in Pinang, where the capital of
Europeans and the skill and industry of the Chinese have been
successfully applied to its culture. The western extremity of Sumatra,
and the north-west coast of that island, are the most remarkable
situations in it for the production of pepper, and here we have
Acheen, Tikao, Bencoolen, Padang, and the country of the Lampungs. The
production of the eastern extremity of Sumatra or Palembang is
considerable, but held of inferior quality. In the fertile island of
Java, the quantity of pepper grown is inconsiderable, nor is it
remarkable for the goodness of its quality.

The province of Bantam has always furnished, and still continues to
produce, the most pepper; but the culture of this creeper is fast
giving place in Java to staples affording higher profits and requiring
less care. The exports were, in the following years:--

             piculs.  |              lbs.
  1830         6,061  |  1843     3,737,732
  1835        11,868  |  1848       461,680
  1839        11,044  |  1851        95,037
  1841        13,477  |  1852       135,690

The number of pepper vines in the district of Bencoolen, in the close
of last year, 1852, was as follows:--1,571,894 young vines; 2,437,052
bearing ditto; total, 4,008,946.

Up to the end of September there had been delivered to the Government
1,145 piculs white pepper, and 1,128 piculs black pepper, while of the
harvest of 1852 there were still probably to be received 330 piculs
white, and 4,967 piculs black pepper.

The south, the west, and the north coasts of the great island of
Borneo produce a large quantity of pepper; as early as 1721 it was a
staple commodity of this island. Banjarmassin is the most productive
place on the south coast, and the State of Borneo Proper on the north
coast. The best pepper certainly does not grow in the richest soils,
for the peppers of Java and Palembang are the worst of the
Archipelago, and that of Pinang and the west coast of Sumatra are the
best. Care in culture and curing improves the quality, as with other
articles, and for this reason chiefly it is that the pepper of Pinang
is more in esteem than that of any other portion of the Archipelago.
From the ports and districts of Siam 3,500 to 4,000 tons are exported
annually.

The duty at present levied on pepper in England is 6d. per lb., while
the wholesale price for that of Pinang, Malabar, and Sumatra is about
4d. per lb. White pepper ranges from 9d. to 1s. 6d. per lb. The prime
cost in Singapore is not more than 1½d. per lb.

About 70,000 or 80,000 piculs of pepper are annually exported from
Singapore, of which between 30,000 and 40,000 piculs have, until
within the last two years, gone on to Great Britain. More than
one-half of the pepper exported from Singapore is grown in the island
by Chinese settlers.

The low selling price of the article in the English market, the high
duty levied upon it, and the large freight paid for its carriage to
Great Britain, now leave so small a price to the cultivator in
Singapore, that the cultivation ceases to be remunerative, and is
carried on at a loss; and has consequently within the last year or two
begun to decrease rapidly, involving the Chinese growers, who are
generally of the poorest class, and without capital, in great
distress. A reduction in the duty on pepper has always been followed
by a very large increase in the consumption of the article, as will
appear from the following table, showing the importation and
consumption in Great Britain during some of the first and last years
of the different rates of duty:--

                               Duty              Singapore price
  Year    Quantity consumed    s.  d.         s.  d.        s.  d.
  1811        1,457,383        1  10½         0   7½   to   0   7¾
  1814          941,569        1  10½         0  11     "   1   1
  1820        1,404,021        2   6          0   6½    "   0   6¾
  1824        1,447,030        2   6          0   4¾    "   0   5½
  1826        2,529,027        2   0          0   4     "   0   4½
  1836        2,749,491        1   0          0   0     "   0   0
  1837        2,625,075        0   6          0   0     "   0   0
  1845        3,210,415        0   6          0   2¼    "   0   4¾

In a memorial from the mercantile community of Singapore, sent home in
1848, it is asserted that a reduction in the duty of pepper being
always attended by a large increase in the consumption, would not lead
to any serious loss in the revenue, while it would confer a great boon
on the poorer classes, to whom it has now become a necessary article
of life. The reduction would also be of great advantage to British
manufacturers, as well as to our Indian possessions, by giving rise to
an increased demand or British goods and productions, and of the
highest benefit to the agricultural settlers in the island of
Singapore, by enabling them to procure for their labor an honest means
of livelihood.

The pepper vines, which are allowed to climb poles or small trees, are
tolerably productive at Singapore; and pepper planting is esteemed by
the Chinese to be a profitable speculation, particularly if they are
enabled to evade the payment of quit-rent. An acre of pepper vines
will yield 1,161 lbs. of clean pepper. In Sumatra a full grown plant
has been known to produce seven pounds; in Pinang the yield is much
more. The average produce of one thousand vines is said, however, to
be only about 450 lbs.

Colonel Low, in his "Dissertation on Pinang," published at Singapore
some years ago, gives an interesting account of the culture:--

    "Pepper was, during many years, the staple product of Pinang soil,
    the average annual quantity having been nearly four millions of
    pounds; but previous to the year 1810, the above amount had
    decreased to about two-and-a-half millions of pounds, which was the
    result of the continental system.

    The price having fallen at length to three and three-and-a-half
    dollars the picul--with only a few occasional exceptions of
    rises--the cultivation of this spice was gradually abandoned, and
    the total product at this day does not exceed 2,000 piculs. The
    original cost, when pepper was at a high price, together with
    charges of transporting it to Europe, amounted to £36,357 for every
    five hundred tons, and the loss by wastage was estimated at £5,405.
    In 1818 there remained on the island 1,480,265 pepper vines in
    bearing, and the average value of exports of pepper from Pinang,
    including that received from other places, was averaged at 106,870
    Spanish dollars.

    As might have been foreseen, the fall of prices has so greatly
    diminished the cultivation of pepper to the eastward, that a
    reaction is likely to take place; and has in fact partly shown
    itself already. Some Chinese in Pinang and Province Wellesley seem
    to be preparing to renew the cultivation. There is abundant scope
    for the purpose on both sides of the harbour, and every facility is
    at hand for carrying it on.

    The pepper plant or vine requires a good soil, the richer the
    better, but the _red_ soil of the higher hills is not congenial, the
    Chinese think, to it. The undulations skirting the bases of the
    hills, and the deep alluvial lands, where not saturated with water,
    or liable to be overflowed, are preferred.

    The Chinese have always been the chief cultivators, and when the
    speculation flourished they received advances from the merchants,
    which they paid back in produce at fixed rates.

    When pepper was extensively cultivated on Prince of Wales Island,
    the European owner of the land had the forest cleared by contract,
    and the vines planted by contract, and when the vines came into
    bearing the plantation was farmed to the Chinese from year to year,
    on payment of a specific quantity of pepper. Any other plan would
    have ruined the capitalist, as the culture is almost entirely in
    their hands in the Straits' Settlements, and they will not work so
    well for others as when they are specially interested.

    The plants are set out at intervals, _every way_, of from seven to
    twelve feet, according to the degree of fertility of the soil, so
    that there are from 800 to 1,000 vines in one orlong of land; to
    each vine is allotted a prop of from ten to thirteen feet high, cut
    from the thorny tree called _dadap_, or where that is scarce, from
    the less durable _boonglai_; these props take root, thus affording
    both shade and support to the plant. The plant may be raised from
    seed pepper, but the plan is not approved of, cuttings being
    preferable, as they soonest come into bearing. The pits in which
    these cuttings are set should be a foot-and-a-half square, and two
    feet in depth; manure is not often applied, and then it is only some
    turf ashes. However unpicturesque a pepper plantation may be, still
    its neat and uniform appearance renders the landscape lively, and
    there can be little doubt that the island has suffered in its
    salubrity since the jungle usurped the extensive tracts formerly
    under pepper cultivation.

    When the vine has reached the height of three or four feet, it is
    bent down and laid in the earth, and about five of the strongest
    shoots which now spring up are retained and carefully trained up the
    prop, to which they are tied by means of ligatures of some creeping
    plants.

    One Chinese, after the plantation has been formed, can take care of
    two orlongs of land. The usual mode is this:--an advance is made by
    the capitalist to the laborer for building a house, and for
    agricultural implements; he then receives two dollars monthly to
    subsist on, until the end of the third year, when the estate or
    plantation is equally divided betwixt the contracting parties.

    The Chinese and even European cultivators used formerly to engage
    the Chinese who had just arrived from China; they paid off their
    passage-money, and then allowed them two dollars monthly, for
    provisions, for one year; with a suit of clothes, by which means the
    cost of the labor of one man averaged about three dollars monthly;
    but this plan is attended with risks.

    The cost attendant on the cultivation of two orlongs of land, with
    pepper, for three years--the Chinese laborer receiving the usual
    hire of _five_ Spanish dollars monthly--will be nearly as follows:--

                                                   Spanish dollars.
  Price of land, clearing, and planting                   40
  Quit rent, at 75 cents per annum per orlong              9
  Two thousand plants                                      4
         "     dadap props                                 6
  Implements                                               6
  House                                                   10
  Labor                                                  200
  Interest, loosely calculated at                         30

               Total Spanish dollars                     305

    In a very good soil a pepper vine will yield about one-eighth of a
    pound of dry produce at the end of the first year; at the end of the
    second, about a quarter of a pound; and at the expiration of the
    third, probably one pound; at the end of the fourth, from three to
    three-and-a-half pounds; ditto fifth, from eight to ten pounds.
    After the fifth year up to the fifteenth, or even the twentieth
    year, about ten pounds of dry merchantable produce may be obtained
    from each vine, under favorable circumstances. The Chinese
    speculator used to rent out his half-share of a new plantation for
    five years, to his cultivating partner, after the expiration of the
    first three years, at the rate of thirty piculs per annum; the total
    produce of these five years giving about fifty-six piculs annually
    as an average.

    A pepper plantation never survives the thirtieth year, unless in
    extremely rich soil, and then it is unproductive; nor will the young
    vine thrive on an old worn out pepper land, a peculiarity which is
    applicable to the coffee tree. The chief crop lasts from August to
    February. Four pounds of dry produce, for ten of green, is
    considered a fair estimate. Great care is requisite in the
    management of the vine, and especially in training and tying it on
    the props. It is subject to be injured by the attacks of a small
    insect. The green pepper dries in two or three days, and if it is
    intended that it shall be black, it is pulled before it is quite
    ripe. To make white pepper, the berry is allowed to remain somewhat
    longer on the vine; it is, when plucked, immersed in boiling water,
    by means of which process and subsequent friction, before drying,
    the husk is separated.

    The exports of pepper from Pinang in the last four years have
    been--In 1849, 2,591,233 lbs.; in 1850, 6,397,733 lbs.; in 1851,
    2,366,933 lbs.; in 1852, 2,112,133 lbs."

A small quantity of pepper seems to be annually exported from Ceylon,
which I presume is the growth of that island; thus there were:--

   54 cwts. shipped in   1842
   83  "        "        1843
  102  "        "        1844

In the Customs' returns of Ceylon, it is classed with cardamoms, and
160 to 170 cwt. of the two were shipped in each of the years 1850 and
1851. Last year the quantity was smaller.

Pepper cultivation has been introduced into the Mauritius, and in 1839
more than 500,000 lbs. were imported from thence, but as the shipments
have since decreased, I presume it has given place to the more
profitable staple sugar. I have been able to glean no information as
to the progress it has made in the West Indies. In Cayenne it has
been successfully carried on for many years; and large shipments of
pepper have been made thence to France.

            BLACK PEPPER EXPORTED FROM SINGAPORE.

                               Piculs.    Value in rupees.
  1841   Total Exports          66,810
    "    Growth of Singapore    21,231         47,674
  1842   Exports                74,228
    "    Growth of Singapore    32,277         72,473
  1843   Exports                57,883
    "    Growth of Singapore    35,585         79,900
  1844   Exports                67,148
    "    Growth of Singapore    42,995        386,152
  1845   Exports                65,892
    "    Growth of Singapore    39,019        350,443
  1846   Exports                56,709
    "    Growth of Singapore    35,712         -----
  1847   Exports                60,994
    "    Growth of Singapore    36,565        328,397

Pliny, the naturalist, states that the price of pepper in the market
of Rome in his time was, in English money, 9s. 4d. a pound, and thus
we have the price of pepper at least 1,774 years ago. The pepper
alluded to must have been the produce of Malabar, the nearest part of
India to Europe that produced the article, and its prime cost could
not have exceeded the present one, or about 2d. a pound. It would most
probably have come to Europe by crossing the Indian and Arabian ocean,
with the easterly monsoon, sailing up the Red Sea, crossing the
desert, dropping down the Nile, and making its way along the
Mediterranean by two-thirds of its whole length. This voyage, which in
our times can be performed in a month, most probably then took
eighteen. Transit and customs duties must have been paid over and over
again, and there must have been plenty of extortion. All this will
explain how pepper could not be sold in the Roman market under
fifty-six times its prime cost. Immediately previous to the discovery
of the route to India by the Cape of Good Hope, we find that the price
of pepper in the markets of Europe had fallen to 6s a pound, or 3s.
4d. less than in the time of Pliny. What probably contributed to this
fall, was the superior skill in navigation of the now converted Arabs,
and the extension of their commerce to the islands of the Eastern
Archipelago, which abounded in pepper. After the great discovery of
Vasco de Gama, the price of pepper fell to about 1s. 3d. a pound, a
fall of 8s. 1d. from that of the time of Pliny, and of 4s. 9d. from
that of the Mahommedan Arabs, Turks, and Venetians.

In 1826, 14,000,000 lbs. of pepper were imported into the United
Kingdom, of which about 5,500,000 were re-exported. In 1841,
15,000,000 lbs. were imported, of which 6,500,000 were re-shipped to
other countries.

The home consumption, it will be seen, now averages about 3,250,000
lbs.:--

              Imports        Home consumption
                lbs.               lbs.
  1845       9,852,984          3,209,718
  1846       5,906,586          3,299,955
  1847       4,669,930          2,966,022
  1848       8,125,545          3,185,337
  1849       4,796,042          3,257,911
  1850       8,028,319          3,170,883
  1851       3,996,496          3,303,403
  1852       6,641,699          3,524,501

The following return shows the number of bags of pepper imported into
the United Kingdom, with the quantity retained for home consumption:--

             Imports.                    Retained for home consumption.
              Black.        White.             Black.      White.
               bags          bags              bags.        bags.
  1843        37,840        3,861              21,163      2,257
  1844        60,705        2,123              23,525      2,122
  1845        80,600        3,208              30,294      2,861
  1847        37,194        1,236              28,768      2,654
  1848        65,518        3,042              31,665      3,950
  1849        43,651        2,616              32,246      3,859


CHILLIES AND CAYENNE PEPPER.

Chillies or capsicum are long roundish taper pods, divided into two or
three cells, full of small whitish seeds. When this fruit is fresh, it
has a penetrating acrid smell; to the taste it is extremely pungent,
and produces a most painful burning in the mouth. They are
occasionally imported dry, and form the basis of Cayenne pepper; put
in vinegar when green or ripe, they are an acceptable present in
Europe. In Bengal the natives make an extract from the chillies, which
is about the consistence and color of treacle.

The consumption of chillies in India is immense, as both rich and poor
daily use them, and it is the principal ingredient in all chutnies and
curries; ground into a paste, between two stones, with a little
mustard, oil, ginger, and salt, it forms the only seasoning which the
millions of poor in that country can obtain to eat with their insipid
rice. They are worth in the Bombay market about 40s. the candy of 600
lbs.

Immense quantities of the capsicum are used by the native population
of the West Indies, Africa, and Mexico; the consumption as a condiment
being almost universal, and perhaps equal in quantity to salt. Ten
barrels of these peppers were shipped from Montego Bay, Jamaica, in
the first six months of 1851.

The wholesale price of chillies in the London market is from 15s. to
25s. the cwt., and there is a duty of 6d. per pound on them. Cayenne
fetches 9d. to 2s. the pound.

Chilli is the Mexican name for all varieties of _Capsicum_. They are
natives of the East and West Indies, and other hot climates. _C.
annuum_ is the species commonly noticed, but there seems to be
numerous varieties, which by many are reckoned species. Thus, _C.
frutescens_ is a shrubby plant, which, along with _C. minimum_,
supplies the variety called bird-pepper, it grows to a larger and more
bushy size; _C. baccatum_ has a globular fruit, and furnishes cherry
or berry capsicum. They are all of the simplest culture, and may even
be grown with very little care in England. Culture appears to increase
the size, but to diminish the pungency of the fruit. In capsicums
irritant properties prevail so as to obscure the narcotic action.
Their acridity is owing to an oleaginous substance called capsicin.
Cayenne pepper is used in medicine chiefly in the form of tincture, as
a rubefacient and stimulant, especially in cases of ulcerated sore
throat. It acts on the stomach as an aromatic condiment, and when
preserved in acetic acid it forms chilli vinegar.

Red pepper may be considered one of the most useful vegetables in
hygiene. As a stimulant and auxiliary in digestion it has been
considered invaluable, especially in warm countries. A kind called the
tobacco red pepper, is said to possess the most pungent properties of
any of the species. It yields a small red pod, less than an inch in
length, and longitudinal in shape, which is so exceedingly hot that a
small quantity of it is sufficient to season a large dish of any food.
Owing to its oleaginous character, it has been found impossible to
preserve it by drying, but by pouring strong boiling vinegar on it a
sauce or decoction can be made, which possesses in a concentrated form
all the essential qualities of the vegetable. A single drop of this
sauce will flavor a whole plate of soup or other food.

The "wort" or Cayenne pottage may be termed the national dish of the
Abyssinians, as that, or its basis "dillock," is invariably eaten with
their ordinary diet, the thin crumpet-like bread of teff or wheat
flour. Equal parts of salt and the red cayenne pods are well powdered
and mixed together with a little pea or bean meal to make a paste.
This is called "dillock," and is made in quantities at a time, being
preserved in a large gourd-shell, generally suspended from the roof.
The "wort" is merely a little water added to this paste, which is then
boiled over the fire, with the addition of a little fat meat and more
meal to make a kind of porridge, to which sometimes is also added
several warm seeds, such as the common cress or black mustard, both of
which are indigenous in Abyssinia.--("Johnston's Abyssinia.")

A great quantity of Agi or Guinea pepper is grown in Peru, the natives
being very fond of this condiment. It is not uncommon for an American
Indian to make a meal of twenty or thirty pods of capsicum, a little
salt, and a piece of bread, washed down by two or three quarts of
chica, the popular beverage.


PIMENTO.

The pimento, _Eugenia Pimento_ (_Myrtus Pimenta_), is a native of
Mexico, and the West Indies. It flourishes spontaneously and in great
abundance on the north side of the island of Jamaica; its numerous
white blossoms mixing with the dark green foliage, and with the
slightest breeze diffusing around the most delicious fragrance, give a
beauty and a charm to nature rarely equalled, and of which he who has
not visited the shady arbors and perfumed groves of the tropics can
have little conception. This lovely tree, the very leaf of which when
bruised emits a fine aromatic odor, nearly as powerful as that of the
spice itself, has been known to grow to the height of from 30 to 40
feet, exceedingly straight, and having for its base the spinous ridge
of a rock, eight or ten feet above the surface of the hill or
mountain. A single tree has frequently produced 150 lbs. of the raw,
or 100 lbs. of the dried fruit.

The fruit has an aromatic odor, and its taste combines that of
cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves; hence its common name of allspice. The
fruit of _Eugenia acris_ is used for pimento.

The trunk is of a grey color, smooth and shining, and altogether
destitute of bark. It is luxuriantly clothed with leaves of a deep
green, somewhat like those of the bay tree, and these leaves are, in
the months of July and August, beautifully contrasted and relieved by
an exuberance of white flowers. The leaves yield by distillation a
delicate odoriferous oil, which is said to be sometimes passed off for
oil of cloves.

The berries are gathered before they are ripe, and spread on a
terrace, exposed to the sun for about a week, during which time they
lose their green color, and acquire that reddish brown tint which
renders them marketable. Some planters kiln-dry them. Like many of the
minor productions of the tropics, pimento is exceedingly uncertain,
and perhaps a very plenteous crop occurs but once in five years.

In 1800 there were 12,759 bags and 610 casks of pimento imported from
Jamaica; in 1824 there were 33,308 bags and 599 casks shipped from the
island; in 1829 the quantity exported was 6,069,127 lbs.

In the year ending October 1843, the export of pimento from Jamaica
was 29,322 bags and 156 casks; in the year ending October 1844, 12,055
bags and 88 casks; in the year ending October 1845, 233 casks, valued
at 30s. each, and 59,494 bags, valued at 20s.

From 1st January to 1st August, 1851, 128,277 lbs. pimento were
shipped from the port of Montego Bay, Jamaica.

There was a very considerable pimento plantation made in Tobago, some
years ago, by a Mr. Franklin, but it was abandoned by his sons, that
they might attend the more exclusively to sugar culture.

Jamaica exported nearly two millions of pounds of pimento less, in
the three years ending 1848, than she did in the three previous to the
emancipation of the slaves. The number of pounds shipped annually, in
these periods, is shown by the following figures:--

  Year.         lbs.
  1830       5,560,620
  1831       3,172,320
  1832       4,024,800
  1846       2,997,060
  1847       2,800,140
  1848       5,231,908

Pimento is imported into this country in bags of about 100 lbs. each.
The imports have been:--

  Year.         Imports.     Home consumption.
                  cwts.            cwts.
  1848           20,773            4,230
  1849           24,994            3,419
  1850           20,448            3,467
  1851           14,840            3,935
  1852           22,708            3,872

The following is a statement of the imports from the West Indies, and
the consumption of the United Kingdom, in pounds:--

                                   Entries for
  Year.         Imports.         home consumption.
                  lbs.                 lbs.
  1831         1,801,355             305,739
  1832         1,366,183             296,197
  1833         4,770,255             330,890
  1834         1,389,402             320,719
  1835         2,536,353             343,942
  1836         3,230,978             400,941
  1837         2,026,128             383,401
  1838           892,974             383,997
  1839         1,071,511             309,078
  1840           999,068             338,969
  1841           797,757             297,201
  1842         1,643,318             450,683
  1843         2,028,658             378,096


  The imports have been, in--

                bags.
  1843         18,649
  1844          2,408
  1845         21,092
  1847          9,649
  1848         18,196
  1849         14,108

Pimento is worth in the London market 6d. to 7d. per lb. The duty is
5s. per cwt.


VANILLA.

The fleshy, pod-like, odoriferous fruit of different species of
_Epidendrum_ constitute the substance called vanilla, which is used in
confectionery for giving a delicious perfume to chocolate, liqueurs,
&c. As an aromatic it is much sought after by confectioners, for
flavoring ices and creams; and also by perfumers, liqueurists, and
distillers. The best comes from the forests round the village of
Zurtila, in the intendancy of Oaxaca, on the eastern slopes of the
Cordillera of Anahuac, between the parallels of 19 deg. and 20 deg. N.
All the vanilla which is used in Europe is imported from Mexico,
Venezuela, and Vera Cruz.

It is a native of tropical America, and grows wild in Brazil, Peru,
the banks of the Orinoco, and all places where heat, shade, and
moisture prevail. There are many species indigenous to the Bahamas,
Trinidad, Jamaica, Cuba, Dominica, Martinique and St. Vincent, which
would produce considerable gain to the inhabitants if they would give
themselves the trouble of cultivating or collecting its fruit.

This parasitical plant has a trailing stem, not unlike the common ivy,
but not so woody, by which it attaches itself to the trunks of trees,
and sucks the moisture which their bark derives from the lichens and
other cryptogamia, but without drawing nourishment from the tree
itself, like the misletoe and loranthus. The Indians in Mexico
propagate it by planting cuttings at the foot of trees selected for
that purpose. It rises to the height of 18 or 20 feet; the flowers are
of a greenish yellow, mixed with white. The plant is subcylindrical
about eight or ten inches long, of a yellow color when gathered, but
dark brown or black when imported into Europe. It is one-celled
siliquose, and pulpy within, wrinkled on the outside, and full of a
vast number of seeds like grains of sand, having when properly
prepared, a peculiar and delicious fragrance. It should be gathered
before it is fully ripe.

Different species of vanilla are natives of Guiana, and it is found in
large quantities along the banks of its rivers, and in the wooded
districts which intersperse the savannahs. The oily and balsamic
substance which the minute seeds possess, may be found to have
medicinal qualities. Its cultivation can be connected with no
difficulties; it needs only to plant the slips among trees, and to
keep them clear of weeds. It would prove therefore a great addition to
a cocoa plantation. In 1825 the price was, in Germany, sixty-six
dollars (equal to £9) per pound, and twenty-five to thirty dollars are
paid for it in Martinique.

Humboldt states that the annual value of vanilla exported from the
state of Vera Cruz was 40,000 dollars, £8,000 sterling. Some vanilla
is exported from Maranham. The cultivation of vanilla, which was
introduced into Java in the year 1847, is said to have made
considerable progress, there being now no fewer than thirty
plantations.

The fruit of this orchideous plant is entirely neglected in the
province of Caracas, though abundant crops of it might be gathered on
the humid coast between Porto Cabello and Ocumare, especially at
Turiamo, where the pods attain the length of nearly a foot. The
English and American merchants often seek to make purchases at the
port of La Guayra, but with difficulty procure it in small quantities.

In the valleys that descend from the chain of coast towards the
Caribbean sea, in the province of Truxillo, as well as in the mission
of Guiana, near the cataracts of the Orinoco, a great quantity of the
vanilla pods might be collected, the produce of which would be still
more abundant, if, according to the practice of the Mexicans, the
plant were disentangled from time to time from the other creepers,
with which it is intertwined and stifled.

When collected to prepare it for the market, about 12,000 of the pods
are strung like a garland by their lower end, as near as possible to
their foot-stalk; the whole are plunged for an instant into boiling
water to blanch them; they are then hung up in the open air and
exposed to the sun for a few hours. By some they are wrapped in
woollen cloths to sweat. Next day they are lightly smeared with oil,
by means of a feather or the fingers, and are surrounded with oiled
cotton to prevent the valves from opening. As they become dry, on
inverting their upper end they discharge a viscid liquor from it, and
they are pressed several times with oiled fingers to promote its flow.
The dried pods, like the berries of pepper, change color under the
drying operation, grow brown, wrinkled, soft, and shrink to one-fourth
of their original size. In this state they are touched a second time
with oil, but very sparingly, because with too much oil they would
lose some of their delicious perfume.

They are then packed for the market in small bundles of 50 or 100 in
each, enclosed in lead foil, or tight metallic cases.

There are four local varieties, all differing in price and excellence;
viz., the vanilla _fina_, the _zacate_, the _rezacate_, and the
_vasura_.

One pod of vanilla is sufficient to perfume a pound and a half of
cacao. It is with difficulty reduced to fine particles, but it may be
sufficiently attenuated by cutting it into small bits, and grinding
these along with sugar.

As it comes to us, vanilla is a capsular fruit, of the thickness of a
swan's quill; straight, cylindrical, but somewhat flattened, truncated
at the top, thinned off at the ends, glistening, wrinkled, furrowed
lengthwise, flexible, from five to ten inches long, and of a reddish
brown color. It contains a pulpy parenchyma, soft, unctuous, very
brown, in which are embedded black, brilliant, very small seeds.

The kind most esteemed in France is called _leq_ vanilla; it is about
six inches long, from one-fourth to one-third of an inch broad,
narrowed at the two ends and curved at the base; somewhat soft and
viscid, of a dark reddish color, and of a most delicious flavor, like
that of balsam of Peru. It is called vanilla _giorees_, when it is
covered with efflorescences of benzcoin acid, after having been kept
in a dry place, and in vessels not hermetically closed.

The second sort, called _vanilla simarona_, or bastard, is a little
smaller than the preceding, of a less deep brown hue, drier, less
aromatic, destitute of efflorescence. It is said to be the produce of
the wild plant, and is brought from St. Domingo.

A third sort, which comes from Brazil, is the _vanillon_, or large
vanilla of the French market; the _vanilla pamprona_ or _bova_ of the
Spaniards. Its length is from five to six inches, its breadth from
one-half to three-fourths of an inch. It is brown, soft, viscid,
almost always open, of a strong smell, but less agreeable than the
_leq_. It is sometimes a little spoiled by an incipient fermentation.
It is cured with sugar, and enclosed in tin plate boxes, which contain
from 20 to 60 pods[52]. The average annual import of vanilla into
Havre, in the five years ending 1841, was about 16 boxes; in 1842 it
was 30 packages.

TONQUIN BEANS.--The seeds of the Tongo tree (_Dipterix odorata_), a
native of Guiana, are the well-known tonquin beans used to give a
pleasant flavor to snuff.


TURMERIC.

This article of commerce is furnished by the branches of the rhizome
or root-stock of the _Curcuma longa_, and _C. rotunda_, plants which
are natives of Eastern Asia, but have been grown in England and the
West Indies. They thrive well in a rich light soil, and are readily
increased by offsets from the roots.

In the East Indies, where it is known as Huldee, turmeric is much
employed in dyeing yellow, principally silks, but the color is very
fugitive. It is also used medicinally as an aromatic carminative, and
as a condiment; it enters into the composition of curry sauce or
powder, and many other articles of Indian cookery. It is cordial and
stomachic, and considered by the native doctors of India an excellent
application in powder for cleansing foul ulcers.

It is grown in, and exported chiefly from, Bengal and Malabar, Madras,
Java, and China. The turmeric of Java is in high estimation in the
European markets, ranking next to that of China, and being much
superior to that of Bengal. The seeds of _Anethum Sowa_, from their
carminative properties, form an ingredient in curry powder.

The price of turmeric in London is from 12s. to 20s. per cwt.,
according to quality. The entries for home consumption are about 4,000
to 5,000 cwts. annually. It is better shipped in casks or cases than
in bags.

A kind of arrowroot is prepared from _C. angustifolia_, another
species of this tribe of plants.

_Amaranthus gangiticus_, and another species, are much cultivated by
the Hindoos for their stews and curries.

The quantity and value of the curry stuff imported into Ceylon,
chiefly from India, has been in the last few years as follows:--

              Quantity.
  Years.      cwts.  packages.     Value.
   1847                            6,866
   1848                            9,981
   1849      26,347     109        9,664
   1850      24,396     300        7,267
   1851      32,550                9,446
   1852                            9,039

What is comprised under the term "curry stuff," I am not aware, but
it appears to be a bulky article, for it was imported to the extent of
32,000 cwt. in 1852.

There are two varieties of turmeric usually sent into Europe from the
East (whence all the turmeric imported into Europe is obtained), the
"long" turmeric (_Curcuma longa_), and the "round," or as it is better
known the "Chinese turmeric." The latter description is very rare, the
former is the common article of commerce. According to one of my
correspondents, Mr. Hepburn, chemist, of Falmouth, Jamaica, the common
or long turmeric is indigenous to that island, growing luxuriantly in
the mountainous districts, in rather damp soils, its locality being in
the vicinity of rivers, water-courses and springs. In this respect it
differs from ginger, which requires a rather dry soil for its culture.
I am not aware that this plant possesses the property of impoverishing
the soil like the ginger. From the general habits of the plant in its
natural state, we may gather the following rules for our guidance in
its culture. The plants should be laid down in rows of five or six
inches distant from each other, in a soil moderately damp, of an
aluminous or clayey nature, and free to a great extent of the more
soluble alkalies, potash and soda, as these, by absorption, may
destroy the coloring matter of the plant, and so diminish its value as
a dye-stuff. Finally, in preparing the roots for exportation, they
should be cleansed from all earthy particles, exposed for drying in
the shade, and without any further preparation bagged for shipment.

The coloring matter of turmeric is of an orange yellow color
exceedingly delicate and capable of change, either from the action of
light or of alkalies, which turn it to a dark brown color. It is
slightly soluble in water, and readily soluble in an alkaline
solution, becoming dark brown. Alcohol extracts the coloring matter.
The uses to which turmeric is applied are two: as an ingredient in the
curry powder and paste, and as a dye for silk. It was some time ago
used as a medicine; but though retained in the "Pharmacopoeias" of the
present day, it is entirely discarded by the practitioner as a
curative agent. The best Bengal and Malabar turmeric fetches a price
nearly as high as that of ginger, and I see no reason why the West
India planter could not send it into the British market quite as cheap
as the East India trader. According to Dallas, 397 bags of turmeric
were exported from Jamaica in 1797.

Turmeric is grown about the city of Patna and Behar. It is much
cultivated about Calcutta and all parts of Bengal. One acre yields
about 2,000 lbs. of the fresh root. It is also grown on the central
table land of Afghanistan. The exports from Calcutta in 1841 were
11,000 Indian maunds, and 28,137 in 1842. The value of that exported
from Madras in 1839 was 40,000 rupees, or £4,000; in 1840, £4,200. The
quantity shipped from that Presidency in 1850 was 6,877 bags.

In the neighbourhood of Dacca about 200 lbs. of seed is sown to the
beegah, measuring 80 cubits by 80, and the yield is from 640 to 800
lbs.

140 tons were imported into Liverpool in 1849, for dyeing and for
curries; 414 tons in 1850; 11,554 bags and packages in 1851; and only
3,595 ditto in 1852. The price in January 1853 was, for Bengal, 10s.
to 12s.; China, 12s. to 14s., and Malabar 9s. to 12s. the cwt. The
imports into London were 18 tons in 1848, 191 in 1849, and 980 in
1850. The deliveries for consumption, 192 tons in 1848, 270 in 1849,
and 870 tons in 1850.

In China turmeric is used with Prussian blue in coloring and facing
tea.


GINSENG

The produce of this plant, as an article of commerce, is confined to
our transatlantic neighbours, who have the monopoly of the supply to
China.

The root of _Panax quinquefolium_, the American ginseng, is much
esteemed by the Chinese, for certain supposed beneficial effects upon
the nerves, and for other presumed virtues; but our physicians have
not discovered any proofs of its efficacy in Europe. The plant is an
herbaceous perennial, growing upon the confines of Tartary and China,
near the great wall. It is found wild, flourishing in moist
situations, and attains the height of from two to three feet; it is
also now produced largely in the northern, middle, and western States
of the Union, particularly Virginia, Louisiana, and Pennsylvania, and
a considerable trade is carried on with it to China. A variety of the
plant was discovered, a few years ago, in the Himalaya mountains, and
small quantities have been thence sent to Canton. It is also found
growing in Canada. The root is about three or four inches in length,
and one inch in thickness. It resembles a small carrot, but not so
taper at the end, and is sometimes single, sometimes divided into two
branches. The stem is striated, without branches, and of a red color
near the root. The leaves, from four to six of which surround the stem
where they form sheaths (bracteal), are simply pinnate. The flower
stalk is long and green, the inflorescence a simple umbel. The fruit
is a berry of a red color, and contains two seeds of the size of
mustard seed. The officinal root differs in appearance, according to
the country from which it is brought. In Korea and China it is white,
corrugated when dry, and covered with a powder resembling starch. In
Mandscharia and Dauria it is yellow, smooth and transparent, and when
cut resembles amber. The taste of the root is bitter. Crude ginseng
now sells in the Canton market at 70 to 80 dollars per picul of 133
lbs., and cured or clarified root at 130 to 140 dollars.

The stem of the plant, which is renewed every year, leaves, as it
falls off, an impression upon the neck of the root, so that the number
of these rings or marks indicates the age of the plant, and the value
of the root increases accordingly. The Chinese government were
formerly in the habit of sending out annually 30,000 Tartar soldiers
to search for the plant, and each was obliged to bring home two ounces
of the root gratis, and for all above that quantity he was paid its
weight in silver. The Asiatic ginseng is said to be obtained from the
root of _P. Schinseng_ of Nees von Esenbeck, _P. Pseudo ginseng_ of
Wallich. This root might be procured in Prince Edward's Island and
some of the other British North American colonies.

I have been able to trace, after some labor and research, the
progressive exports of this curious article of trade from the United
States.

In 1790, 813 casks, of the value of 47,025 dollars, were exported; and
in 1791, 29,208 lbs. From 1803 to 1807, the annual value of ginseng
shipped was about 123,000 dollars, and from 1820 to 1830, it averaged
157,000 dollars.

The following figures show the value of the article in subsequent
years:--1831, 115,921 dollars; year ending 30th September, 1835,
94,960 dollars; 1837, 212,899 lbs., valued at 108,548 dollars; 1840,
22,728 dollars; 1841, 437,245 dollars.

The quantity shipped in 1839, from Philadelphia alone, was 317,443
lbs. In 1841, 637,885 lbs. were exported from the United States.

The value of that exported in the years ending 30th June, was 1844,
95,008 in dollars, and in 1845, 117,146 dollars; 110,000 lbs. were
collected at Toledo, Ohio, in 1845. The value of the exports in the
following years, ending June 30th, were--1847, 64,466 dollars; 1849,
162,640; 1849, 182,966; 1850, 122,916 dollars.


CORIANDER, CARRAWAY, AND OTHER SEEDS.

The fruits of anise, carraway, coriander, &c., (erroneously called
seeds,) are in demand for various purposes.

CARRAWAY SEED is imported to the extent of 500 tons annually from
Germany and Holland, the price being about 33s. per cwt. It is also
now much grown in Essex and Kent. In the years 1848 and 1849, 7,000
cwt. of this seed was imported, of which nearly the whole quantity was
retained for home consumption.

CORIANDER SEED is chiefly used by distillers, to produce an aromatic
oil. The quantity imported annually does not exceed 50 tons, and it is
brought principally to the port of Hull. It is also cultivated in
Suffolk, Essex and Kent.

Of MUSTARD SEED the aggregate quantity imported annually is about
2,000 tons for home consumption, and the flour is used as a well-known
condiment to food, &c., and in medicine; the average price being about
9d. per pound.

ANISE.--The fruit of _Pimpinilla anisum_, under the name of aniseed,
is principally imported from Alicant and Germany (the first is
preferred), but some is also brought from the East Indies. It is an
annual plant, largely cultivated in Spain, Malta, and various parts of
Germany, and also in the island of Scio, Egypt, and parts of Asia. The
imports are not large; 192 cwts. paid duty in 1833, and 315 cwts. in
1840. About 60 cwts. are annually received at Hull from Germany. It is
used to flavor liqueurs, sweetmeats, and confectionery of various
kinds. Oil of aniseed is obtained by distillation from the fruit, and
1,544 lbs. were imported in 1839. About two pounds of oil are obtained
from one hundred-weight of seed.

STAR ANISE, _Illicum anisatum_, is a native of the countries extending
from 23½ deg. to 35 deg. of north latitude, or from Canton to Japan.
The capsules constitute in India a rather important article of
commerce, and are sold in all the bazaars. Large quantities are also
used in Europe in the preparation of liqueurs. 695 piculs of star
aniseed were exported from Canton in 1850, valued at 8,200 Spanish
dollars. 81 piculs of oil of aniseed were exported from Canton in
1845, and 105 piculs in 1850, valued at 11,900 dollars. 3,000 piculs
of aniseed are exported annually from Cambodia.


PUTCHUK, OR COSTUS.

The substance called costus was highly prized by the ancients, and
specimens may be met with at a few of the London drug-houses. It has
been shown by Dr. Falconer to be the produce of a genus of the thistle
tribe, to which he has given the name of _Aucklandia_. The root of _A.
Costus_ is supposed to be the _Costus Arabicus_, on the following
grounds:--It corresponds with the descriptions given by the ancient
authors, and is used at the present day for the same purposes in
China, as costus was formerly applied to by the Greeks. The
coincidence of the names--in Cashmere the root is called koot, and the
Arabic synonym is said to be _koost_. It grows in immense abundance on
the mountains which surround Cashmere. It is a gregarious herb, about
six or seven feet high, with a perennial thick branched root, with an
annual round smooth stem, large leaves and dark purple flowers. The
roots are dug up in the months of September and October, when the
plant begins to be torpid; they are chopped up into pieces, from two
to six inches long, and are exported without further preparation. The
quantity collected, according to Dr. Falconer, is very large,
amounting to about two million pounds per annum. The cost of its
collection and transport to a mercantile depot in Cashmere, is about
2s. 4d. the cwt. The commodity is laden on bullocks and exported to
the Punjaub, whence the larger portion goes down to Bombay, where it
is shipped for the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, and China; a portion of
it finds its way across the Sutlej and Jumna into Hindostan Proper,
whence it is taken to Calcutta, and bought up there with avidity under
the name of putchuk. The value is enhanced at Jugadree, on the Jumna,
to about 16s. 9d. or 23s. 4d. per cwt. In the Chinese ports it
fetches nearly double that price the cwt. The Chinese burn the roots
as an incense in the temples of their gods, and they also attach great
efficacy to it as an aphrodisiac. The imports into Canton in 1848 were
414 piculs; in 1850, 854 piculs; valued at 5,150 dollars. In Cashmere
it is chiefly used for the protection of bales of shawls from insects.
The exports from the port of Calcutta were, in 1840-41, 19,660 maunds;
in 1841-42, 12,847; in 1847-48, 2,050¼; in 1848-49, 2,110¾;--worth
about £1,500 annually.

Specimens of amboyna wood, the odoriferous sandal wood from Timor,
clove wood, and other choice woods from the Moluccas and Prince of
Wales Island, were sent home to the Great Exhibition in 1851.

LIGNUM ALOES, the eagle wood and Calambak of commerce, yielding an
aromatic perfume, is furnished by the _Aquilaria malaccensis_, and
_agallocha_, in Silhet, an ornamental evergreen shrub. A very high
artificial value is placed on the better qualities of this product by
the natives of the East; the best quality being worth about £14 the
picul of 133 lbs.

This fragrant wood is probably the lign aloes of the Bible.

Incense to the value of nearly one million and a quarter francs was
exported from Alexandria in 1837.

Calambak or eagle wood, the true lignum aloes so highly esteemed in
the East as a perfume or incense, is said to be produced by the
_Aloexylum agallochum_, Lour. This remarkable wood contains a large
quantity of an odoriferous oleo-resin; when heated it undergoes a sort
of imperfect fusion, and exhales a fragrant and very agreeable odor.
Its price in Sumatra is about £30 per cwt. Inferior specimens are
obtained at Malacca. Eagle wood is also obtained from several other
trees. The true eagle wood is however very scarce.




SECTION IV.

DYES AND COLORING STUFFS, AND TANNING SUBSTANCES.


Of the several classes of materials collected at the Industrial
Exhibition in Hyde Park, in 1851, few possessed so much importance in
the eyes of the textile and leather manufacturer and chemist as the
different products used in the arts and manufactures for coloring and
tanning purposes. These were in a great measure lost sight of by the
public at large, being scattered about in small quantities in a great
number of directions; and, from the minute samples shown, were in many
instances overlooked altogether. Besides furnishing some novel and
general statistical facts, which may prove interesting, I propose also
in this section to draw attention more prominently to some of these
products, which are at present little known or appreciated.

Coloring substances for staining and dyeing are obtained indifferently
from the animal, mineral, and vegetable kingdoms, but it is of the
last alone that I shall have to speak. The importance of a more
careful consideration of this subject will be admitted, if we consider
how much the prosperity and extent of our cotton, silk, woollen, and
leather manufactures depends on a liberal and cheap supply of dyes and
tannin, to give beauty and color to the fabrics, and substance and
utility to the skins. Even oil colors, for painters' purposes, which
do not come within the scope of my remarks, form an item in our yearly
exports of the value of £250,000, and when we calculate the large
amount of cotton, silk and wool worked up, most of which requires
various coloring agents, gums, starches, and mordants;--that nearly
30,000 tons of hides are annually imported, exclusive of those
obtained from our now slaughter-houses, besides goat, seal, and other
skins--and that the exports of our various manufactures of cotton,
linen, silk, wool and leather in 1852, setting aside our home
consumption, amounted to nearly fifty millions sterling, we shall be
able to form a better estimate of the importance of the various
subjects we are about to notice.

Great Britain does not pay less than £600,000 annually for the dried
carcasses of the tiny cochineal insect, while the produce of another
small insect, that which produces the lac dye, is scarcely less
valuable. Then there are the gall nuts used for dyeing and making
black ink. Upwards of £3,000,000 is paid for barks of various kinds
for tanners' purposes, about one million for other tanning substances
and heavy dye woods, besides about £200,000 for various extracts of
tannin, such as Gambier, Cutch, Divi-divi, and Kino. The aggregate
value of the dye stuffs and gum it is difficult to estimate.

The beautiful specimens of materials imported from China, India, New
Zealand, the Continent, and other countries, and exhibited at the
Crystal Palace, proves to us that we have yet much to learn from other
nations in the art of fixing colors and obtaining brilliant dyes. The
French are much our superiors in dyeing and the production of fast and
beautiful colors. Their chemical researches and investigations are
carried out more systematically and effectively than our own. Russia
imports dyewoods and dye-stuffs to the value of five millions and a
half of silver roubles annually.

It was well observed by the Jury Reporters at the Great Exhibition,
that "a vast number of new coloring materials have been discovered or
made available, and improved modes have been devised of economically
applying those already in use; so that the dyer of the present time
employs many substances of the very existence of which his practical
predecessors were wholly ignorant. From the increased use of many of
the vegetable colors, and from the improved modes of applying the
coloring matters, a demand has naturally sprung up for various dye
stuffs; and at the present time, many of the dyeing materials of
distant countries are beginning to excite the attention of practical
men; for though they have been acquainted with many of these
substances, it is only recently that the progress of the art has
rendered their use desirable or even practicable."

It would be quite impossible, within the limits which I have assigned
myself, to make even a bare enumeration of the various plants and
trees from which coloring substances and dye stuffs can be obtained, I
must, therefore, be content to specify only a few.

The roots of some species of Lithospermum afford a lac for dyeing and
painting. Dried pomegranates are said to be used in Tunis for dyeing
yellow; the rind is also a tanning substance.

Sir John Franklin tells us that the Crees extract some beautiful
colors from several of their native vegetables. They dye a beautiful
scarlet with the roots of two species of bed-straw, _Galium
tinctorium_ and _boreale_. They dye black, with an ink made of elder
bark and a little bog-iron ore dried and powdered, and they have
various modes of producing yellow. They employ the dried roots of the
cowbane (_Cicuta virosa_), the bruised buds of the Dutch myrtle, and
have discovered methods of dyeing with various lichens.

In the "Comptes Rendus," xxxv., p. 558, there is an account by M.J.
Persoz, of a green coloring matter from China, of great stability,
from which it appears that the Chinese possess a coloring substance
having the appearance of indigo, which communicates a beautiful and
permanent sea green color to mordants of alumina and iron, and which
is not a preparation of indigo, or any derivative of this dyeing
principal. As furnished to M. Persoz by Mr. Forbes, the American
consul at Canton, it was in thin plates of a blue color, resembling
Japanese indigo, but of a finer grain, differing also from indigo in
its composition and chemical properties. On infusing a very small
quantity of it in water, this fluid soon acquired a deep blue color
with a greenish tinge; upon boiling and immersing a piece of calico on
which the mordants of iron and alumina had been printed, it was dyed a
sea green color of greater or less intensity according to the strength
of the mordant--the portions not coated remaining white.

A berry called _Makleua_ grows on a large forest tree at Bankok, which
is used most extensively by the Siamese as a vegetable black dye. It
is merely bruised in water, when a fermentation takes place, and the
article to be dyed is steeped in the liquid and then spread out in the
sun to dry. The berry, when fresh, is of a fine green color, but after
being gathered for two or three days it becomes quite black and
shrivelled like pepper. It must be used fresh, and whilst its mixture
with water produces fermentation. The bark of _Datisca cannabina_ also
dyes yellow. It contains a bitter principle, like quassia.

A coloring matter is prepared from the dried fruit of the _Rottlera
tinctoria_, by the natives of the East, to dye orange, which is a
brilliant and tolerably permanent dye. It is apparently of a resinous
nature.

A small quantity of Alkanet root (_Anchusa tinctoria_), is imported
from the Levant and the south of France, and is used to color gun
stocks, furniture, &c., of a deep red mahogany and rosewood color. It
is brought over in packages weighing about two cwt., the price being
40s. or 50s. per cwt.

Turmeric is now imported to the extent of upwards of 800 tons, a
portion of this is used in dyeing. The culture and commerce has been
already noticed in Section III.

The bark and roots of the berberry are used in the East to dye yellow;
the color is best when boiled in ley. Some of the species of
Symplocos, as _S. racemosa_, known as lodh about the Himalaya
mountains, and _S. tinctoria_, a native of Carolina, are used for
dyeing. The scarlet flowers of _Butea frondosa_ (the Dhaktree), and
_B. superba_, natives of the Indian jungles, yield a beautiful dye,
and furnishing a species of kino (_Pulas kino_), are also used for
tanning. _Althea rosea_, the parent of the many beautiful varieties of
hollyhock, a native of China, yields a blue coloring matter equal to
indigo. Indigo of an excellent quality has been obtained in the East
from a twining plant, _Gymnema tingens_ or _Asclepias tingens_.

The juice of the unripe fruit of _Rhamnus infectorius_, _catharticus_
and _virigatius_, known as Turkey or French berries, is used for
dyeing leather yellow. When mixed with lime and evaporated to
dryness, it forms the color called sap-green. A great quantity of
yellow berries are annually shipped from Constantinople; 115 tons were
imported into Liverpool last year. The average annual imports into the
United Kingdom are about 450 tons. They come from the Levant in hair
bales weighing three and a quarter cwt., or in tierces of four to five
cwt., and are used by calico printers for dyeing a yellow color. They
are sometimes called Persian berries.

It is a subject of surprise that the common betel-nut of the East has
never been introduced for dyeing purposes. The roots of the awl tree
of Malabar and other parts of India, _Morinda citrifolia_, and of _M.
tinctoria_, found abundant in all the Asiatic islands, are extensively
used as a dye stuff for giving a red color. It is usually grown as a
prop and shade for the pepper vine and coffee tree. The coloring
matter resides principally in the bark of the roots, which are long
and slender, and the small pieces are the best, fetching 8s. to 10s. a
maund. It is exported in large quantities from Malabar to Guzerat, and
the northern parts of Hindostan, but seldom finds its way to Europe.

The wood and roots of another species, _M. umbellata_, known in the
eastern islands as "Mangkudu," are used extensively for their red dye,
in Celebes and Java. Specimens of all these, and of the Lopisip bark,
bunchong bulu wood, and the gaju gum (from undescribed plants), have
been introduced into England. They are said to furnish excellent dyes
in the Asiatic islands. Native dyes from Arracan have also been
imported, viz., thit-tel and the-dan yielding red dyes, ting-nget and
reros, affording dark purple dyes; and thit-nan-weng, a chocolate dye.
These would be worth enquiry, and particulars of the plants yielding
them, the quantities available, and the prices might be procured. Dyes
and colors from the following plants are obtained in India: several
species of _Terminalia_, _Sinecarpus Anacardium_, _Myrica Sapide_,
_Nelumbium speciosus_, _Butea frondosa_, and _Nyctanthes
arboretristis_. The bunkita barring, obtained from an undescribed
plant in Borneo, produces a dark purple or black dye. A species of
ruellia, under the name of "Room," is employed in its raw state by the
Khamptis and Lingphos to dye their clothes of a deep blue. It is
described by the late Dr. Griffiths as "a valuable dye, and highly
worthy of attention." It might, perhaps, be usefully employed as the
ground for a black dye. In Nepaul they use the bark of _Photinia
dubia_ or _Mespilus Bengalensis_ for dyeing scarlet. The bark of the
black oak, _Quercus tinctoria_ and its varieties, natives of North
America, are used by dyers under the name of quercitron.

In the south of Europe, _Daphne Gnidium_ is used to dye yellow. The
root of reilbon, a sort of madder in Chili, dyes red. A purple tint or
dye is obtained from the bark of an undescribed tree, known under the
name of "_Grana ponciana_," growing about Quito; and Stevenson
(Travels in South America) says, "if known in Europe, it would
undoubtedly become an article of commerce." Another much more
expensive species of coloring matter (red) is obtained in various
parts of South America from the leaves of the _Bignonia Chica_, a
climbing evergreen shrub, native of the Orinoco country, with large
handsome panicles of flowers. The coloring substance is obtained by
decoction, which deposits, when cool, a red matter; this is formed
into cakes and dried. Dr. Ure thinks it might probably be turned to
account in the arts of civilization. The order of plants to which it
belongs, contains a vast number of species, all natives of tropical
regions, and their value for the production of coloring substances may
be worth investigation.

It is met with in British Guiana, and the Indian tribes of that
district prepare the pigment with which they stain their skin from it;
it is called by them "Caraveru." The coloring matter is used as a dye
in the United States, and for artistical purposes would rival madder.
Sir Robert Schomburgk thinks it might form an article of export if it
were sufficiently known, as its preparation is extremely simple. The
leaves are dried in the sun, and at the first exposure, after having
been plucked from the vine which produces them, they show the abundant
feculent substance which they contain.

LANA DYE.--A beautiful bluish-black color, known as "Caruto," is
procured in Demerara and Berbice from the juice of the fruit of the
_Genipa Americana_, Linn.--a tree very common in the colony. The
Indians use it for staining their faces and persons. The Lana dye was
honorably mentioned by the jurors at the Great Exhibition in 1851. The
bluish-black color obtained from it is remarkably permanent, a fact
which has very long been known, though hardly any attempt appears to
have been made to introduce it to the notice of European dyers.
Another pigment is prepared by them from arnotto, mixed with turtle
oil, or carap oil, obtained from the seeds of the _Carapa guianensis_
(Aubl.). The wild plantain (_Urania guianensis_) and the cultivated
plantain (_Musa paridisiaca_), the Mahoe (_Thespesia populnea_), and
the pear seed of the Avocado (_Persea gratissima_), furnish dyes in
various parts of the West Indies; specimens of many of these have been
imported from British Guiana and Trinidad.

Russia produces good specimens of the wood of _Statice coriaria_, the
leaves and bark of sumach, the bark of the wild pomegranate, yellow
berries, _Madia sativa_, saffron, safflower and madder roots for
dyeing purposes.

_Avicenna tomentosa_, a species of mangrove, is very common about the
creeks of Antigua, Jamaica, and other West India islands, where it is
used for dyeing and tanning.

In New Zealand, the natives produce a most brilliant blue-black dye
from the bark of the Eno, which is in great abundance. Some of the
borders of the native mats, of a most magnificent black, are dyed with
this substance. It has been tried in New South Wales; but, as with
other local dyes, although found well suited for flax, hemp, linen,
or other vegetable productions, it could not be fixed on wools or
animal matter. Dr. Holroyd, of Sydney, some time since, imported a ton
of it for a friend near Bathurst. It is of great importance that
chemical science should be applied to devise some means of fixing this
valuable dye on wool. As the tree is so common, the bark could be had
in any quantity at about £3 10s. a ton; and our tweed manufacturers
are in great want of a black dye for their check and other cloths.

The principal heavy woods used for dyeing are fustic, logwood,
Nicaragua wood, barwood, camwood, red Sanders wood, Brazil wood, and
sappan wood. All the dyewoods are nearly £2 per ton higher than last
year.

Common Spanish fustic which in September, 1852, was only £3 10s. per
ton, now fetches £6 10s. in the Liverpool market; and there is a great
demand for all kinds of dyewoods. Tampico and Puerto Cabello fustic
are now worth £6 10s. to £7 the ton, Cuba ditto, £9 10s. to £10.

Sappan wood is £4 higher than last year; barwood has risen cent per
cent; logwoods are £2 per ton higher.

The following were the prices of the different dyewoods in the
Liverpool market, on the 1st September, 1853, per ton:--

                               £   s. d.       £   s. d.
  FUSTIC, common Spanish       5  10  0   to   6  10  0
    Tampico                    6  10  0        7   0  0
    Puerto Cabello             6  10  0        7  10  0
    Cuba                       8   0  0        9  10  0
  LOGWOOD, Jamaica             5   0  0        5   5  0
    St. Domingo                5   5  0        5  10  0
    Campeachy, direct          7  12  6        8   0  0
    Indirect and Tobasco       6  10  0        7   0  0
  NICARAGUA. WOOD.
    Rio de la Hache, solid     9   0  0       11  10  0
     "          "    small     6   0  0        6  10  0
    Lima                      12   0  0       14  10  0
  BARWOOD, Angola         }
                 Gaboon   }    7   0  0         -----
  CAMWOOD                     25   0  0       30  10  0
  RED SANDERS WOOD             5  15  0        6  10  0
  SAPPAN WOOD                 10   0  0       15   0  0

RED SANDERS WOOD (_Pterocarpus santalinus_), which is hard and of a
bright garnet red color, is employed to dye a lasting reddish brown on
wool. It only yields its color to ether or alcohol. The tree, which is
a lofty one, is common about Madras and other parts of India; it is
also indigenous to Ceylon, Timor, and other Eastern islands. The
exports of this wood from Madras in one year have been nearly 2,000
tons.

The imports of red Sanders wood from Calcutta and Bombay chiefly into
London are to the extent of 700 or 800 tons a year, worth £6 to £9 per
ton.

Of FUSTIC we import from 1,500 to 2,000 tons annually. We derive our
supplies from Brazil, Tampico, Puerto Cabello, Cuba, and Jamaica. The
best is obtained from Cuba; for while the common white fustic from
Jamaica and the Spanish Main fetches only £5 10s. to £6 10s. the ton,
that of Cuba realizes from £8 to £9 10s. the ton.

SAPPAN WOOD (_Cæsalpinia Sappan_) is an article of considerable
commerce in the East. It is the bukkum wood of Scinde, and is procured
in Mergui, Bengal, the Tenasserim Provinces, Malabar and Ceylon. In
1842 as much 78,000 cwts. were shipped from Ceylon, but the export
from thence has decreased. This island, however, ships dyewoods
annually to the amount of £2,000. A large quantity is exported from
Siam and the Philippine Islands; as much as 200,000 piculs annually
from the former, and 23,000 piculs from Manila. 3,524 piculs were
shipped from Singapore in 1851, and 4,074 piculs in 1852. The picul is
about one cwt. and a quarter. Sappan wood yields a yellowish color,
like that of Brazil wood (_C. brasiliensis_) but it does not afford of
dye matter so much in quantity or so good in quality.

It forms a large export from Ceylon: the shipments from thence were,
in 1842, 77,694 cwt.; in 1843, 1,692; in 1844, 2,592; in 1845, 2,854.
I have no detailed returns at hand, but in 1837, 23,695 piculs of
sappan wood, and 2,266 piculs of roots of ditto were shipped, and in
the first six months of 1843, 22,326 piculs were exported from Manila;
a large portion of this comes to Europe, but some goes to China, the
United States, Singapore, &c. 15,500 piculs were shipped from Manila
in 1844, 5,250 ditto in 1845; and 1,210 tons in 1850. About 3,000
piculs of sappan wood and the same quantity of other dye-stuffs are
annually imported into Shanghae. The price of straight sappan wood at
Shanghae in July, last year, was thirty dollars per picul.

In Calcutta, in June last year, 4,000 piculs of the root of Manila
sappan wood sold freely at about 7s. 6d. per factory maund, Siam ditto
6s.

75 tons were imported into Liverpool in 1849; and 120 tons in 1850,
from Calcutta. The imports of sappan wood into the United Kingdom, in
1850, amounted to 3,670 tons, worth £8 to £12 the ton, and this
continued the price in January 1853.

Camwood, red sanders wood, barwood, and other dye woods, are found in
great quantities in many parts of Africa. The dyes of Africa are found
to resist both acids and light, properties which no other dyes seem to
possess in the same degree. About thirty miles east of Bassia Cove, in
the republic of Liberia, is the commencement of a region of unknown
extent, where scarcely any tree is seen except the camwood. This
boundless forest of wealth, as yet untouched, is easily accessible
from that settlement; roads can be opened to it with little expense,
and the neighbouring kings would probably give their co-operation to a
measure so vastly beneficial to themselves. It is impossible to
ascertain the exact amount of export of these commodities to Europe
and the United States, but it is very great, and employs a large
amount of vessels. One Liverpool house imported 600 tons in a single
year, worth £9,000.

In 1841 upwards of 3,000 tons of dye woods were imported into
Liverpool from the western coast of Africa.

CAMWOOD (_Baphia nitida_) is used as a mordant and for producing the
bright red color seen in English bandana handkerchiefs. The imports
from Sierra Leone to Liverpool in 1849 were 216 tons, worth £20 to £25
per ton.

Gaboon barwood is another variety of this dyewood which is imported
from the west coast of Africa, in straight flat pieces, from three to,
five feet in length; the average annual import being about 2,000 tons,
of the value of £4 a ton.

The imports of barwood into Liverpool were in--

           Tons.
  1835     2,000
  1836     1,000
  1837     1,150
  1838       650
  1839       350
  1841     2,012
  1850     1,710


                          Dyewoods imported in 1850.   Re-exported.
  Logwood                           32,930                4,332
  Fustic                             9,808                1,771
  Nicaragua                          7,909                  112
  Barwood                            1,896                1,229
  Sappan                             3,670                  --
  Green Ebony, and }
  Cocuswood        }                 1,457                  --
  Red Sanders                          656                  --
  Camwood                              416                  --
  Brazil and Brazillito                309                  --

                                    59,051                7,444

Thus we perceive the annual consumption of heavy dyewoods in this
country, in dyeing cotton, linen, woollen and silk goods, &c., exceeds
in weight 51,000 tons.

ARNOTTO.--The plants of this family are chiefly natives of the warmest
parts of South America, the East and West Indies, and Africa. In
America the seeds are called achote or roucou. From the port of
Barcelona, in Venezuela, about 2,000 quintals are annually exported.
The species grown for its dye is the _Bixa orellana_. It is used to
impart a bright orange color to silk goods, and to afford a deeper
shade to simple yellows. The dry hard paste is also found to be the
best of all ingredients for giving a golden tint to cheese or butter.
A convenient liquid preparation is now sold to dairymen. The Spanish
Americans mix it with their chocolate, to which it gives a beautiful
rich hue.

It is of two sorts, viz.:--

1. Flag or cake arnotto, which is by far the most important article in
a commercial point of view, is furnished almost wholly by Cayenne. It
is imported in square cakes, weighing two or three pounds each,
wrapped in banana leaves, packed in casks.

2. Roll arnotto is principally brought from Brazil. The rolls are
small, not exceeding two or three ounces in weight. It is hard, dry,
and compact, brownish on the outside, and of a beautiful red color
within.

The dye is usually prepared by macerating the pods in boiling water
for a week or longer. When they begin to ferment, the seeds ought to
be strongly stirred and bruised with wooden pestles to promote the
separation of the red skins. This process is repeated several times,
till the seeds are left white. The liquor passed through close cane
sieves, pretty thick, of a deep red color, and a very bad smell, is
received into coppers. In boiling, it throws up its coloring matter to
the surface in the form of scum, which is taken off, saved in large
pans, and afterwards boiled down to a due consistence, and then made
up, when soft, into balls or cakes of two or three pounds weight.

The following description of the manufacture is from Dr. Ure:--

"The pods of the tree being gathered, their seeds are taken out and
bruised; they are then transferred to a vat, which is called the
steeper, where they are mixed with as much water as covers them. Here
the substance is left for several weeks or even months; it is now
squeezed through sieves placed above the steeper, that the water
containing the coloring matter in suspension may return into the vat.
The residuum is preserved under the leaves of the pine-apple shrub,
till it becomes hot by fermentation. It is again subjected to the same
operation, and this treatment is continued till no more color remains.

"The substance thus extracted is passed through sieves, in order to
separate the remainder of the seeds, and the color is allowed to
subside. The precipitate is boiled in coppers till it be reduced to a
consistent paste; it is then suffered to cool, and dried in the shade.
Instead of this long and painful labor, which occasions diseases by
the putrefaction induced and which affords a spoiled product, Leblond
proposes simply to wash the seeds of arnotto till they be entirely
deprived of their color, which lies wholly on their surface; to
precipitate the color by means of vinegar or lemon juice, and to boil
it up in the ordinary manner, or to drain it in bags as is practised
with indigo.

"The experiments which Vauquelin made on the seeds of arnotto imported
by Leblond, confirmed the efficacy of the process which he proposed;
and the dyers ascertained that the arnotto obtained in this manner was
worth at least four times more than that of commerce; that, moreover,
it was more easily employed; that it required less solvents; that it
gave less trouble in the copper, and furnished a purer
color."--("Dict. of Arts.")

Our imports of arnotto for home consumption are from 200,000 to
300,000 lbs. per annum. The plant is grown in Dacca and other parts of
India, and the eastern Archipelago. At the Hawaiian Islands,
Tongataboo, Rio Janeiro, Peru and Zanzibar, the arnotto is an
indigenous shrub which rises to the height of seven or eight feet,
producing oblong heavy pods, somewhat resembling those of a chesnut.
Within these there are generally thirty or forty irregularly-formed
seeds, which are enveloped in a pulp of a bright red color, and a
fragrant smell.

The imports of arnotto have been as follows:--

                          Retained for
             lbs.       home consumption.
  1834      252,981             --
  1835      163,421             --
  1839      303,489          224,794
  1840      408,469          330,490
  1847      270,000          296,821
  1849      162,400          145,824
  1850      301,504          231,280

The price of flag arnotto in the London market, in June 1853, was 1s.
per lb.

We imported from France, in 1850, 1,924 cwt. of roll or flag arnotto,
of the official value of £21,499; and in 1851, 1,253 cwt., worth
£13,968.

Wood dye exported from Ceylon--

            Value      Quantity
              £          cwts.
  1848      1,359          --
  1849      2,035          --
  1850      1,766        5,206
  1851        259          776
  1852        770        2,396

CHAY-ROOT.--There is a plant called chay, the _Oldenlandia umbellata_,
which is extensively cultivated as a dye plant in the East, especially
on the coasts of Coromandel, Nellore, Masulipatam, Malabar, and other
parts of India. The outer bark of the roots furnishes the coloring
matter for the durable red for which the chintzes of India are famous.
Chay-root forms a considerable article of export from Ceylon. The wild
plant there is considered preferable; the roots, which are shorter,
yielding one-fourth part more coloring matter, and the right to dig it
is farmed out. It grows spontaneously on light, dry, sandy ground on
the sea coast; the cultivated roots are slender, with a few lateral
fibres, and from one to two feet long. The dye is said to have been
tried in Europe, but not with very advantageous effect. Dr. Bancroft
suspects it may be injured by the long voyage, but he adds that it
cannot produce any effect which may not be more cheaply obtained from
madder.

This red dye, similar to Munjeet, is used to a great extent in the
southern parts of Hindostan by the native dyers.

It is not held in very good estimation in Europe but seems to deserve
a better reputation than it at present possesses. Attention was drawn
to it as a dye-stuff in 1798, by a special minute of the Board of
Trade recommending its importation; but Dr. Bancroft, who made some
experiments with a sample of damaged chay-root, considered it inferior
to madder and hence discouraged its further importation.

The bark and root of various species of Morinda (_M. citrifolia_ and
_tinctoria_) are used in different parts of the East Indies, and
considered a very valuable red dye. The colors dyed with it are for
the most part exceedingly brilliant, and the coloring matter is far
more permanent than many other red colors are, with improved
management it would probably rival that of madder, and is, therefore,
worthy more attention from dyers.

MANGROVE BARK (_Rhizophora mangle_), is used to dye a chocolate color
in the East and West Indies. This was one of the colors introduced by
Dr. Bancroft, and for the exclusive use of which he obtained an Act of
Parliament. It is procured in plenty at Arracan, Malabar, and
Singapore in the East.

SHUMAC or SUMACH, sometimes called young fustic, is the powder of the
leaves, peduncles, and young branches of a small deciduous plant
(_Rhus coriaria_), native of the South of Europe, but which is also
grown in Syria and Palestine, for its powerful astringent properties,
which renders it valuable for tanning light-colored leather, and it
imparts a beautiful bright yellow dye to cottons, which is rendered
permanent by proper mordants. It is principally imported from the
Ionian Islands and the Morea. The species grown for the purpose in
Spain, Portugal, and Italy is _R. Cotinus_, a shrub with pale purple
flowers, whereas _R. coriaria_ has greenish yellow blossoms. They may
be propagated by cuttings of the roots and layers. _R. typhina_, and
_R. glabia_, with their varieties, are North American species, which
are also used for tanning purposes. In Montpellier and the South of
France the twigs and leaves are known under the name of _redoul_ or
_roudo_. They are gathered every year, and the shoots are chipped or
reduced to powder by a mill.

The imports into the United Kingdom were in 1846,10,256 tons; in 1847,
11,975 tons; in 1848, 9,617 tons; in 1849, 12,590 tons; in 1850,
12,929 tons, and in 1852, 9,758; which were all retained for
consumption. In 1841, we received about 9,000 tons from the port of
Leghorn. There were exported from Sicily in 1842, 123,305 tons, valued
at £68,894. It is imported in packages of about a cwt., wrapped in
cloth. America takes a large quantity of sumach. The imports into the
port of Boston alone, were 19,070 bags in 1847; 34,524 in 1848; and
30,050 in 1849.

The prices in Liverpool, duty paid, in the close of this year, are per
cwt.:--

                        s.  d.      s.  d.
  Sicily, Messina       10  0   to  10  6
    "     Palermo       12  0    "  13  0
    "     Trieste        7  0    "   7  6
    "     Verona         5  6    "   6  6
    "     Tyrolese       8  0    "   9  0

SAFFLOWER.--The dried flowers of _Carthamus tinctorius_ yield a pink
dye, which is used for silks and cottons, and the manufacture of
rouge; the color, however, is very fugitive. It is an annual plant,
cultivated in China, India, Egypt, America, Spain, and some of the
warmer parts of Europe; and is indigenous to the whole of the Indian
Archipelago. A large quantity is grown in and exported from Bali. The
Chinese safflower is considered the best, and that from Bombay is
least esteemed. The annual quantity exported from the district of
Dacca averages about 150 tons. The shipments from Calcutta exceed 300
tons to various quarters. Our imports are on the decline, and are now
only about 1,200 cwt. per annum. Safflower was shown in the Great
Exhibition from Celebes, Assam, the vicinity of Calcutta, Dacca, the
states of Rajpootana, and other places.

There are two species: _C. tinctorius_, which has small leaves and an
orange flower; and _C. oxyacantha_, with larger leaves and a yellow
flower, a native of Caucasus. The former is cultivated in Egypt, the
Levant, &c., where it forms a considerable article of commerce. 6,633
cwts. of safflower were imported into the United Kingdom in 1835, of
which about one-half was retained for home consumption. Of 5,352 cwts.
imported in 1840, nearly the whole came from our possessions in the
East. In 1847, about 405 tons were imported; in 1848, 506 tons; in
1849, 407 tons; in 1850, 522 tons. The price of safflower varies from
£1 to £8 per cwt., according to quality. That from Bombay is least
esteemed, fetching only 20s. to 30s.

The annual quantity of safflower, according to Dr. Taylor, exported
from the district of Dacca for eight years ending with 1839, amounted
to 4,000 maunds, or about 149 tons. The exports through the Calcutta
Custom House are occasionally large: in 1824-25 there were about 316
tons; 8,500 Indian maunds were shipped from Calcutta in each of the
years 1841 and 1842.

The prices in the Liverpool market, in January 1853, were for Bengal,
good and fine, £6 to £7 10s. per cwt.; middling, £4 to £4 10s.;
inferior and ordinary, £2 10s. to £3.

GAMBOGE is extensively used as a pigment, from its bright yellow
color. There are two kinds known in commerce, the Ceylon and the Siam.
The former is procured from the _Hebradendron Cambogoides_, Graham; a
tree which grows wild on the Malabar and Ceylon coasts, and affords
the coarsest kind. The pipe gamboge of Siam is said to be obtained
from the bruised leaves and young branches of _Stalagmites
cambogoides_. The resinous sap is received into calabashes, and
allowed to thicken, after which it is formed into rolls. Several other
plants, as the _Mangostana Gambogia_, Gaertner, and the _Hypericum
bacciferum_ and _Cayanense_, yield similar yellow viscid exudation,
hardly distinguishable from gamboge and used for the same purpose by
painters. The _Garcinia elliptica_, Wallich, of Tavoy and Moulmein,
affords gamboge, and approaches very closely in its characters to
Graham's _Hebradendron_. In like manner the Mysore tree bears an
exceedingly close resemblance to that species. It is common in the
forests of Wynaad in the western part of Mysore, and has been named by
Dr. Christison _Hebradendron pictorium_. Another gamboge tree has
recently been found inhabiting the western Burmese territories. Both
these seem to furnish an equally fine pigment. As it can be obtained
in unlimited quantity, it might be introduced into European trade, if
the natives learn how to collect it in a state of purity, and make it
up in homogenous masses in imitation of pipe gamboge, the finest Siam
variety. It seems to possess more coloring matter, more resin and less
gum than the ordinary gamboge of commerce. Gamboge owes its color to
the fatty acid. The resin must be regarded as the chief constituent,
and is most abundant in that imported from Ceylon, which contains
about 76 per cent., and is therefore best adapted for painting.
Gamboge also has its medicinal uses.

Various species of _Lecanora_, particularly _L. tartarea_, known as
cudbear, are used in dyeing woollen yarn. The _Rocella tinctoria_ and
_fusiformis_ furnish the orchil, or orchilla weed of commerce, which
is sometimes sold as a moist pulp, but usually in the form of dry
cakes, known under the name of _litmus_; it produces a fine purple
color. Our imports, which have amounted to 6,000 or 7,000 cwts.
annually, are derived chiefly from the Canary, Azores, and Cape Verd
Islands. Rock orchilla was shown at the Exhibition, from the Berlingen
Isles, from Angola, Madeira and the Cape de Verds. Orchilla weed is
very plentiful about the shores of the islands of New Zealand, some
being sent from thence to the Exhibition; but from a want of knowledge
as to the time at which it should be gathered, and the mode of
preparing it for the market, it has not yet become a saleable
commodity there. The rich varieties of lichens on the rocks and plains
of Australia have not been tested, as they ought to be, with Helot's
lichen test. Various lichens, and _Rocella tinctoria_, from Tenasserim
and other parts of India, have been introduced by the East India
Company. In the Admiralty instructions given to Capt. Sir James C.
Ross, on his Antarctic voyage, a few years ago, his attention was
specially called to the search and enquiry for substitutes for the
_Rocella_, which is now becoming scarce. A prize medal was awarded, in
1851, to an exhibitor from the Elbe for specimens of the weed, and an
extract of red and violet orchil. Specimens of varieties of the
lichens used in the manufacture of cudbear, orchil and litmus, and of
the substance obtained, were also shown in the British department,
which were awarded prize medals.

The beauty of the dyes given by common materials, in the Highlands of
Scotland, to some of the cloths which were exhibited, should lead our
botanists and chemists to examine, more closely than they have
hitherto done, the dye-stuffs that might be extracted from British
plants. Woad (_Isatis tinctoria_) and the dyers' yellow woad (_Reseda
lutea_), are both well known. A piece of tweed, spun and woven in
Ross-shire, was dyed brown and black, by such cheap and common dyes as
moss and alder bark, and the colors were unexceptionable.

Sutherlandshire tweed and stockings, possessing a rich brown color,
were produced with no more valuable dye than soot; in another piece,
beautifully dyed, the yellow was obtained from stoney rag, brown from
the crops of young heather, and purple from the same, but subjecting
the yarn to a greater action of the dye than was necessary to produce
brown. There is very little doubt but that beautiful and permanent
dyes, from brown to a very rich purple, might be cheaply procured by
scientific preparations of the common heather (_Genista tinctoria_).
The inhabitants of Skye exhibited cloth with a peculiarly rich dye,
obtained from the "crobal" moss. In the Spanish department, specimens
of vegetable dyes from many cultivated and wild plants were furnished
by the Agricultural Board of Saragossa, and of several of these it
would be important to obtain descriptions and particulars.

Gums are of essential importance to the dyer, and the imports of
these, therefore, are large, averaging about 8,000 tons.


INDIGO.

The plants which afford this dye grow chiefly in the East and West
Indies, in the middle regions of America, in Africa and Europe. They
are all species of the genera _Indigofera_, _Isatis_ and _Nerium_.
_Indigofera tinctoria_ or _coerulea_, furnishes the chief indigo of
commerce, and affords in Bengal, Malabar, Madagascar, the Isle of
France, and St. Domingo, an article of middling quality, but not in
large quantity. The _Indigofera disperma_, a plant cultivated in the
East Indies and America, grows higher than the preceding, is woody,
and furnishes a superior dye-stuff. The Guatamela indigo comes from
this species.

_Indigofera Anil_ grows in the same countries, and also in the West
Indies. The _Indigofera Argentea_, which flourishes in Africa, yields
little indigo, but it is of an excellent quality. _I.
pseudotinctoria_, cultivated in the East Indies, furnishes the best of
all. _I. glauca_ is the Egyptian and Arabian species. There are also
the _cinerea_, _erecta_ (a native of Guinea), _hirsuta_, _glabra_,
with red flowers, species common to the East, and several others.

The _Wrightia tinctoria_, of the East Indies, an evergreen, with white
blossoms, affords some indigo, as does the _Isatis tinctoria_, or,
Woad, in Europe, and the _Polygonum tinctorium_, with red flowers, a
native of China. _Baptisia tinctoria_ furnishes a blue dye, and is the
wild indigo of the United States.

SOURCES OF SUPPLY.--Indigo is at present grown for commercial purposes
in Bengal, and the other provinces of that Presidency, from the 20th
to the 30th deg. of north latitude; in the Province of Tinnevelly; in
the Madras Presidency; in Java, in the largest of the Philippine
islands, in Guatemala, Caraccas, Central America and Brazil. Bengal
is, however, the chief mart for indigo, and the quantity produced in
other places is comparatively inconsiderable. It is also still
cultivated in some of the West India islands, especially St. Domingo,
but not in large quantities. Indigo grows wild in several parts of
Palestine, but attention seems not to have been given to its
cultivation or collection. On most parts of the eastern and western
coasts of Africa, it is indigenous; at Sierra Leone, Natal, and other
places it is found abundant.

In our settlements of Honduras, Demerara, and various portions of the
American continent, it would amply reward the labor of the cultivator;
several inferior sorts of Indigofera being found there indigenous, and
only requiring care and culture to improve them.

The quality of indigo depends upon the species of the plant, its
ripeness, the soil and climate of its growth, and the mode of
manufacture. The East India, and Brazilian indigo arrives here packed
in chests, the Guatemala in ox-hides, called serons.

The indigo imported from the western hemisphere was for some time
considered superior in quality to that of the East. Its cultivation,
however, has been neglected, and the Bengal indigo is preferred at
present to any imported from South America, where it is now only
cultivated by the Brazilians and Colombians. If proper attention were
paid to the cultivation of the plant, and to the preparation of the
dye, it is very likely part of that important trade would be brought
back. It thrives best in a moist climate, and the interior of Guiana,
chiefly newly-cleared land, would be well adapted for it.

The late Mr. Dunlop ("Travels in Central America") gives an
interesting description, which, at the risk of repetition in some
points, I shall give entire.

"Several vessels generally arrive at the Union from South America at
the time of the periodical fairs, where nearly all the indigo (the
only produce of any importance), is disposed of; formerly it reached
10,000 bales, but at present it does not at most exceed 3,000 bales of
150 lbs. each.

The indigo well known in Europe by the name of Guatemala indigo, was
never cultivated in that province (in the same manner as not a grain
of the Honduras cochineal is grown there), being entirely grown in the
state of San Salvador, in the vicinity of San Miguel, San Vicenti, and
the City of Salvador, with the exception of a small quantity of very
superior quality grown in the state of Nicaragua, and a few bales in
Costa Rica, which is all consumed in the State. Under the government
of Spain, the produce of the state of San Salvador alone had reached
10,000 bales, and that of Nicaragua 2,000; the produce of San Salvador
in 1820, two years before its independence, being 8,323 bales. But
since 1822 the annual produce had gradually declined, and in 1846 it
did not exceed 1,000 to 1,200 bales, nearly all the indigo estates
being abandoned, partly, no doubt, from the great fall in the price of
the article, but more on account of the impossibility of getting
laborers to work steadily.

The plant cultivated in Central America for the manufacture of indigo,
is the triennial plant, supposed to be a native of America; but there
is also an indigenous perennial plant, abounding in many parts of
Central America, which produces indigo of a very superior quality, but
gives less than half the weight which is produced by the cultivated
species. The ground for sowing the indigo seed is prepared in
April,--a piece of good forest land near one of the towns being
selected, a part is cut to make a rude fence, and the remainder burnt,
which is easily accomplished, as everything is very dry at that
season; and the ground is afterwards scratched with two sticks,
fastened crosswise, to resemble somewhat the shape of a plough, and
the seed scattered over it by hand. The rainy season always commences
early in May, and the indigo is ready for cutting about the middle of
July, taking about two and a half months to come to perfection. The
growing crop somewhat resembles lucerne, and is in the best state for
making indigo, when it becomes covered with a sort of greenish farina.

The crop of the first year is small, and sometimes not worth
manufacturing; that of the second year is the best, and the third is
also very good, if it has been carefully weeded; but many indigo
fields have lasted more than ten years without being re-sown, as the
seed which falls naturally springs up again, and where the land is
good yields nearly as large a crop as a new sown field. When the plant
is ready for manufacturing, a number of men are collected, each of
whom is either provided with, or brings his own mule or horse, if he
has one. Two men always go together, cut the plant, then about the
height of full-grown red clover, and take it to the vats, which are
large tanks made of brick and lime, holding at least 1,000 gallons,
and some as much as 10,000. Into these the plant is thrown till they
are nearly full, when weights are put above it to prevent its
floating; and the vats filled with water till it covers the mass of
the indigo plant. After remaining from twelve to twenty-four hours,
according to the state of the plant, weather, and other circumstances
(the time required being determined by the color which the water
assumes), the herb is taken out, and the water beaten with paddles in
the very small vats, and by a wheel suspended above and turned by men
or horses in the larger ones, till it changes from a green color,
which it has acquired ere the removal of the herb, to a fine blue,
when it is allowed to stand for some hours, till the coloring matter
has settled to the bottom of the tank, a process which is generally
hastened by throwing in an infusion of certain herbs to facilitate its
settlement, or as the natives term it curdle (_cuajar_) the colored
water. As soon as all the color has settled, the water is drawn off,
and the blue, which is of the consistency of thick mud, is taken out
of the vat and spread upon cotton, or coarse woollen cloth, and dried
in the sun. The color in a great measure depends upon removing the
herb exactly at the proper time, and upon properly beating the water,
neither too long, or too short. Unless these processes are properly
performed, the indigo will not be of first-rate quality; but some
estates will never produce the best indigo, whatever care may be
bestowed on the manufacture.

A _mansana_, of 100 yards square, which is nearly two British statute
acres, produces generally about 100 to 120 lbs. of indigo, the
carriage and cutting of the herb costing about twenty dollars, and the
cleaning of the field and all other expenses connected with it,
including the manufacture of the indigo, about as much more.

The indigo of Central America is not put into moulds when drying, as
that of Bengal, but is allowed to remain in the rough shape in which
it dries, and without further preparation is ready for baling and
exportation.

The bales are generally made up in 150 lbs. each, and the quality is
classed by numbers, from 1 to 9; Nos. 1 to 3 being of the quality
called _cobres_ in Europe; Nos. 4 to 6 of that called _cortes_, and
Nos. 7 to 9 of that called _flores_; Nos. 1 to 6 do not at present pay
the expenses of manufacture, and are never intentionally made. No
doubt, with a little more skill in the manufacture, the whole might,
as in Bengal, be made of the quality called _flores_; but such
improvements cannot be expected till a new race of people inhabit
Central America. At present about one-half of the indigo produced is
under No. 7, and as the cultivation is said not to pay at the present
prices--and, indeed, hardly can be supposed to compete with Bengal, a
country where labor is so much cheaper, and capital abundant--it is
probable, that the cultivation will shortly be entirely abandoned,
unless the price should again rise in Europe." In 1846, 21,933 lbs. of
indigo were exported from Angostura.

The following particulars were contributed to my "Colonial Magazine,"
by the late Dr. Edward Binns, of Jamaica:--

    The species generally cultivated is the _I. tinctoria_, which
    requires a rich moist soil and warm weather. The seed, which is at
    first sight not unlike coarse gunpowder, is sown three or four
    inches deep, in straight lines, twelve or fifteen inches apart. The
    shoots appear above ground in about a week; at the end of two months
    the plant flowers, when it is fit for cutting, which is done with a
    pruning knife. It must be mentioned that great care is requisite in
    weeding the indigo field when plants first shoot through the earth.
    In the State of St. Salvador, large vats made of mahogany, or other
    hard wood, are constructed for the reception of the plant, where it
    is allowed to undergo maceration and fermentation. In a short time
    the water becomes greenish, and emits a strong pungent smell, while
    carbonic acid gas is freely evolved. In about twenty-four hours it
    is run off into large flat vessels, and stirred about until a blue
    scum appears, when additional water is added, and the blue flakes
    sink to the bottom. The supernatant water has now acquired a
    yellowish tinge, when it is run off carefully, and the blue deposit
    or sediment put into bags to drain. It is subsequently dried in the
    shade, or sometimes in the sun, then placed in cotton bags and
    carried to the indigo fair, or forwarded to the city of Guatemala.

    The East Indian mode of manufacturing the indigo differs materially,
    and many suppose it preferable to the Salvador. It consists in
    _steaming_ the fermented mass in large pipes enclosed in huge
    boilers. I am inclined to believe this to be the most economical, if
    not the best way of manufacturing indigo. From Guatemala alone, it
    is computed that from 6,000 to 8,000 serons of indigo are exported
    annually; while San Miguel, Chalatenaugo, Tejulta, Secatecolnea, St.
    Vincent, Sensuntepepe, not only, it is said, produce a larger
    quantity, but the four last-mentioned places have the advantage as
    to quality. The _Belize Advertiser_ stated, some time since, that
    the value of this dye from one State in 1830 produced 2,000,000
    dollars, the minimum of an immense sum which has been most unjustly
    and unwisely wrested from the people of Jamaica, and the West India
    islands.

    Bridges ("Annals of Jamaica," p. 584, Append.), speaking of the vast
    returns of an indigo plantation, says, "The labour of a single negro
    would often bring to his owner £30 sterling per annum clear
    profit,--a sum which was at the time the laborer's highest price. It
    continued the _staple_ of Jamaica till an intolerable tax oppressed
    it, while its price was lowered by the competition of other
    colonies.

    Its cultivation immediately declined throughout them all, but
    nowhere so rapidly as here. The financial error was quickly
    discovered,--a remedy was attempted by a bounty; but it came too
    late, the plantations were thrown up, and the planters, attracted by
    the temporary gain, abused the tardy boon, by introducing, as of
    their own growth, large quantities of foreign indigo." As Bridges
    may be said in this passage to be merely a commentator on Edwards,
    who has entered more largely upon the subject, I shall condense from
    the latter, statements connected with the manufacture and decay of
    this branch of industry, once the staple of Jamaica.

    Edwards ("West Indies," vol. ii., p. 275, 2nd edition) reckons three
    kinds of indigo--the wild, Guatemala, and French. The first is the
    hardest, and the dye extracted from it of the best quality as
    regards color and grain; but one or other of the two species is
    commonly preferred by the planter, as yielding a greater return. Of
    these the French surpasses the Guatemala in quantity, but yields to
    it in fineness of grain and beauty of color. The indigo thrives
    almost on any land, though the richest soils produce the most
    luxuriant plants, and the longest dry weather will not kill it. The
    cultivation and manufacture our author thus describes:--"The land
    being prepared, trenches, two or three inches in depth, are made by
    the hoe. These are ten or twelve inches asunder. The seeds are then
    strewed in the trenches by the hand, and slightly covered with
    mould. When the plants shoot, they are carefully weeded, and kept
    constantly clean, until they rise high enough to cover the ground. A
    bushel of seed is sufficient for four or five acres. The best season
    for planting is March; but if the land be good, it may be sown at
    any time, and in three months the plants attain maturity. In
    seasonable situations, they have four cuttings in the year. The
    subsequent growths from the plants ripen in six or eight weeks; but
    the produce diminishes after the second cutting, so that the seeds
    should be sown every second year. A species of grub, or worm, which
    infests the plant on the second year is avoided by changing the
    soil; or, in other words, by a rotation of crops. The produce per
    acre of the first cutting is about 60 lbs. It is nearly as much in
    North America; but when the thermometer falls to sixty, the returns
    are very uncertain, that degree of heat being too low for the
    necessary vegetation, maceration, and fermentation. The yieldings
    for the subsequent cuttings somewhat diminish; but in Jamaica and
    St. Domingo, if the land is new, about 300 lbs. per acre of the
    second quality may be expected annually from all the cuttings
    together; and four negroes are sufficient to carry on the
    cultivation of five acres, besides doing other occasional work,
    sufficient to reimburse the expenses of their maintenance and
    clothing."

    The process for obtaining the dye, according to the same author, was
    conducted through the means of two cisterns, the one elevated above
    the other, in the manner of steps. The higher, which was also the
    longer, was named the _sleeper_--its dimensions sixteen feet square
    and two and a half in depth. The second, into which the fluid was
    discharged, was called the _battery_; it was about twelve feet
    square, and four and a half in depth. These cisterns were of stone;
    but strong timber answered remarkably well. There was also a
    lime-vat, six feet square and four feet deep, the plug of which was
    at least eight inches from the bottom. This was for the purpose of
    permitting the lime to subside, before the lime-water was withdrawn.
    The plants then being ripe, or fit for cutting, were cut with
    reaping-hooks, or sickles, a few inches from the ground--six was the
    minimum--and placed by strata in the _sleeper_, until it was about
    three parts full. They were then pressed with boards, either loaded
    with weights or wedged down, so as to prevent the plants from
    floating loosely; and as much water was admitted as they would
    imbibe, until it covered the mass four or five inches deep. In this
    state it was allowed to ferment until the water had extracted the
    pulp. To know when this had been thoroughly effected, required
    extreme attention and great practical knowledge; for if the fluid
    were drawn off too soon, much of the pulp was left behind; and if
    the fermentation continued too long, the tender tops of the plants
    were decomposed, and the whole crop lost. When the tincture or
    extract was received in the battery, it was agitated or churned
    until the dye began to granulate, or float in little flakes upon the
    surface. This was accomplished at one period in Jamaica by paddles,
    worked by manual labor, and, in the French islands, by buckets or
    cylinders, worked by long poles; but subsequently--that is, at the
    time Edwards wrote--convenient apparatus was constructed, the levers
    of which were worked by a cog-wheel, kept in motion by a horse or
    mule. When the fluid had been churned for fifteen or twenty minutes,
    a small quantity was examined in a cup or plate, and if it appeared
    curdled or coagulated, strongly impregnated lime-water was gradually
    added, not only with a view to promote separation, but to prevent
    decomposition. Browne remarks ("Civil and Nat. Hist. of Jamaica,"
    art. "Indigo"), the planters "must carefully distinguish the
    different stages of this part of the operation also, and attentively
    examine the appearance and color as the work advances,--for the
    grain passes gradually from a greenish to a fine purple, which is
    the proper color when the liquor is sufficiently worked,--too small
    a degree of agitation leaving the indigo green and coarse, while too
    vigorous an action brings it to be almost black." The liquor being
    then, as we shall suppose, properly worked, and granulation
    established, it was left undisturbed until the flakes settled at the
    bottom, when the liquor was drawn off, and the sediment (which is
    the indigo) placed in little bags to drain, after which it was
    carefully packed in small square boxes, and suffered to dry
    gradually in the shade.

    Such is the account, nearly word for word, which Edwards gives of
    the mode of manufacturing indigo. I shall now quote his remarks upon
    the outlay and gain upon the article _verbatim_.--"To what has been
    said above of the nature of the plant suiting itself to every soil,
    and producing four cuttings in the year, if we add the cheapness of
    the buildings, apparatus, and labor, and the great value of the
    commodity, there will seem but little cause for wonder at the
    splendid accounts which are transmitted down to us concerning the
    great opulence of the first indigo-planters. Allowing the produce of
    an acre to be 300 lbs., and the produce no more than 4s. per pound,
    the gross profit of only twenty acres will be £1,200, produced by
    the labor of only sixteen negroes, and on capital in land and
    buildings scarce deserving consideration." Yet, notwithstanding this
    statement, the author informs us afterwards that he knew, in the
    course of eighteen years' residence in the West Indies, upwards of
    twenty persons who tried to re-establish indigo manufactories, but
    failed. This appears strange, since it is plain that what has once
    been done can be done again, but especially in the manufacture of an
    article requiring a capital so very small in proportion to the
    profits as almost to tempt the most cautious and the most timid man
    to embark in it.

    I quote the following passage from the same author, for the purpose
    of showing the very loose manner in which statements are made on the
    authority of others, who are as incompetent to decide the merits of
    a question as the party himself chronicling their opinion. Speaking
    of the twenty unfortunate indigo-planters, our author thus
    writes:--"Many of them were men of foresight, knowledge, and
    property. That they failed is certain; but of _the causes of their_
    FAILURE _I confess I can give no satisfactory account._ I was told
    that disappointment trod close upon their heels at every stop. At
    one time the fermentation was too long continued, at another the
    liquor was drawn off too soon; now the pulp was not duly granulated,
    and now it was worked too much. To these inconveniences, for which
    practice would doubtless have found a remedy, were added others of a
    much greater magnitude--the mortality of the negroes, from the
    vapour of fermented liquor (an alarming circumstance, that, I am
    informed, both by the French and English planters, constantly
    attends the process), the failure of the seasons, and the ravages of
    the worm. These, or some of these evils, drove them at length to
    other pursuits, where industry might find a surer recompense."--(p.
    283.)

    The fallacy of much of this requires no comment, as it must strike
    even the most careless reader,--for if the so-called indigo-growers
    did not know the process of manufacturing the commodity, then it
    could not be surprising that they failed. Thus the cause of their
    failure required no comment, and no explanation. Were a ploughman
    taken from the field and placed at the helm of a ship, and the
    vessel in consequence wrecked, would any one be astonished but at
    the folly of those who placed him there? This was the case with the
    indigo-growers,--they attempted what they did not understand, and,
    consequently, lost their labor and their money. The mortality of the
    negroes employed, stated as another reason for abandoning the
    attempt, requires a somewhat more lengthy notice.

    I can briefly say, that I have learned that in the Central States of
    America, deaths among indigo-laborers are not more frequent than in
    other branches of tropical industry; and I never heard or have read
    that the _original_ growers complained of the mortality attending
    the progress. The truth is, that this statement is not founded on
    fact. There is nothing whatever in the manufacture of indigo, either
    in the cultivation or the granulation, or even the maceration and
    fermentation of the plant, which is directly or indirectly, _per
    se_, injurious to human life. I have certainly never seen the indigo
    plant macerated on a large scale; but I have myself steeped much of
    it in water, and allowed it even to rot, and found nothing in the
    mass differing in any marked degree from decomposed vegetable
    matter. It seems to me that this idea of the manufacture of indigo
    being especially inimical to human life, is as unfounded as the
    belief, even by Humboldt, up to a very recent period, that none of
    the Cerealia would grow in tropical climates. In conversing with an
    old gentleman in Jamaica, some twelve years since, who had tried the
    manufacture of indigo, and with every prospect of success, but
    abandoned it, as he confessed, for the cultivation of the sugar
    cane, since it was then more profitable, he suggested the solution,
    that as the manufacture was light work, probably aged and
    debilitated, in place of youthful and vigorous slaves, were too
    frequently employed in the process--hence the mortality. This may be
    correct to a certain extent; but I am also inclined to think that
    another cause of mortality might be found in the mode and manner in
    which the negro was fed and clothed, and not because aged persons
    were exclusively engaged in the manufacture. I believe I may state,
    without fear of contradiction, that the real cause of the decline
    and consequent abandonment of the indigo plant was the monstrous
    duty levied upon it by the English government. Indeed, this has been
    already stated in the extract from Bridges; while the cause of the
    failure of the attempt to renew it, over and above the reasons we
    have given, was the greater temptation to embark capital in sugar
    plantations,--the West Indies enjoying a monopoly in this article,
    while they had competitors in the Southern States of America in the
    other. I have, therefore, no hesitation in saying, that, with a
    trifling capital, under prudent management, indigo might be
    cultivated to a very great extent, and with considerable profit,
    even now, in Jamaica. But the adventurer is not to expect to count
    his gains, as the original growers did, by thousands; he must be
    content with hundreds, if not fifties; for at the present day every
    branch of industry is laden with difficulties, encumbered by
    taxation, and obstructed by competition. There are two objections,
    however, which I have not removed,--I allude to "the failure of the
    seasons and the ravages of the worm." Very little need be said to
    combat these. Seasons are mutable, and the same heaven that frowns
    this year on the labors of the husbandman, may smile the next; while
    a remedy for the "ravages of the worm" may be found in the mutation
    of the soil, the destruction of the grub, or the rotation of
    crops,--accessories to success which seem not to have entered into
    the vocabularies of the twenty pseudo indigo-growers, "many of them
    men of knowledge, foresight and property."

    The following passage from Bryan Edwards will corroborate much that
    I have endeavored to enforce. It furnishes not only a solution which
    has been hinted at before, of the enigma why indigo ceased to be
    cultivated in Jamaica, but also _an incentive_ to re-introduce the
    culture. He says (p. 444), "It is a remarkable and well-known
    circumstance, after the cultivation of indigo was suppressed by an
    exorbitant duty of near £20 the hundred-weight, Great Britain was
    compelled to pay her rivals and enemies £200,000 annually for this
    commodity, so essential to a great variety of her most important
    manufactures. At length, the duty being repealed, and a bounty some
    time after substituted in its place, the States of Georgia and South
    Carolina entered upon, and succeeding in the culture of this
    valuable plant, supplied at a far cheaper rate than the French and
    Spaniards (receiving too our manufactures in payment) not only the
    British consumption, but also enabled Great Britain to export a
    surplus at an advanced price to foreign markets."--It is therefore
    plain that the manufacture of indigo was lost to Jamaica, not from
    any difficulty in growing the plant, or from any loss of life
    attending the process of manufacturing it, but from the ruinously
    heavy duty of £20 the hundred-weight--and that now, when no duty
    exists, it might be again cultivated with great advantage.

The cultivation of indigo has been repeatedly attempted in Cuba, but
never with much success; although the shrub called the Xiquilite, from
which it is extracted, grows wild in several districts of the island,
but more especially towards the eastern extremity. The first
_anileria_, or manufactory of indigo, was established in 1795, under
the patronage of the _Ayuntamento_ of the Havana, who made an advance
of 3,500 dollars, without interest, to the party engaging in the
speculation, in order to encourage the enterprise; but the undertaking
proved unsuccessful, and the same fate has befallen every subsequent
attempt to introduce this branch of industry. In 1827, the whole
produce amounted only to 56 arrobas. In 1837 the imports of indigo
greatly exceeded the exports; the former having amounted to 121,350
lbs., and the latter to 82,890 lbs. In 1833, 5,184 lbs. reached the
United Kingdom from the Havana, and in 1843, 62,675 lbs.

In 1826 British Honduras exported 358,552 lbs.; in 1830, 2,650 serons;
in 1844, 1,247 serons; and in 1845, 1,052 serons.

The indigo shrub is one of the most common bushes in Trinidad, where
it grows wild on almost all the indifferent soils. In 1783, there were
several plantations and manufactories of indigo established in
Trinidad; these were subsequently abandoned, on account of a
supposition that they were unhealthy. Prior to 1783, the colonists had
a kind of simple process by which they extracted sufficient coloring
matter to serve domestic consumption. This process is at present
unknown, hence all the indigo used there is imported from Europe,
although the plant from which it can be made vegetates in every
direction.

In 1791 Hayti imported 930,016 lbs. of indigo, while in 1804 the
export had dwindled to 35,400 lbs.

Indigo, as I have already stated, was once a most important crop in
South Carolina, some attention has recently again been given to it by
an individual or two in Louisiana, and the enterprise is said to
promise success; enough might undoubtedly be raised in the United
States to supply the home market. Some indigo produced at Baton Rouge
was pronounced to have been equal to the best Caraccas, which sells at
two dollars per pound; and the gentleman who cultivated it remarks,
that one acre of ground there, well cultivated, will yield from 40 to
60 lbs.; that it requires only from July to October for cultivating
it; that there is not connected with it one-third of the expense or
time that is generally required for the cultivation of cotton.

I take the following from Smyth's "Tour in the United States."

"This plant is somewhat like the fern when grown, and when young is
hardly distinguishable from lucern grass, its leaves in general are
pinnated, and terminated by a single lobe; the flowers consist of five
leaves, and are of the papilonaceous kind, the uppermost petal being
longer and rounder than the rest, and lightly furrowed on the side,
the lower ones are short and end in a point; in the middle of the
flower is formed the style, which afterwards becomes a pod containing
the seeds.

"They cultivate three sorts of indigo in Carolina, which demand the
same variety of soils. First, the French or Hispaniola indigo, which
striking a long tap root will only flourish in a deep rich soil, and
therefore, though an excellent sort, is not so much cultivated in the
maritime parts of the State, which are generally sandy, but it is
produced in great perfection one hundred miles backwards; it is
neglected too on another account, for it hardly bears a winter so
sharp as that of Carolina. The second sort, which is the false
Guatemala, or true Bahamas, bears the winter better, is a more tall
and vigorous plant, is raised in greater quantities from the same
compass of ground, is content with the worst soil in the country, and
is therefore more cultivated than the first soil, though inferior in
the quality of its dye.

"The third sort is the wild indigo, which is indigenous here; this, as
it is a native of the country, answers the purposes of the planter
best of all, with regard to the hardiness of the plant, the easiness
of the culture, and the quantity of the produce. Of the quality there
is some dispute not yet settled amongst the planters themselves; nor
can they distinctly tell when they are to attribute the faults of
their indigo to the nature of the plant, to the seasons, which have
much influence upon it, or to some defect in the manufacture.

"The time of planting the indigo is generally after the first rains
succeeding the vernal equinox; the seed is sown in small straight
trenches, about eighteen or twenty inches asunder; when it is at its
height, it is generally eighteen inches tall. It is fit for cutting,
if all things answer well, in the beginning of July.

"Towards the end of August a second cutting is obtained, and if they
have a mild autumn, there is a third cutting at Michaelmas. The indigo
land must be weeded every day, the plants cleansed from worms, and the
plantation attended with the greatest care and diligence. About
twenty-five hands may manage a plantation of fifty acres, and complete
the manufacture of the drug, besides providing their own necessary
subsistence and that of the planter's family.

"Each acre yields, if the land be very good, 60 or 70 lbs. weight of
indigo, at a medium the produce is 50 lbs. This however, is reckoned
by many skilful planters but a very indifferent crop.

"When the plant is beginning to blossom it is fit for cutting, and
when cut great care ought to be taken to bring it to the steeper
without pressing or shaking it, as great part of the beauty of the
indigo depends upon the fine farina, which adheres to the leaves of
this plant. The apparatus for making indigo is inconsiderable and not
expensive, for besides a pump, the whole consists only of vats and
tubs of cypress wood, common and cheap in this country.

"The indigo, when cut, is first laid in a vat, about twelve or
fourteen feet long and four feet deep, to the height of about fourteen
inches, to macerate and digest; then this vessel, which is called the
_steeper_, is filled with water; the whole having laid from about
twelve to sixteen hours, according to the weather, begins to ferment,
swell, rise, and grow sensibly warm. At this time spars of wood are
run across, to mark the highest point of its ascent; when it falls
below this mark, they judge that the fermentation has attained its due
pitch, and begins to abate; this directs the manager to open a cock,
and let off the water into another vat, which is called the _beater_;
the gross matter that remains in the first vat is carried off to
manure the ground, for which purpose it is excellent, and new cuttings
are put in, as long as the harvest of the weed continues. When the
water, strongly impregnated with the particles of indigo, has run into
the second vat or beater, they attend with a sort of bottomless
buckets, with long handles, to work and agitate it, when it froths,
ferments, and rises above the rim of the vessel that contains it. To
allay this violent fermentation, oil is thrown in as the froth rises,
which instantly sinks it. When this beating has continued for twenty,
thirty, or thirty-five minutes, according to the state of the weather
(for in cool weather it requires the longest continued beating), a
small muddy grain begins to be formed; the salts and other particles
of the plant united, dissolved, and before mixed with the water, are
now re-united together, and begin to granulate. To discover these
particles the better, and to find when the liquor is sufficiently
beaten, they take up some of it from time to time on a plate, or in a
glass; when it appears in a hopeful condition, they let loose some
lime water from an adjacent vessel, gently stirring the whole, which
wonderfully facilitates the operation; the indigo granulates more
fully, the liquor assumes a purplish color, and the whole is troubled
and muddy; it is now suffered to settle; then the clearer part is
permitted to run off into another succession of vessels, from whence
the water is conveyed away as fast as it clears on the top, until
nothing remains but a thick mud, which is put into bags of coarse
linen. These are hung up and left for some time until the moisture is
entirely drained off.

"To finish the drying, this mud is turned out of the bags, and worked
upon boards of some porous timber, with a wooden spatula; it is
frequently exposed to the morning and evening sun, but for a short
time only; and then it is put into boxes or frames, which is called
the curing, exposed again to the sun in the same cautious manner,
until, with great labor and attention the operation is finished, and
the valuable drug fitted for the market. The greatest skill and care
is required in every part of the process, or there may be great danger
of ruining the whole; the water must not be suffered to remain too
short or too long a time, either in the steeper or beater; the beating
itself must be nicely managed, so as not to exceed or fall short; and
in the curing the exact medium between too much or too little drying
is not easily attained. Nothing but experience can make the overseers
skilful in these matters. There are two methods of trying the goodness
of indigo; by fire and by water. If it swims it is good, if it sinks
it is inferior, the heavier the worse; so if it wholly dissolves in
water it is good. Another way of proving it, is by the fire ordeal; if
it entirely burns away it is good, the adulterations remain
untouched."

Indigo to the extent of 220,000 lbs. per annum is grown in Egypt. The
leaves are there thrown into earthen vessels, which are buried in pits
and filled with water; heat is applied, and the liquid is boiled away
until the indigo becomes of a fit consistence, when it is pressed into
shape and dried. Many Armenians have been invited from the East Indies
to teach the fellahs the best mode of preparation, and, in
consequence, nine indigo works have been established belonging to the
government.

The indigo plant is found scattered like a weed abundantly over the
face of the country in the district of Natal, Eastern Africa. It is
said that there are no less than ten varieties of the plant commonly
to be met with there. Mr. Blaine submitted, in 1848, to the Manchester
Chamber of Commerce, a small specimen of this dye-stuff, which had
been extracted by a rude process from a native plant, which was
pronounced by good authority to be of superior quality, and worth 3s.
4d. per pound. Mr. W. Wilson, a settler at Natal, in a letter to the
editor of the _Natal Witness_, thus speaks of the culture:--

    "My attention was first forcibly drawn to the cultivation of indigo
    by some seed imported by Mr. Kinlock, from India. This seed, on
    trial, I found to grow luxuriantly; and after a few experiments I
    succeeded in manufacturing the dye. The success which thus attended
    my first attempts has encouraged me to try indigo planting on a more
    extensive scale. For this purpose I am allowing all the plants of
    this season to run to seed, and intend to plant equal quantities of
    Bengal and native indigo.

    While my attention was engaged in these preliminary experiments, I
    observed that the country abounded in a variety of species of
    indigo, and by a series of experiments found it rich and abundant,
    and have since learnt that it is known and in use among the natives,
    and called by them Umpekumbeto.

    This of course induced further inquiry, and on consulting different
    works I find that the Cape of Good Hope possesses more species of
    indigo than the whole world besides. Now I take it for granted that
    if Providence has placed these materials within our reach, it was
    evidently intended that we should, by the application of industry,
    appropriate them to our use. It becomes, then, a matter of necessity
    that indigo must thrive, this being its native soil and climate; and
    the experiments I have successfully made, go to support me in the
    opinion that the cultivation of indigo will bring an ample reward.
    Indeed it seems contrary to the laws of nature that it should be
    otherwise.

    I have obtained from the 140th part of an acre the proportion of 300
    lbs. of indigo per acre. That the plant will cross successfully, I
    have also ascertained."

_Cultivation in India._--During the nine years which preceded the
opening of the trade with India in 1814, the annual average produce of
indigo in Bengal, for exportation, was nearly 5,600,000 lbs. But since
the ports were opened, the indigo produced for exportation has
increased fully a third; the exports during the sixteen years ending
with 1829-30, being above 7,400,000 lbs. a year.

The consumption in the United Kingdom has averaged, during the last
ten years, about 2,500,000 lbs. a year.

In 1839-40 the export of indigo from Madras amounted to 1,333,808
lbs. A small quantity is also exported from the French settlement of
Pondicherry. In 1837 the export from Manila amounted to about 250,000
lbs. The export from Batavia in 1841 amounted to 913,693 lbs., and the
production in 1843 was double that amount. The annual exports of
indigo, from all parts of Asia and the Indian Archipelago, were taken
by M'Culloch, in 1840, to be 12,440,000 lbs. The imports are about
20,000 chests of Bengal, and 8,000 from Madras annually, of which
9,000 or 10,000 are used for home consumption, and the rest
re-exported.

The total crop of indigo in the Bengal Presidency has ranged, for the
last twenty years, at from 100,000 to 172,000 factory maunds; the
highest crop was in 1845. The factory maund of indigo in India is
about 78 lbs.

In the delta of the Ganges, where the best and largest quantity of
indigo is produced, the plant lasts only for a single season, being
destroyed by the periodical inundation; but in the dry central and
western provinces, one or two _ratoon_ crops are obtained.

The culture of indigo is very precarious, not only in so far as
respects the growth of the plant from year to year, but also as
regards the quantity and quality of the drug which the same amount of
plant will afford in the same season.

The fixed capital required, as I have already shown, in the
manufacture of indigo, consists simply of a few vats of common masonry
for steeping the plant, and precipitating the coloring matter; a
boiling and drying house, and a dwelling for the planter. Thus a
factory of ten pair of vats, capable of producing, at an average,
12,500 lbs. of indigo, worth on the spot £2,500, will not cost above
£1,500 sterling. The buildings and machinery necessary to produce an
equal value in sugar and rum, would probably cost about £4,000.

The indigo of Bengal is divided into two classes, called, in
commercial language, Bengal and Oude; the first being the produce of
the southern provinces of Bengal and Bahar, and the last that of the
northern provinces, and of Benares. The first class is in point of
quality much superior to the other. The inferiority of the Oude indigo
is thought to be more the result of soil and climate, than of any
difference in the skill with which the manufacture is conducted. The
indigo of Madras, which is superior to that of Manila, is about equal
to ordinary Bengal indigo. The produce of Java is superior to these.

Large quantities of indigo, of a very fine quality, are grown in
Scinde. I have to acknowledge the receipt, from the Indian Government,
of an interesting collection of documents on the culture and
manufacture of indigo in Upper Scinde. The papers are chiefly from the
pen of Mr. Wood, Deputy Collector of Sukkur, though there are several
others, perhaps of much value, from various other of the revenue
officers of Scinde.

Mr. Wood is of opinion that Scinde is much better suited than Bengal
for the production of this dye-stuff--the alluvial soil on the banks
of the Indus is equal in richness to that on those of the Ganges, and
the climate seems equally well suited for the growth of the plant. But
in two years out of three, the crops of the Bengal planter are injured
by excessive inundations, while the work of gathering and manipulation
is necessarily performed, during the rainy season, under the greatest
imaginable disadvantages. In Scinde, on the other hand, the inundation
of the river is produced almost solely from the melting of the snows
in the Himalayas, and it is not liable to those excessive fluctuations
in amount, or that suddenness in appearance peculiar to inundations
chiefly arising from falls of rain. The Granges sometimes rises ten
feet in four-and-twenty hours, and at some part of its course its
depth is at times forty feet greater during a flood than in fair
weather, while the Indus rarely rises above a foot a day, its extreme
flood never exceeding fifteen feet, the limits and amount of the
inundation being singularly uniform over a succession of years.
Moreover, as rain hardly ever falls in Scinde, and when it does so
only continues over a few days, and extends to the amount of three or
four inches, no danger or inconvenience from this need be apprehended.
Mr. Wood mentions that hemp may be grown in profusion on the indigo
grounds, and that were the production of the dye once introduced, it
would bring hundreds of thousands of acres now barren into
cultivation, and secure the growth or manufacture of a vast variety of
other commodities for which the country is eminently fitted. An
experimental factory might, it is believed, be set up for from two to
three thousand pounds, but this appears to be an amount of adventure
from which the Government shrinks.

The districts of Kishnagar, Jessore, and Moorshedabad, in Bengal,
ranging from 88 to 90 degs. E. latitude, and 22½ to 24 degs. N.
longitude, produce the finest indigo. That from the districts about
Burdwan and Benares is of a coarser or harsher grain. Tirhoot, in
latitude 26 degs., yields a tolerably good article. The portion of
Bengal most propitious to the cultivation of indigo, lies between the
river Hooghly and the main stream of the Ganges.

In the East Indies, after having ploughed the ground in October,
November, and the beginning of December, they sow the seed in the last
half of March and the beginning of April, while the soil, being
neither too hot nor too dry, is most propitious to its germination. A
light mould answers best; and sunshine, with occasional light showers,
are most favorable to its growth. Twelve pounds of seed are sufficient
for sowing an acre of land. The plants grow rapidly, and will bear to
be cut for the first time at the beginning of July; nay, in some
districts so early as the middle of June. The indications of maturity
are the bursting forth of the flower buds, and the expansion of the
blossoms; at which period the plant abounds most in the dyeing
principle. Another indication is taken from the leaves, which, if
they break across when doubled flat, denote a state of maturity. But
this character is somewhat fallacious, and depends upon the poverty or
richness of the soil. When much rain falls, the plants grow too
rapidly, and do not sufficiently elaborate the blue pigment. Bright
sunshine is most advantageous to its production.

The first cropping of the plants is the best; after two months a
second is made; after another interval a third, and even a fourth; but
each of these is of diminished value.

_Culture in India._--For the following excellent account of the modes
of culture, and practice, &c., in Bengal, and other parts of India, I
am indebted to Mr. G. W. Johnson, one of the correspondents of my
"Colonial Magazine." Mr. Johnson, besides his own Indian experience,
has consulted all the best authorities, and the opinions of
contributors to the leading periodicals of Calcutta on this important
subject:--

    When America became known to Europeans, its indigo became to them a
    principal object of cultivation, and against their skill the native
    Hindostanee had nothing to oppose, but the cheapness of his simple
    process of manufacture. The profit and extent of the trade soon
    induced Europeans to brave the perils of distance and climate to
    cultivate the plant in Hindostan; but these obstacles, added to the
    superior article manufactured by the French and Spaniards in the
    West Indies, would long have held its produce in India in
    subordination, if the anarchy and wars incident to the French
    Revolution, especially when they reached St. Domingo, had not almost
    annihilated the trade from the West, and consequently proportionally
    fostered that in the East. The indigo produce of St. Domingo was
    nearly as large as that of all the other West India islands
    together. From the time that the negroes revolted in that island,
    the cultivation of indigo has increased in Hindostan, until it has
    become one of its principal exports, and the quality of the article
    manufactured is not inferior to that of any other part of the world.

    The most general mode of obtaining the necessary supply of _weed_,
    as it is called by the planter, is as follows:--The land attached to
    the factory is parcelled out among the ryots or farmers, who
    contract to devote a certain portion of their farm to the
    cultivation of indigo, and to deliver it, for a fixed price per
    bundle, at the factory; a sum of money, usually equal to half the
    probable produce, has to be advanced to the ryot by the planter, to
    enable him to accomplish the cultivation, and to subsist upon until
    the crop is ready for cutting.

    If, as is generally the case, sufficient land is not attached to the
    factory to supply it with plant, the owner obtains what he requires
    by inducing the ryots in his vicinity to cultivate it upon a part of
    their land. Yet it is with them far from a favorite object of
    cultivation; and, indeed, if it were not for the money advanced to
    each ryot by the planter, to provide seed, &c., and which gives him
    a little ready money, bearing no interest, it is doubtful whether he
    would engage in the cultivation at all. Even this advance of money
    does not induce him to appropriate it to any but the worst part of
    his farm, nor to bestow upon it more than the smallest possible
    amount of labor. The reasons for this neglect are valid, for the
    grain crops are more profitable to the ryot, and indigo is one of
    the most precarious of India's vegetable products.

    In Bengal the usual terms of contract between the manufacturer and
    the ryot are, that the latter, receiving at the time a certain
    advance of money, perhaps one rupee (2s.) per biggah, with promise
    of a similar sum at a more advanced period of the season, undertakes
    to have a certain quantity of land suitably and seasonably prepared
    for sowing, to attend and receive seed whenever occasion requires,
    and to deliver the crop, when called upon, at the factory, at a
    specified price per bundle or 100 bundles. The particular conditions
    of these contracts vary generally in Bengal; they amount to
    advancing the ryot two rupees for every biggah of land, furnishing
    him with seed at about one-third its cost, on an engagement from
    him to return whatever his lands may produce (which, as has been
    said, is generally none at all), at the price charged, and receiving
    the plant from him at six, seven, eight, or sometimes nine bundles
    for a rupee--much oftener the former than the latter rates. A ryot
    cultivating alluvial lands, and having no seed, can hardly ever
    repay his advances; but it does not follow that he has been a loser,
    for he, perhaps, could not value his time, labor, and rent
    altogether at half the amount; and as long as this system is kept
    within moderate bounds, it answers much better than private
    cultivation to the manufacturer, and has many contingent advantages
    to the cultivator.

    In Tirhoot similar engagements are entered into with the ryots, who
    are there called _Assamees_. These engagements with Assamees are
    generally made in the month of September, on a written instrument
    called a _noviskaun_, by which they agree for a certain quantity of
    land, for five years, to be cultivated with indigo plant, and for
    which they are to be paid at the rate of six rupees per biggah, for
    every full field of plant measured by a luggie or measuring-rod. The
    luggie, it must be observed, varies in size throughout the district.
    In the southern and eastern divisions of Tirhoot and Sarun it is
    eight-and-a-half to ten feet long; and in the northern and western
    from twelve to fourteen feet. The Assamee receives, on the day of
    making his _bundobust_, or settlement, three rupees advance on each
    biggah he contracts for, another rupee per biggah when the crop is
    fit to weed, and the remaining two rupees at the ensuing settlement
    of accounts. Exclusive of the price of his maul or plant, the
    Assamee is entitled to receive two or three rupees per biggah (as
    may be agreed on) for gurkee, or lands that have failed, as a
    remuneration for his trouble, and to enable him to pay his rent. The
    foregoing are the principal stipulations of the noviskaun, but the
    Assamee further engages to give you such land as you may select,
    prepare it according to instructions from the factory, sow and weed
    as often as he is required, cut the plant and load the hackeries at
    his own cost, and in every other respect conform to the orders of
    the planter or his aumlah (managing man). The Assamee is not charged
    for seed, the cartage of his plants, or for the cost of drilling. I
    should mention that a penalty is attached to the non-fulfilment of
    the Assamees engagements, commonly called _hurjah_, viz., twelve
    rupees for every biggah short of his agreement, and this for every
    year that the noviskaun has to run. This is, however, seldom
    recoverable, for if you sue the Assamee in court and obtain a decree
    (a most expensive and dilatory process), he can in most instances
    easily evade it by a fictitious transfer of his property to other
    hands.

    The planter generally finds it his interest to get the Zemindar of
    the village in which he proposes cultivating, to join in the
    noviskaun, as a further security; or he engages with a jytedar, or
    head Assamee, having several others subordinate to him, and for
    whose conduct he is responsible. But a still better system is lately
    gaining ground in this district, I mean that of taking villages in
    ticka, or farm, by far the best and cheapest plan that has ever been
    resorted to for the cultivation of indigo.

    When the planter cultivates the ground himself, it is called in
    Tirhoot _Zerant_ cultivation. _Zerants_, or _Neiz_, are taken on a
    pottah or lease for five years, at the average rent of three rupees
    per biggah. The heavy cost attending this cultivation has occasioned
    its decrease in most factories in Tirhoot and particularly since the
    fall in prices. About a third, I believe, was the proportion it
    formerly bore to the whole cultivation of the district, but of late
    such factories only have retained it as cannot procure sufficient
    good land under the Assamewar system; but now that the plan of
    taking villages in farm is becoming more and more prevalent here, it
    is very likely that Zerants will be entirely abandoned. From all the
    information I have been able to collect, the cost of a biggah of
    Zerant (ten feet luggie) may be estimated at sixteen rupees; that of
    Assamewar is generally twenty-five per cent. less, both exclusive of
    interest, agents' charges, and private expenses.

    It can only be the reluctance of the ryot to cultivate indigo that
    induces a manufacturer to grow it himself, for it has been found an
    expensive plan, profitable only when the dye is at its highest rate,
    and even then scarcely furnishing an adequate return. They not only
    could not cultivate so cheaply as the native laboring husbandman,
    but ordinarily had to engage extensive tracts of land, much of
    which was not suitable for their purpose, or, perhaps, for any
    other, and consequently, although the average rate of rent was even
    low on the whole, it constituted a very heavy charge on the portion
    from which they obtained their return.

    In Oude there are three systems of obtaining a supply of the plant,
    viz., _Kush Kurreea_, _Bighowty_, and _Nij_; but the latter is a
    mere trifle in proportion to the others, and is, therefore, not
    worth mentioning. On the _Bighowty_ system, which prevails chiefly
    in the Meerut and Mooradabad districts, the planter advances for a
    biggah of _Jumowah_ (irrigated sowings) nine rupees, and for a
    biggah of _Assaroo_ (rain sowings) five rupees four annas. The next
    year's plant, or _khoonti_, becomes his on an additional payment of
    eight annas per biggah. He also supplies the seed at the rate of six
    seers per biggah, being almost double the quantity made use of in
    Bengal, but which is necessary to make up for the destruction of the
    plant the year following by the frost, white ants, hot winds, grass
    cutters, and, I may add, the village cattle, which are let loose to
    graze on the khoonte during the latter period, when not a blade of
    grass or vegetation is to be seen anywhere left.

    The Bighowty system is a sadly ruinous one, as, independently of the
    attempts to assimilate Assaroo, at five rupees four annas, with
    _Jumowah_, at nine rupees per biggah, which is very easily effected
    if the planter is not very vigilant, he is obliged to maintain an
    extensive and imposing establishment of servants, not only to
    enforce the sowings, weeding, and cutting, but also to look after
    his khoonte, and protect it from being destroyed by bullocks and
    grass cutters, or from being ploughed up clandestinely by the
    Zemindars themselves.

    The Kush Kurreea system again has its evils, as the planter never
    gets plant for the full amount of his advances, and hence often
    leads to his ruin.

    _Soils._--Indigo delights in a fresh soil; new lands, of similar
    staple to others before cultivated, always surpass them in the
    amount and quality of their produce. Hence arises the superior
    productiveness of the lands annually overflowed by the Ganges, the
    earthy and saline deposits from which in effect renovate the soil.
    The further we recede from the influence of the inundation, the less
    adapted is the soil for the cultivation of indigo. The staple of the
    soil ought to be silicious, fertile, and deep. Mr. Ballard, writing
    on the indigo soils of Tirhoot, says that high "soomba," or light
    soils, are generally preferred, being from their nature and level
    less exposed to the risk of rain or river inundation; but they are
    difficult to procure, and, moreover, require particular care in the
    preparation. Next in estimation is "doruss," a nearly equal mixture
    of light earth and clay; a soil more retentive of moisture in a dry
    season than any other. "Muttyaur," or heavy clay soils, are
    generally avoided, although in certain seasons, with mild showers of
    rain, they have been known to answer. The safest selection I should
    conceive to be an equal portion of soomba and doruss. In a country,
    however, interspersed with jheels and nullahs, it is difficult to
    form a cultivation without a considerable mixture of low lands, more
    or less, according to the situation of the Assamee's fields. Great
    care should be taken, at all events, to guard against oosur lands,
    or such as abound with saltpetre; these can be most easily detected
    in the dry months. _Puchkatak_, that is, lands slightly touched with
    _oosur_, have been known to answer, as partaking more of the nature
    of _doruss_ soil; but the crop is generally thin, although strong
    and branchy.

    There is another description of land that should be cautiously
    avoided. It goes by the name of _jaung_, and is a light soil, with a
    substratum of sand from six to twelve inches below the surface. The
    plant generally looks very fine in such fields till it gets a foot
    high, when the root touching the sand, and having no moisture to
    sustain it, either dies away altogether, or becomes so stunted and
    impoverished as to yield little or nothing in the cutting. Of the
    _daub_ or _dearab_ (alluvial) land, says Mr. Ballard, there is
    scarcely any in the district except what falls to the lot of my own
    factories, being situated on the banks of the Ganges and Great
    Gunduck. Of _bungur_, a stiff reddish clay soil, there is little in
    Tirhoot; it pervades the western provinces, and is best adapted for
    Assaroo sowings, which do not succeed in Tirhoot.

    _Preparation of the soil._--The root of the indigo plant being
    fusiform, and extending to about a foot in length, requires the soil
    to be loosened thoroughly to that depth at least. Experience
    teaches that the fineness of the tilth to which the soil is reduced
    previously to the seed being committed to it, is one very
    influential operation for the obtaining a productive crop. Yet in
    some districts of Bengal, particularly about Furudpore, the sowing
    is performed without any previous ploughing. This is where the
    river, when receded, has left the soil and deposit so deep, that
    about October, or a little later, the seed being forcibly discharged
    from the sower's hand, buries itself, and requires no after covering
    by means of the rake or harrow.

    In Tirhoot they are indefatigable in this first step of the
    cultivation. Mr. Ballard says, that the preparation of indigo lands
    should commence in September, as soon as the cessation of the rains
    will permit; and as we do not rely on rain for our sowings (as is
    the custom in Bengal and elsewhere, and irrigation is never resorted
    to, from the heavy expense attending it), our principal aim is to
    preserve as much moisture in the fields as possible. They should
    receive, for this purpose, not less than eight ploughings, besides a
    thorough turning up with the spade, after the fourth ploughing, to
    clear the field from stubble, grass and weeds. It is absolutely
    indispensable to get all this done on our light soils, especially
    before the end of October, and have the land carefully harrowed
    down, so as to prevent the moisture escaping.

    Should there be heavy rains between the interval of preparing and
    sowing, it will be necessary to turn the fields up with either one
    or two ploughings, and harrow them down as before. If only a slight
    shower, running the harrow over them will be sufficient to break the
    crust formed on the surface, and which, if allowed to remain, would
    quickly exhaust the moisture. This, with the occasional use of the
    weeding-hook, is all that the lands will require till the time of
    sowing.--("Transactions of the Agri.-Hort. Society of Calcutta,"
    vol. ii., p. 22.)

    _Sowing_.--The time when the seed is committed to the soil varies in
    different parts of India, and, even in the same place, admits of
    being performed at two different seasons. The periods of sowing in
    Bengal are first immediately after the rains, from about the latter
    end of October. The rivers are then rapidly retiring within their
    beds, and as soon as the soft deposit of the year has drained itself
    into a consistency, though not solid enough to keep a man from
    sinking up to his knees in it, they begin to scatter the seed
    broadcast. This is continued until the ground has become too hard
    for the seed to bury itself; the plough is then used to loosen the
    crust, and the sowing continued to about the middle, or even the end
    of November, from which period the weather is considered too cold,
    until February. These autumnal sowings are called October sowings,
    from the month in which they generally commence. Much of the plant
    perishes during the months of December and January, and more again
    in the spring, unless there are early and moderate showers. The crop
    that remains is not so productive ordinarily in the vat, as that
    obtained from spring sowings, and some think the quality of the
    produce inferior. But there is no expense of cultivation, and the
    liabilities of the crop to failure are such a discouragement to cost
    and labor in rearing it, that the October sowing is followed by most
    planters who can obtain suitable land. The second period of sowing
    is the spring, with the first rains of March, or even the end of
    February. The land having been measured and placed under its slight
    course of tillage during the two or three preceding mouths, is sown
    broadcast as soon as the ground has been well moistened, or even in
    prospect of approaching rain. The quantity of seed used for this
    autumn sowing is generally more than what is considered requisite
    for spring sowing; six seers at the former and four at the latter
    season per biggah, in Bengal, is the quantity usually allowed.

    Some cultivators commence the autumn sowing as early as at the close
    of September, or as soon as the low lands are in a state to permit
    the operation after the inundation has subsided. This seed time may
    be said to continue until the end of December, and the crops from
    these sowings often yield an average produce, if the lands are not
    very low and wet. If they are, the sowing had better be delayed
    until January, or even February, for the crops from these latter
    sowings are usually the most productive, and the dye obtained from
    them the finest. The object for thus delaying the sowing is, that
    the young plants may have a more genial season for vegetation. Those
    who prefer sowing earlier, and yet are aware of the importance of
    saving the young plants as much as possible from the comparative low
    temperature of the season, sow some other crop with their indigo.
    Til, the country linseed, is good for this purpose in high lying
    soils. But I never knew an intermixture of crops that was not
    attended by inconveniences and injuries more than was compensated by
    the advantages gained.

    The success of sowings during March and April is very doubtful. It
    depends entirely upon the occurrence of rain, which in those months
    is proverbially uncertain. If the season should be sufficiently wet,
    the sowing may be performed in May; but a June sowing is very rarely
    remunerating. The rains setting in during the latter part of this
    month so promote the growth of weeds, that the young plants are
    choked and generally destroyed. The exceptions only occur in high
    lands, in unusually propitious seasons, and ought never to be relied
    upon except when the earlier sowings have failed. To protract the
    manufacturing season, some planters begin sowing upon low lying
    lands in the hot season, for the chance of a crop at the
    commencement of the rains; and they sow at the close of the rains
    with the hope of, as it were, stealing another in the next year. In
    the western provinces sowing necessarily occurs in the dry weather,
    usually in March and April, though occasionally either a little
    earlier or later.

    In Tirhoot the sowings commence about the latter end of February or
    the beginning of March, if by that time there is sufficient warmth
    in the atmosphere to ensure a healthy vegetation. Light soils are
    sown on one close ploughing; heavy soils on two, with from four to
    eight seers of seed, in proportion to the size of the biggah. After
    strewing the seed, the field should be harrowed down by two turns of
    the harrow, and then again by two turns more after the third day. In
    case of rain before the plant appears (which it ought to do on the
    sixth or seventh day), if a slight shower, the harrow should be used
    again; if very heavy, it were best to turn up the ground and re-sow.
    If rain fall after the appearance of the plant, and before it has
    got past four leaves, and attained sufficient strength to resist the
    hard crust before alluded to, immediate recourse must be had to
    drilling. In fact, the closest attention is required to watch the
    state of the young crop for a month at least after the sowings; if
    it yield the least, or assume a sickly appearance, drills are the
    only resource. These, if applied in time, in all March, for
    instance, or before the middle of April at latest, are generally
    successful, not only in restoring plants, but recovering such as may
    have become sickly from want or excess of moisture, or any other
    cause. In dry seasons they have been known to give a crop when
    broadcast sowings have failed. Each drill, with a good pair of
    bullocks, should do five biggahs a day. They are regulated to throw
    from three to four seers per biggah, but the quantity can be
    increased or diminished at pleasure. The natives do not employ them
    in their grain sowings, but commonly adopt a contrivance with their
    own plough for sowing in furrows, whenever their fields are
    deficient in moisture. The drill employed in Tirhoot resembles
    considerably the implement known by that name in England. It is
    found not only to effect a great saving of seed, ten seers being
    there sown broad-cost on a biggah of 57,600 feet square, and only
    seven seers by this drill; but also materially to improve the
    quality and regularity of the growth of the plant. Experience has
    demonstrated, that the more lateral room the plants have, the more
    abundant is their produce of leaves, in which the coloring matter
    chiefly resides. The seed employed should always be as new as
    possible, for though, if carefully preserved, it vegetates when one
    year old, and even when nearly two years old has produced a moderate
    crop, yet this has been under circumstances of an unusually
    favorable season and soil. The plants from old seed rarely attain a
    height of more than a foot before they wither and die. As frauds are
    very likely to be practised by giving old seed the glossiness and
    general appearance of new, great circumspection should be shown by
    the planter, who does not grow his own, in obtaining seed from known
    parties.

    Planters in the lower provinces are induced to use up-country seed,
    because, coming from a colder climate, it vegetates, and the plants
    ripen rapidly, so as to be harvested more certainly before the
    annual inundation, but they employ one-fourth more. Three seers per
    Bengal biggah are sufficient, if it is "Dassee" seed; but four is
    not too much if it is up-country seed. A Bengal biggah is only a
    third of the size of that of Tirhoot. If the weather is dry, the
    seed very often does not germinate until the occurrence of rain, and
    it has been known in a dry, light soil, to remain in the ground
    without injury for six weeks. If seasonable showers occur, the
    plants make their appearance in four days, or even less; and they
    must be watched, in order that they may be weeded on the earliest
    day that they are sufficiently established to allow the operation to
    be safely performed. In dry weather, it must not be done while they
    are very young, otherwise many of the seedlings will have their
    roots disturbed, and perish from the drought. However, not more than
    a fortnight should be allowed to pass, after the seedlings have
    appeared, before the weeds are carefully removed, and this clearing
    should be frequently repeated until the plants so overshadow the
    ground that they of themselves keep back the advance of the weeds.
    The first weeding is best performed immediately after a shower of
    rain.

    Irrigation is rarely adopted for the indigo crops in the lower
    provinces of Bengal, unless they happen to be grown in some
    situation very favorable to the operation, such as the bank of a
    river. It is much more attended to in the western provinces, and in
    Oude, the water being obtained from wells, which are dug in nearly
    every cultivated plot. In Oude, Mr. Ballard says that a biggah of
    land employs three persons to irrigate it, and occupies never less
    than six days. The ryot, or cultivator, requires for the work a pair
    of bullocks, which cost him at least 32s., a bucket made of a white
    bullock hide, at 2s., and a rope for 2s. more, both of which do not
    last him above a year. He never pays less than 8s. for the rent of a
    biggah of land near a well.

    In Bengal the plant requires three months to attain its highest
    state of perfection for manufacturing, but is often cut, from
    necessity, within half that time; for the approach of the river
    compels the premature removal of the crop, unless, indeed, its
    growth has been so retarded that it would not pay the expense of
    working. Most indigo factories have consequently to begin in June,
    or early in July, whenever they may have effected their spring
    sowings, and the labors of the season are commonly terminated by the
    middle or end of August.

    When the plants begin to flower is considered the best time for
    cutting them, and this is just what the botanist would have
    suggested, because then the proper sap of all plants is most
    abundant, and most rich in their several peculiar secretions. A
    vividly green, abundant and healthy foliage, downy at the back, is
    the surest intimation of the plants being rich in indigo. Plants
    that are ready for cutting in July and August, are usually the most
    productive.

    In the western provinces from sixteen to twenty maunds of plant is
    considered a good produce per biggah. In the upper provinces the
    produce of the best crop, which is sown directly the rains commence,
    is not more then ten maunds per biggah. The factory maund is equal
    to about seventy-eight pounds. One thousand maunds of plant are
    considered as producing quite an average quantity of indigo if this
    amounts to four maunds. Adopting another mode of estimate, Mr.
    Ballard says, that in Bengal an average crop may he considered to be
    from ten to twelve bundles, over an extensive cultivation, in a good
    season, from each Bengal biggah; the sheaf or bundle being measured
    by a six-feet cord or chain. Speaking of the produce in Tirhoot, the
    same gentleman says the "luggie," or measuring rod, varies
    throughout the district. The common Tirhoot biggah, is, I believe,
    equal to two-and-a-half or three Bengal biggahs (about an English
    acre). Its produce varies according to the size of the luggie, the
    fertility of the soil, and accidents of season; eight to ten hackery
    loads, however, is generally considered a good average return. South
    and east of Tirhoot, one hundred maunds from six hundred biggahs,
    including "khoonti," or a second cutting, is reckoned a successful
    result. In another part of the district, including Sarun, where the
    "luggie" is larger, the average produce is about one-third better.
    As we measure our plant on the ground (he adds), the bundle system
    is unknown here; but, I believe, forty-five or fifty Tirhoot hackery
    loads of plants (estimated to yield a maund of dry indigo), will be
    found equal to two hundred Bengal bundles.--("Trans. Agri. Hort.
    Soc., vol. ii. p. 23.")

    In Oude the _jamowah_, or crop sown in May, yields on an average
    twenty maunds, or say thirteen bundles, per biggah (160 feet
    square). The "assaroo," or rain sowings, producing a very inferior
    plant, the average return is not more than three maunds, or two
    bundles. The "khoonti," or crop of the next year from the same
    plants, averages fifteen maunds, or ten bundles per biggah.

    In Central and Western India, the plants are allowed to produce the
    second and even the third year, according to some statements; but in
    Bengal the same stocks are rarely suffered to yield a second crop:
    being nearly all on lands that are under water in the height of the
    inundation, the stock is rotted in the ground. Mr. Ballard, speaking
    of the duration of the plant, says that, as for three years' plant
    and "khoonti," it is a mere chimera, like the many others with which
    the planters have hitherto deluded themselves, and which it only
    requires a little reflection to overthrow. A biggah may be cut here
    and there, on an extensive cultivation, but it can never be relied
    upon as forming a part of the cultivation.

    The uncertainty of the indigo crop has been already noticed, and is,
    indeed, as proverbial as that from the hop plant in England. In
    Bengal the crop is particularly subject to be destroyed by the
    annual inundation of the river, if it occurs earlier than usual. A
    storm of wind, accompanied by rain and hail, as completely ruins the
    crop as if devoured by the locust; neither from this latter scourge
    is the crop exempt.

    This proneness to injury extends throughout its growth. The
    seedlings are liable to be destroyed by an insect closely resembling
    the turnip-fly, as well as by the frog. Caterpillars feed upon the
    leaves of older plants, and the white ant destroys them by consuming
    their roots. To these destructive visitations are to be added the
    more than ordinary liability of the plant to injury, not merely from
    atmospheric commotions, but even from apparently less inimical
    visitations. Thus not only do storms of wind, heavy rains, and hail,
    destroy the indigo planter's prospects, but even sunshine, if it
    pours out fervently after showers of rain, is apt, as it is properly
    termed, to _scorch_ the plants; and if it occurs during the first
    month of their growth, is most injurious to their future advance.
    The reason of this effect appears to be the violent change from a
    state of imbibing to a rapid transpiration of moisture. No human
    invention or foresight can preserve the crop from the atmospheric
    visitations. To destroy and drive away the little coleopterous
    insects which attack the seedlings, it would be a successful method
    to spread dry grass, &c., over the surface intended to be
    cultivated, and to burn the litter immediately before the sowing.
    The heat and smoke produced has been found perfectly efficacious
    against the turnip-fly in England. To destroy the caterpillar,
    slacked lime dusted over the leaves, while the dew is upon them, is
    an effectual application. The white ants may be driven away or
    destroyed by frequent hoeings, which is the best preventive of the
    scorching, for hoeing preserves the soil in an equable and fitting
    state of moisture.

    The great supply of seed for Bengal cultivation is obtained from the
    western provinces, and forms an article of trade of no
    inconsiderable magnitude. The stubble in the low lands of Bengal is
    generally submerged before it has time to throw out fresh shoots, on
    which the blossom and subsequent seed-pod are formed. There are,
    however, some high tracts reserved for that purpose, and on these
    the plant is found well in flower in September, and the seed fit to
    gather in November or early in December.

Two methods are pursued to extract the indigo from the plant; the
first effects it by fermentation of the fresh leaves and stems; the
second, by maceration of the dried leaves; the latter process being
most advantageous. They are thus described by Dr. Ure, in his
"Dictionary of Arts and Manufactures:"--

    1. _From the recent leaves._--In the indigo factories of Bengal,
    there are two large stone-built cisterns, the bottom of the first
    being nearly upon a level with the top of the second, in order to
    allow the liquid contents to be run out of the one into the other.
    The uppermost is called the fermenting vat, or the steeper; its
    area is twenty feet square, and its depth three feet; the lowermost,
    called the beater or beating vat, is as broad as the other, but
    one-third longer. The cuttings of the plant, as they come from the
    field, are stratified in the steeper, till this be filled within
    five or six inches of its brim. In order that the plant, during its
    fermentation, may not swell and rise out of the vat, beams of wood
    and twigs of bamboo are braced tight over the surface of the plants,
    after which water is pumped upon them till it stands within three or
    four inches of the edge of the vessel. An active fermentation
    speedily commences, which is completed within fourteen or fifteen
    hours; a little longer or shorter, according to the temperature of
    the air, the prevailing winds, the quality of the water, and the
    ripeness of the plants. Nine or ten hours after the immersion of the
    plant, the condition of the vat must be examined; frothy bubbles
    appear, which rise like little pyramids, are at first of a white
    colour, but soon become grey, blue, and then deep purple red. The
    fermentation is at this time violent, the fluid is in constant
    commotion, apparently boiling, innumerable bubbles mount to the
    surface, and a copper colored dense scum covers the whole. As long
    as the liquor is agitated, the fermentation must not be disturbed,
    but when it becomes more tranquil, the liquor is to be drawn off
    into the lower cistern. It is of the utmost consequence not to push
    the fermentation too far, because the quality of the whole indigo is
    deteriorated; but rather to cut it short, in which case there is,
    indeed, a loss of weight, but the article is better. The liquor
    possesses now a glistening yellow color, which, when the indigo
    precipitates, changes to green. The average temperature of the
    liquor is commonly 85 deg. Fahr.; its specific gravity at the
    surface is 1.0015; and at the bottom 1.003.

    As soon as the liquor has been run into the lower cistern, ten men
    are set to work to beat it with oars, or shovels four feet long,
    called _busquets_. Paddle wheels have also been employed for the
    same purpose. Meanwhile two other laborers clear away the
    compressing beams and bamboos from the surface of the upper vat,
    remove the exhausted plant, set it to dry for fuel, clean out the
    vessel, and stratify fresh plants in it. The fermented plant appears
    still green, but it has lost three-fourths of its bulk in the
    process, or from twelve to fourteen per cent. of its weight, chiefly
    water and extractive matter.

    The liquor in the lower vat must be strongly beaten for an hour and
    a half, when the indigo begins to agglomerate in flocks, and to
    precipitate. This is the moment for judging whether there has been
    any error committed in the fermentation, which must be corrected by
    the operation of beating. If the fermentation has been defective,
    much froth rises in the beating, which must be allayed with a little
    oil, and then a reddish tinge appears. If large round granulations
    are formed, the beating is continued, in order to see if they will
    grow smaller. If they become as small as fine sand, and if the water
    clears up, the indigo is allowed quietly to subside. Should the vat
    have been over-fermented, a thick fat-looking crust covers the
    liquor, which does not disappear by the introduction of a flask of
    oil. In such a case the beating must be moderated. Whenever the
    granulations become round, and begin to subside, and the liquor
    clears up, the beating must be discontinued. The froth or scum
    diffuses itself spontaneously into separate minute particles, that
    move about the surface of the liquor, which are marks of an
    excessive fermentation. On the other hand, a rightly fermented vat
    is easy to work; the froth, though abundant, vanishes whenever the
    granulations make their appearance. The color of the liquor, when
    drawn out of the steeper into the beater, is bright green; but as
    soon as the agglomerations of the indigo commence, it assumes the
    color of Madeira wine; and speedily afterwards, in the course of
    beating, a small round grain is formed, which, on separating, makes
    the water transparent, and falls down, when all the turbidity and
    froth vanish.

    The object of the beating is three-fold; first, it tends to
    disengage a great quantity of carbonic acid present in the liquor;
    secondly, to give the newly-developed indigo its requisite dose of
    oxygen by the most extensive exposure of its particles to the
    atmosphere; thirdly, to agglomerate the indigo in distinct flocks or
    granulations. In order to hasten the precipitation, lime water is
    occasionally added to the fermented liquor in the progress of
    beating, but it is not indispensable, and has been supposed capable
    of deteriorating the indigo. In the front of the beater a beam is
    fixed upright, in which three or more holes are pierced, a few
    inches in diameter. These are closed with plugs during the beating,
    but two or three hours after it, as the indigo subsides, the upper
    plug is withdrawn to run off the supernatant liquor, and then the
    lower plugs in succession. The state of this liquor being examined,
    affords an indication of the success of both the processes. When the
    whole liquor is run off, a laborer enters the vat, sweeps all the
    precipitate into one corner, and enters the thinner part into a
    spout which leads into a cistern, alongside of a boiler, twenty feet
    long, three feet wide, and three feet deep. When all this liquor is
    once collected, it is pumped through a bag, for retaining the
    impurities, into the boiler, and heated to ebullition. The froth
    soon subsides, and shows an oily looking film on the liquor. The
    indigo is by this process not only freed from the yellow extractive
    matter, but is enriched in the intensity of its color, and increased
    in weight. From the boiler the mixture is run, after two or three
    hours, into a general receiver called the _dripping vat_, or table,
    which, for a factory of twelve pairs of preparation vats, is twenty
    feet long, ten feet wide, and three feet deep, having a false bottom
    two feet under the top edge. This cistern stands in a basin of
    masonry (made water-tight with Chunam, hydraulic cement), the bottom
    of which slopes to one end, in order to facilitate the drainage. A
    thick woollen web is stretched along the bottom of the inner vessel,
    to act as a filter. As long as the liquor passes through turbid, it
    is pumped back into the receiver; whenever it runs clear, the
    receiver is covered with another piece of cloth to exclude the dust,
    and allowed to drain at its leisure. Next morning the drained magma
    is put into a strong bag, and squeezed in a press. The indigo is
    then carefully taken out of the bag, and cut with a brass wire into
    bits, about three inches cube, which are dried in an airy house,
    upon shelves of wicker work. During the drying a whitish
    effloresence comes upon the pieces, which must be carefully removed
    with a brush. In some places, particularly on the coast of
    Coromandel, the dried indigo lumps are allowed to effloresce in a
    cask for some time, and when they become hard they are wiped and
    packed for exportation.

    2. _Indigo from dried leaves._--The ripe plant being cropped, is to
    be dried in sunshine from nine o'clock in the morning till four in
    the afternoon, during two days, and threshed to separate the stems
    from the leaves, which are then stored up in magazines till a
    sufficient quantity he collected for manufacturing operations. The
    newly dried leaves must be free from spots, and friable between the
    fingers. When kept dry, the leaves undergo, in the course of four
    weeks, a material change, their beautiful green tint turning into a
    pale blue-grey, previous to which the leaves afford no indigo by
    maceration in water, but subsequently a large quantity. Afterwards
    the product becomes less considerable.

    The following process is pursued to extract indigo from the dried
    leaves:--They are infused in the steeping vat with six times their
    bulk of water, and allowed to macerate for two hours, with continual
    stirring, till all the floating leaves sink. The fine green liquor
    is then drawn off into the beater vat, for if it stood longer in the
    steeper, some of the indigo would settle among the leaves and be
    lost. Hot water, as employed by some manufacturers, is not
    necessary. The process with dry leaves possesses this advantage,
    that a provision of the plant may be made at the most suitable
    times, independently of the vicissitudes of the weather, and the
    indigo may be uniformly made; and, moreover, that the fermentation
    of the fresh leaves, often capricious in its course, is superseded
    by a much shorter period of simple maceration.

  PRODUCTION  OF INDIGO  IN  INDIA.

             maunds.

  1840      120,000
  1841      162,318
  1842       79,000
  1843      143,207
  1844      127,862
  1845      127,862
  1846      101,328
  1847      110,000
  1848      126,565
  1849      126,000

Average of the ten years 126,744 maunds.

The yield from the different districts in 1849, was nearly as
follows:--

                maunds.
  Bengal        84,500
  Tirhoot       24,500
  Benares        9,500
  Oude           6,500

               125,000

In 1790 the general object of cultivation in Mauritius was indigo, of
which from four to five crops a year were procured. One person sent to
Europe 30,000 lbs., in 1789, of very superior quality.

CEYLON.--Indigo, though indigenous in Ceylon, is still imported from
the adjoining continent, but its growth in this island would be
subject to none of the vicissitudes of climate, that in the course of
a single night have devastated the most extensive plantations in
Bengal, and annihilated the hopes and calculations of the planter at a
time when they had attained all the luxuriance of approaching
maturity.

The district of Tangalle, in the southern province, is the best
adapted to the culture and manufacture of indigo for various reasons,
such as the abundance of the indigenous varieties of the plant, the
similarity of the climate to that of the coast of Coromandel, where
the best indigo is produced; facility of transport by water to either
of the ports of export, Galle or Colombo, during the south-east, or to
Trincomalee by the south-west monsoon; every necessary material is at
hand for building a first rate indigo factory, including drying yards,
leaf godowns (stores), steeping vats and presses, except roof and
floor tiles--which may be obtained in any quantity from Colombo,
during the south-west monsoon, at a moderate rate, compared with their
cost at home.

In 1817 an offer was made to the Grovernment to introduce the
cultivation of indigo, on condition of a free grant of the land
required for the purpose and freedom from taxation for thirty years,
after which the usual tax was to be levied; and in case the
cultivation were abandoned, the land was to revert to the Crown. But
whether from the disturbed state of the colony at the time or from
incredulity on the part of the Government, as to the capability of the
colony in this respect, the application was unheeded. A subsequent
proposal, emanating from a Swedish gentleman of great ability, skill
and enterprise, was defeated by his death, although a company was on
the point of formation to carry out the scheme. It would not be
difficult, says Mr. Barrett, to select 500,000 acres, the property of
the Crown, which at a comparatively small expenditure might be brought
into a proper state of cultivation for the reception of indigo seed;
for very little would be required to be done beyond clearing the land
of weeds, burning the grass, and then lightly ploughing and levelling
the ground; and whenever manure might be requisite, the fecula of the
leaf affords one of the richest that could be employed. Ceylon
produces two other plants from which a very valuable blue dye may be
obtained by a similar process to that of making indigo. The Singhalese
head men of the Tangalle district have long been anxious for the
establishment of an indigo plantation there, and would readily take
shares in a company established for that purpose. Indigo would seem to
have been exported by the Dutch from Ceylon so late as 1794. The wild
varieties of indigo which grow on the sea-shore are used by the dobies
(_washermen_).

Indigo grows in a wild state in Siam, and all the dye used in the
country is manufactured from these plants. The extensive low grounds
are admirably suited for the cultivation of this plant.

A large quantity is raised in Manila, but I have no full details of
the cultivation in the Philippines. However, in the first six months
of 1843, 1,039 piculs of indigo were shipped to Europe, and about 650
to other quarters--equal in all to about 226,000 lbs. in the half
year. In the year 1847 the exports of indigo were 30,631 arrobas,
equal to about 7,658 cwt.; in 1850 the total exports from Manila were
4,225 quintals.

JAVA.--The cultivation of indigo was introduced into Java in the time
of the company. It was so much neglected during the administration of
Governor Daendels, that the exportation ceased. It however revived
subsequently, and in 1823 the exports were close upon 17,000 lbs. In
1826 it had risen to 46,000 lbs. In the single province of Westbaglen,
about 60 square miles in extent, 86 indigo factories were established
in the course of seven or eight years. In 1839, the exports of this
dye-stuff from Java were 588,764 kilogrammes, valued at 7½ million
francs.

It has been found by experience that a good soil is essentially
necessary for the plant, and the indigo transplanted from elevated
grounds to the rice fields succeeds better and yields more coloring
matter than when raised direct on the spot from the seed. The
residencies of Cheribon, Baglen and Madura, are those in which the
crop succeeds best. From being so exhausting a crop, and finding it
prejudicial to their rice grounds, they are gradually abandoning
indigo culture in Java, and about two-thirds of the indigo plantations
have within the, last year or two been replaced with sugar.

The value of the Java indigo is set down at 250 rupees (£25) per
maund. If this be the average price, and it cannot be manufactured
lower, Bengal has little to fear from Javanese competition. The
product of indigo rose from 276 maunds in 1825, to 28,000 in 1842, and
the quantity sold by the Dutch Trading Company in the last-named year
was 10,500 chests, of about the same dimensions as those usually
exported from Calcutta.

Some further statistics of the culture in Java are shown in the
following returns of the quantity exported:--

                  lbs.
  1830          22,063
  1835         535,753
  1839         595,818
  1841         913,693
  1843       1,890,429
  1851         769,580
  1852         838,288

The produce in 1848 was 1,151,368 lbs.

                                                            1840.       1841.
  Residencies in which this culture is introduced               9          10
  Number of factories                                         728         728
  Families occupied with this culture                     197,085     192,159
  Extent of fields where the cutting has been made
     in _bahas_ of 71 decametres                           40,844      38,829
  Quantity  of _bahus_ planted before the gathering           317         538
  Quantity of indigo crop in pounds                     2,032,097   1,663,427
  "           average pounds per _bahu_                       49¾          43

The extent of fields destined for the crop of 1842 was 37,970 bahus,
and the amount of the crop was calculated by approximation at
1,862,000.

The gradual increase of the export in the eighteen years ending 1842,
is shown as follows:--

            Maunds.
  1825          76
  1826         126
  1827         109
  1828         310
  1829         600
  1830         480
  1831         563
  1832       2,213
  1833       2,861
  1834       3,310
  1835       7,023
  1836       5,365
  1837      10,822
  1838       9,788
  1839      15,680
  1840      27,946
  1841      24,044
  1842      28,000

Total imports of indigo into the United Kingdom, and quantity retained
for home consumption:--

               Imports.   Home consumption.
                  cwts.          cwts.
  1848          59,127           9,032
  1849          81,449          12,270
  1850          70,482          16,374
  1851          89,994          27,947
  1852          83,565          16,381


            IMPORTS OF INDIGO.
                               Mexico and the ports
                East Indies.     of South America.
                   lbs.             lbs.
  1831          6,996,062           ------
  1832          6,196,080           66,363
  1833          6,315,529          125,264
  1834          3,595,697           64,638
  1835          3,861,853           88,306
  1836          7,218,991          198,003
  1837          5,706,896          365,091
  1838          6,578,352          142,739
  1839          4,651,542          363,148
  1840          6,940,192          124,766
  1841          7,451,653          247,031
  1842          8,931,112          155,003
  1843          6,319,294          130,836

    Entered for home consumption about two millions and a half pounds
    annually. (" Parl. Returns No. 656, September 1843, and 426,
    September 1844.")

The consumption of indigo in Europe and North America in round
numbers, estimated from authentic sources, is thus set down by Mr.
Macculloch in 1849:--

                                                                chests.
  In Great Britain for home consumption                           9,820
  " France total for ditto                                       10,400
  " American ports from London and Liverpool                      2,500
  "        "            Calcutta                                    700
  "        "            Holland, &c                                 400
  Other European countries export from London and Liverpool.     21,530
           "                "          Holland                    4,270
           "                "          Calcutta                     120
           "                "          France                       300

                                                                 50,040


MADDER.

This substance, which is so extensively used in dyeing red, is the
product of the long slender roots of the _Rubia tinctorum_, a plant of
which there are several varieties. Our principal supplies of this
important article of commerce are obtained from Holland, Belgium,
France, Turkey, Spain, and the Balearic Isles, the Italian States,
India, and Ceylon.

The plant is generally raised from seed, and requires three years to
come to maturity. It is, however, often pulled in eighteen months
without injury to the quality; the quantity only is smaller. A rich
soil is necessary for its successful cultivation, and when the soil is
impregnated with alkaline matter, the root acquires a red color; in
other cases it is yellow. The latter is preferred in England, from the
long habit of using Dutch madder, which is of this color, but in
France the red sells at two francs per cwt. higher, being used for the
Turkey-red dye. Madder does not deteriorate by keeping, provided it be
kept dry. It contains three volatile coloring matters, madder purple,
orange, and red. The latter is in the form of crystals, having a fine
orange red color, and called Alizaine. This is the substance which
yields the Turkey-red dye. The chay root is employed in the East
Indies as a substitute for madder, and so is the root of _Morinda
citrifolia_, under the name of Sooranjee.

Turkey madder roots realise about 30s. per cwt. About 1,100 tons are
annually shipped from Naples, worth about £30 per ton.

Madder has become an article of great request, on account of the fine
scarlet color produced from its roots, and is so essential to dyers
and calico printers that without it they cannot carry on their
manufactures. It is cultivated extensively in Holland, from whence it
is imported in large quantities into both England and France, though
it is cultivated to some extent in both countries. It has also been
raised as a soiling crop, but the coloring matter is of so penetrating
and subtile a character, that the flesh, milk, and even the bones of
animals fed upon it are said to be tinged to a considerable degree
with it. The soils best adapted, and which should be selected for its
cultivation, are dry, fertile, and deep sandy loams; the roots are
long and fibrous, and descend to a depth of from two to three feet. It
may be propagated by seed, which, by some, is thought the best
method, but the more usual mode is by the division of, and
transplanting, the roots. The ground should be thoroughly and deeply
pulverised, clean, and well-manured for the preceding crop, that the
manure may be thoroughly rotted and incorporated with the soil: in
April or May the suckers will be fit for taking from the older
plantations--those of two or three years producing the best. The sets
should have roots four or five inches long. Mark out rows two feet
apart, with a line, and set the plant with a dibble, one foot apart in
the rows. The roots should be dipped in a puddle of fine rich earth
and water, beaten to the consistence of cream, previous to planting;
let the crown of the plant be clearly over ground, and secure the
earth well around the root, to keep out drought. The plantation
requires nothing more but to be kept perfectly clean and well-hoed
during the summer months; and after the top decays in the autumn, to
be earthed up by the plough for the winter, each year, till the plants
are three years old, when they are of the proper size and age for
lifting, which must be done by trenching the land two feet
deep--several hands accompanying the digger to pick out the roots,
which must be thoroughly cleaned and dried on a kiln till they are so
brittle as to break across, when they are fit to be packed in bags,
and sold to the dye-stuff manufacturers who grind and reduce them to
powder for use. The produce is variable; usually from eight to twenty
cwt. per acre, but as much as 3,000 to 6,000 lbs. is frequently
obtained. The forage amounts to about 15,000 lbs. the first year, and
7,500 lbs. the second year. In a new and good soil manure may be
dispensed with for the first crop. Some cultivators interline and grow
other crops between the rows, but the best cultivators state that such
a practice is objectionable. The breadth of land under this crop in
England is much reduced, in consequence of the reduction in price from
the competition of the Dutch growers.

Madder is extensively grown on the central table land of Afghanistan,
forming one of the leading products of Beloochistan.; and, according
to Mr. Pottinger, it sells in the Kelat Bazaar at about 10 lbs. for
2s. The cultivation there pursued is as follows:--The ground is
repeatedly ploughed, and laid out finally in small trenches, in which
the seed is sown, covered slightly with earth, and then the whole is
flooded. Whilst thus irrigated, the trenches are filled with a mixture
of rich manure and earth. The plants appear in about ten days, and
attain a height of three or four feet during the first summer. They
are cut down in September and used as fodder for cattle. Subsequently,
and until spring arrives, the ground is manured and repeatedly
flooded. During the second year's growth, the plants which are
intended to produce seed are set apart, but the stems of the remainder
are cut every four or six weeks, in order to increase the size and
goodness of the roots.

Madder is said to repay a nett profit of 200 dollars to the acre,
when properly managed. It produced on the farm of a gentleman, who
has devoted some attention to this product in Ohio, at the rate of
2,000 lbs. per acre, and it may be made to produce 3,000 lbs., which
is a greater yield than the average crops of Germany and Holland. Nine
acres were planted by another person in the United States, in 1839,
which he harvested in 1842. The labor required is said to be from 80
to 100 days work per acre.

In the third year the stems are pruned as in the two preceding, and in
September the roots are dug up. The roots are fusiform and thin,
without any ramifications, and usually from three to five feet long.
As soon as raised, they are immediately cut into small pieces and
dried, and are then merchantable.

Mr. Joseph Swift, an enterprising American farmer, of Erie county,
Ohio, who occupies about 400 acres of choice land, mostly alluvial, in
the valley of the Vermilion river, seven miles from Lake Erie, has
detailed his practice in the "New Genesee Farmer" (an agricultural
periodical), for March, 1843. His directions must be understood as
intended for those who wish to cultivate only a few acres, and cannot
afford much outlay of capital. Those who desire to engage in the
business on an extensive scale, would need to adopt a somewhat
different practice:--

    _Soil and preparation._--" The soil should be a deep, rich, sandy
    loam, free from weeds, roots, stones, &c., containing a good portion
    of vegetable earth. Alluvial "bottom" land is the most suitable, but
    it must not be wet. If old upland is used, it should receive a heavy
    coating of vegetable earth, from decayed wood and leaves. The land
    should be ploughed very deep in the fall, and early in the spring
    apply about one hundred loads of well-rotted manure per acre, spread
    evenly, and ploughed in deeply; then harrow till quite fine and free
    from lumps. Next plough the land into beds four feet wide, leaving
    alleys between three feet wide, then harrow the beds with a fine
    light harrow, or rake them by hand, so as to leave them smooth and
    even with the alleys; they are then ready for planting.

    _Preparing sets and planting._--Madder sets or seed roots are best
    selected when the crop is dug in the fall. The horizontal uppermost
    roots (with eyes) are the kind to be used; these should be separated
    from the bottom roots, and buried in sand in a cellar or pit. If not
    done in the fall, the sets may be dug early in the spring, before
    they begin to sprout. They should be cut or broken into pieces,
    containing from two to five eyes each; _i.e._, three to four inches
    long. The time for planting is as early in the spring as the ground
    can be got in good order, and severe frosts are over, which in this
    climate (America) is usually about the middle of April. With the
    beds prepared as directed, stretch a line lengthwise the bed, and
    with the corner of a hoe make a drill two inches deep along each
    edge and down the middle, so as to give three rows to each bed,
    about two feet apart. Into these drills drop the sets, ten inches
    apart, covering them two inches deep. Eight or ten bushels of sets
    are requisite for an acre.

    _After culture._--As soon as the madder plants can be seen, the
    ground should be carefully hoed, so as to destroy the weeds and not
    injure the plants; and the hoeing and weeding must be repeated as
    often as weeds make their appearance. If any of the sets have failed
    to grow, the vacancies should be filled by talking up parts of the
    strongest roots and transplanting them; this is best done in June.
    As soon as the madder plants are ten or twelve inches high, the tops
    are to be bent down on the surface of the ground, and all except the
    tip end covered with earth, shovelled from the middle of the alleys.
    Bend the shoots outward and inward in every direction, so as in time
    to fill all the vacant space on the beds, and about one foot on each
    side. After the first time covering, repeat the weeding when
    necessary, and run a single horse plough through the alleys several
    times to keep the earth clean and mellow. As soon as the plants
    again become ten or twelve inches high, bend down and cover them as
    before, repeating the operation as often as necessary, which is
    commonly three times the first season. The last time may be as late
    as September, or later if no frosts occur. By covering the tops in
    this manner, they change to roots, and the design is to fill the
    ground as full of roots as possible. When the vacant spaces are all
    full, there is but little chance for weeds to grow; but all that
    appear must be pulled out.

    _The second year._--Keep the beds free from weeds; plough the alleys
    and cover the tops, as before directed, two or three times during
    the season. The alleys will now form deep and narrow ditches, and if
    it becomes difficult to obtain good earth for covering the tops,
    that operation may be omitted after the second time this season.
    Care should be taken, when covering the tops, to keep the edges of
    the beds as high as the middle; otherwise the water from heavy
    showers will run off, and the crop suffer from drought.

    _The third year._--Very little labor or attention is required. They
    will now cover the whole ground. If any weeds are seen, they must be
    pulled out; otherwise their roots will cause trouble when harvesting
    the madder. The crop is sometimes dug the third year; and if the
    soil and cultivation have been good, and the seasons warm and
    favorable, the madder will be of a good quality; but generally it is
    much better in quality, and more in quantity, when left until the
    fourth year.

    _Digging and harvesting._--This should be done between the 20th of
    August and the 20th of September. Take a sharp shovel or shovels,
    and cut off and remove the tops with half an inch of the surface of
    the earth; then take a plough of the largest size, with a sharp
    coulter and a double team, and plough a furrow outward, beam-deep,
    around the edge of the bed; stir the earth with forks, and carefully
    pick out all the roots, removing the earth from the bottom of the
    furrow; then plough another furrow beam-deep, as before, and pick
    over and remove the earth in the same manner; thus proceeding until
    the whole is completed.

    _Washing and drying._--As soon as possible after digging, take the
    roots to some running stream to be washed. If there is no running
    stream convenient, it can be done at a pump. Take large round
    sieves, two-and-a-half or three feet in diameter, with the wire
    about as fine as wheat sieves; or if these cannot be had, get from a
    hardware store sufficient screen wire of the right fineness, and
    make frames or boxes, two-and-a-half feet long and the width of the,
    wire, on the bottom of which nail the wire. In these sieves or
    boxes, put half a bushel of roots at a time, and stir them about in
    the water, pulling the branches apart so as to wash them clean;
    then, having a platform at hand, lay them onto dry. (To make the
    platform, take two or three common boards, so as to be about four
    feet in width, and nail deals across the under side). On these
    spread the roots about two inches thick for drying in the sun. Carry
    the platforms to a convenient place, not far from the house, and
    place them side by side, in rows east and west, and with their ends
    north and south, leaving room to walk between the rows. Elevate the
    south ends of the platforms about eighteen inches, and the north
    ends about six inches from the ground, putting poles or sticks to
    support them--this will greatly facilitate drying. After the second
    or third day's drying, the madder must be protected from the dews at
    night, and from rain, by placing the platforms one upon another to a
    convenient height, and covering the uppermost one with board. Spread
    them out again in the morning, or as soon as danger is over. Five or
    six days of ordinarily fine weather will dry the madder
    sufficiently, when it may be put away till it is convenient to
    kiln-dry and grind it.

    _Kiln-drying,_--The size and mode of constructing the kiln may be
    varied to suit circumstances. The following is a very cheap plan,
    and sufficient to dry one ton of roots at a time. Place four strong
    posts in the ground, twelve feet apart one way, and eighteen the
    other; the front two fourteen feet high, and the other eighteen; put
    girts across the bottom, middle, and top, and nail boards
    perpendicularly on the outside as for a common barn. The boards
    must be well seasoned, and all cracks or holes should be plastered
    or otherwise stopped up. Make a shed-roof of common boards. In the
    inside put upright standards about five feet apart, with
    cross-pieces to support the scaffolding. The first cross-pieces to
    be four feet from the floor; the next two feet higher, and so on to
    the top. On these cross-pieces lay small poles, about six feet long
    and two inches thick, four or fire inches apart. On these scaffolds
    the madder is to be spread nine inches thick. A floor is laid at the
    bottom to keep all dry and clean. When the kiln is filled, take six
    or eight small kettles or hand-furnaces, and place them four or five
    feet apart on the floor (first securing it from fire with bricks or
    stones), and make fires in them with charcoal, being careful not to
    make any of the fires so large as to scorch the madder over them. A
    person must be in constant attendance to watch and replenish the
    fires. The heat will ascend through the whole, and in ten or twelve
    hours it will all be sufficiently dried, which is known by its
    becoming brittle like pipe stems.

    _Breaking and grinding._--Immediately after being dried, the madder
    must be taken to the barn and threshed with flails, or broken by
    machinery (a mill might easily be constructed for this purpose), so
    that it will feed in a common grist-mill. If it is not broken and
    ground immediately, it will gather dampness so as to prevent its
    grinding freely. Any common grist-mill can grind madder properly.
    When ground finely it is fit for use, and may be packed in barrels
    like flour for market.

    _Amount and value of product, &c._--Mr. Swift measured off a part of
    his ground, and carefully weighed the product when dried, which he
    found to be over two thousand pounds per acre, notwithstanding the
    seasons were mostly dry and unfavorable. With his present knowledge
    of the business, he is confident that he can obtain at least three
    thousand pounds per acre, which is said to be more than is often
    obtained in Germany. The whole amount of labor he estimates at from
    eighty to one hundred days' work per acre. The value of the crop, at
    the usual wholesale price (about fifteen cents per pound), from
    three to four hundred dollars. In foreign countries it is customary
    to make several qualities of the madder, which is done by sorting
    the roots; but as only one quality is required for the western
    market, Mr. Swift makes but one, and that is found superior to most
    of the imported, and finds a ready sale.

Madder is produced in Middle Egypt to some extent, for the consumption
of the country, principally for dyeing the _tarbouche_ or skull caps
which are universally worn. Its culture was introduced in 1825. In
1833, 300 acres in Upper Egypt, and 500 in the Delta and the Kelyout,
were devoted to madder roots.

New South Wales is eminently suited to the culture of this valuable
root, and as the profits upon its cultivation are very large, I would
strongly recommend it to the attention of agriculturists there. The
article produces to France an annual sum of one million sterling; the
price of the finest quality in the English market being £60 per ton.
Its yield varies from £40 to £50 per acre, and the expenses upon its
proper culture should not exceed one-half that amount. The colonists
would find it to their interest to turn their attention to such
articles as this, for which there is an extensive demand at home,
instead of confining themselves exclusively to the commoner and
bulkier products, which they export at a much less profit, and which
when once the market is fully supplied, may fall to a price at which
they cannot afford to sell.

The following is a calculation of the expenses generally supposed to
attend a crop according to the mode of cultivation practised in
Vaucluse:--

  Rent per hectare (2½ English acres), 3 years, at                 £ s. d.
             165 francs                                           19 17  6
  Manure, 440 francs                                   £17 12  6
  Carriage of ditto, 132 francs                          3  5 10
                                                       ---------  22 18  4

                                                                 £42 15 10

These expenses may almost be dispensed with in our colonies, as the
soil at Vaucluse has long been exhausted.

  Two and a-half acres require 170 lbs. seed, at 2½d. per pound,
  which, with the labor afterwards bestowed, including the
  cost of spade trenching, will be                                30  0  0

                                                                 £72 15 10

The average produce per hectare is 77 cwt., which, at £1 4s. 2d. per
cwt. (the price on the spot), is £93. The price is now much lower, but
still it is clear a most profitable return would be derived from the
first crop, and a proportionably larger one afterwards.

A considerable portion of the madder roots, instead of being ground
and exported in that form, as heretofore, is now exposed, after being
invested with dilute sulphuric acid, to a boiling heat by means of
steam, by which the coloring matter is considerably altered and
improved in quality for some dyeing processes, while the quantity
rendered soluble in water is greatly increased. The madder so prepared
is known as "garancine," and forms an important branch of manufacture
in the south of France, which was well illustrated at the Great
Exhibition in 1851, by a collection of specimens supplied by the
Chamber of Commerce of Avignon. The spent madder, after being used in
dyeing, is now also converted by Mr. H. Steiner, of Accrington, into a
garancine (termed _garanceuse_ by the French) by steaming it with
sulphuric acid in the same manner as the fresh madder, and thus a
considerable quantity of coloring matter is recovered and made
available which was formerly thrown away in the spent madder. Both
varieties of garancine give a more scarlety red than the unprepared
madder, and also good chocolate and black, without soiling the white
ground, but are not so well fitted, particularly the garancine of
spent madder, for dyeing purples, lilacs, and pinks. The value of the
garancine imported from France in 1848 was £59,554, and of that
imported in 1851 £93,818. This preparation of ground madder is
imported into Liverpool to the extent of from 500 to 600 tons annually
from Marseilles, for the use of calico printers in the manufacturing
districts. The price is £7 to £8 the ton.

This important root is already cultivated to a considerable extent in
Russia but not nearly in sufficient quantity to meet the local demand;
so that large quantities are imported from Holland and elsewhere,
every year.

The quantity of madder, madder-root, and garaneine annually imported
into the United Kingdom is exceedingly large, over 15,000 tons, as is
shown by a reference to the following figures:--

          Madder.  Madder roots.  Garancine.   Total.
           cwts.       cwts.         cwts.     cwts.
  1848    81,261      139,463        5,955    276,679
  1849    92,736      161,986        4,969    259,691
  1850   100,248      161,613        5,845    267,706
  1851    92,925      202,091        9,382    304,398
  1852    84,385      179,813         ----       ----

We imported from France, duty free, the following:--

               Madder.      Official value.           Madder-root.
                 cwts.             £              cwts.            £
  1848          54,084          122,851          25,068          70,749
  1849          57,108          131,059          23,459          81,274
  1850          54,559          123,628          13,693          55,263
  1851          65,577          151,502          34,017         167,721

The price in the Liverpool market, in June 1853, for Bombay
madder-roots was £1 18s. to £2 14s. the cwt.

INDIAN MADDER.--_Rubia cordifolia_, or _Munjestha_, a variety with
white flowers, a native of Siberia, is cultivated largely in the East,
particularly about Assam, Nepaul, Bombay, Scinde, Quitta, China, &c.,
for its dye-stuff, and is known as Munjeet. A small quantity is
exported from China and India; about 338 Indian maunds were shipped
from Calcutta in 1840, and 2,328 in 1841. It fetches in the London and
Liverpool markets from 20s. to 25s. and 30s. per cwt., duty free; 405
tons were imported into Liverpool from Bombay and Calcutta, in 1849,
and 525 tons in 1850, but none was imported in 1851 and 1852.

It was remarked by the Jury in 1851, at the Great Exhibition, that
this is a valuable dye-stuff, and hitherto not so well appreciated as
it deserves, for some of the colors dyed with it are quite as
permanent as those dyed with madder, and even more brilliant. Its use
however is gradually increasing, and it is unquestionably well worthy
the attention of dyers.

LOGWOOD.--The logwood of commerce is the red heart wood, or duramen,
of a fine lofty growing tree (_Haematroxylon Campechianum_), growing
in Campeachy and the bay of Honduras, and which is also now common in
the woods of Jamaica and St. Domingo. It is principally imported as a
dye wood, cut into short lengths. We chip, grind, and pack it into
casks and bags, ready for the dyers, hatters, and printers' use, who
esteem it as affording the most durable deep red and black dyes. It is
sometimes used in medicine as an astringent. That grown in Jamaica is
least valued that of Honduras, Tobasco, and St. Domingo, fetches a
somewhat higher price; but that imported from Campeachy direct, is the
most esteemed. The annual imports into Liverpool are about 1,300 tons
from Honduras, 100 from Tobasco, and 1,800 from Campeachy.

It thrives best in a damp tenacious soil, with a small proportion of
sand. It is imported in logs, which are afterwards chipped, and is of
great commercial importance from its valuable dyeing properties. Old
wood is preferred; it is so hard as almost to be indestructible by
the atmosphere. The albumen is of a yellowish color, and is not
imported. The bark and wood are slightly astringent. The imports of
logwood into the United Kingdom, were 23,192 tons in 1848, 23,996 tons
in 1849, and 34,090 tons in 1850, of which 3,484 tons were re-exported
in 1848, and 2,307 tons in 1849. The imports in the past two years of
1852 and 1853, have averaged 20,000 tons, of which about 3,000 tons
were re-exported. It is increasing in use, for in 1837, the quantity
retained for home use was only 14,677½ tons. The price varies
according to quality from £4 to £7 per ton.

We received from Honduras 5,401 tons in 1844; and 55,824 tons in 1845.
From Montego Bay, Jamaica, 398 tons were shipped between January and
July 1851.

FUSTIC.--This is the common name of a species of dye wood in extensive
use, which is obtained from _Maclura tinctoria_, or _Broussonitia
tinctoria_, Kunth, a large and handsome evergreen tree, growing in
South America and the West Indies. The wood is extensively used as an
ingredient in the dyeing of yellow, and is largely imported for that
purpose. The quantity entered for home consumption in the United
Kingdom was 1,731 tons in 1847, 1,653 in 1848, and 1,842 tons in 1849.

Ninety-one tons were shipped from Montego Bay, Jamaica, in the first
six months of 1851.

QUERCITRON.---This bark furnishes a yellow dye, of which about 3,500
tons are annually imported in hogsheads of from half a ton to a ton.
296 tons were imported into Liverpool from Philadelphia in 1849, and
514 tons in 1850.

BRAZIL WOOD.--This very ponderous wood is obtained in Brazil from the
_Cæsalpina Braziliensis_, which yields a red or crimson dye, when
united with alum or tartar, and is used by silk dyers. It is imported
principally from Pernambuco, 1,200 quintals having been shipped to
London in 1835, but about 500 tons, worth about £4 a ton, were
imported from Costa Rica in 1845.

The tree is large, crooked, and knotty, and the bark is thick, and
equals the third or fourth of its diameter.

The imports may be stated at about 600 tons annually, the average
price being £50 per ton.

Brazil wood is found in the greatest abundance and of the best
quality, in the Province of Pernambuco, but being a government
monopoly it has been cut down in so improvident a manner, that it is
now seldom seen within several leagues of the coast.

Among the Cuba dye woods is Copey _(Clusia rosea_, Linn).

Braziletto, obtained from _C. Crista_, is one of the cheapest and
least esteemed of the red dye woods, imported from Jamaica and other
West India islands to the extent of 150 tons per annum, fetching £6 to
£8 per ton. 2,361 tons of Nicaragua wood were imported in 1848, 2,701
tons in 1849, and 6,130 tons in 1850.

Spain exhibited various vegetable dyes obtained from cultivated and
wild plants furnished by the Agricultural Board of Saragossa.


LICHENS.

The chief lichens employed in the manufacture of orchil and cudbear
are the following:--

Angola weed (_Ramalina furfuracea_).

Mauritius weed (_Rocella fusiformis_), which comes also from
Madagascar, Lima, and Valparaiso, and then bears the distinctive
commercial name of the port of shipment.

Cape weed (_Rocella tinctoria_), from the Cape de Verd Islands.

Canary Moss (_Parmelia perlata_).

Tartareous Moss (_Parmelia tartarea_).

Pustulatus Moss (_Umbilicaria pustulata_).

Velvet Moss (_Gyrophora murina_).

The last three are imported from Sweden.

Of these lichens, the first, which is the richest in coloring matter,
grows as a parasite upon trees; all the remainder upon rocks.

_Rocella corallina_, _Variolaris lactea_ and _dealbata_, have been
also resorted to.

About 130 tons of cudbear are imported annually from Sweden.

These lichens are found on rocks, on the sea coast. The modes, of
treating them for the manufacture of the different dyes is the same in
principle, though varying slightly in detail. They are carefully
cleaned and ground into a pulp with water, an ammoniacal liquor is
from time to time added, and the mass constantly stirred in order to
expose it as much as possible to the air. Peculiar substances existing
in these plants are, during this process, so changed by the combined
action of the atmosphere, water, and ammonia, as to generate the
coloring matter, which, when perfect, is pressed out, and gypsum,
chalk, or other substances, are then added, so as to give it the
desired consistency; these are then prepared for the market under the
forms of cudbear or litmus.

HENNA (_Lawsonia inermis_), is an important dye-stuff, and the
distilled water of the flowers is used as a perfume. The Mahomedan
women in India use the shoots for dyeing their nails red, and the same
practice prevails in Arabia. In these countries the manes and tails of
the horses are stained red in the same manner. The _Genista tomentosa_
yields red petals used in dyeing, and containing much tannic acid.

ORCHILLA WEED.--The fine purple color which the orchilla weed yields,
is in use as an agent for coloring, staining, and dyeing. About 30,000
lbs. is obtained annually in the island of Teneriffe. 460 arrobas (or
115 cwt.) of orchilla were exported from the Canary Isles in 1833. In
1839, 6,494 cwts. paid duty, and 4,175 cwts. in 1840. The average
imports of the three years ending with 1842, was 6,050 cwt. A little
comes in from Barbary and the islands of the Archipelago.

Dr. W.L. Lindley, in a very interesting paper, read before the
Botanical Society of London, in December, 1852, on the dyeing
properties of the lichens, stated--

    The subject of the _colorific_ and _coloring_ principles of the
    lichen has, within the last few years, attracted a due share of that
    attention which, has been increasingly devoted to organic chemistry.
    Since 1830, Heeren, Kane, Schunck, Rochleder and Heldt, Knop,
    Stenhouse, Laurent and Gerhardt, have published valuable papers on
    these principles; but, here again, we have to regret the great
    discrepancy in the various results obtained, and there is therefore,
    here also, imperatively demanded re-investigation and correction
    before _any_ of the results already published can he implicitly
    relied upon, and before we can have safe data from which to
    generalise. I have no doubt that a great proportion of the obscurity
    overhanging this subject depends on the circumstance that many of
    the chemists, who have devoted attention to the color-educts and
    products of the lichens, were not themselves botanists, and have
    therefore probably, in some cases at least, analysed species under
    erroneous names, and also because their investigations have
    comprehended a much too limited number of species.

    Their utility in the arts, and especially in dyeing--including the
    collection of a series of the commercial dye lichens, _i.e._, those
    used by the manufacturers of London, &c., in the making of orchil,
    cudbear, litmus, and other lichen dyes. While investigating the
    dyeing properties of the lichens, I made experiments, with a view to
    test their colorific power, on as many species as I could obtain in
    sufficient quantity, to render it at all useful to operate on--that
    number, however, being very limited (between forty and fifty).

    Dr. Lindley adds, many parties may be able to aid his
    investigations, by furnishing information on their economic uses,
    and on their special applications in dyeing and other
    arts--(particularly on their employment, as dye agents, by the
    natives of Britain and other countries)--with specimens of the
    lichens so used, and their common names--specimens of fabrics dyed
    therewith--notes of the processes employed for the elimination of
    the dyes, &c. Parties resident in, or travelling through our western
    Highlands and Islands, the northern Highlands, Ireland, Wales,
    Norway, Iceland, and similar countries, are most likely to be able
    to afford this description of information--many native lichens being
    still used by the peasantry of these countries to dye their homespun
    yarn, &c.

    He proceeded to treat--1. The vast importance of this humble tribe
    of plants in the grand economy of nature, as the pioneers and
    founders of _all_ vegetation. 2. Their importance to man and the
    lower animals, as furnishing various articles of food. 3. Their
    importance in medicine, and especially in its past history, at home
    and abroad. 4. Their importance in the useful and fine arts, and
    especially in the art of dyeing. 5. Their affinities and analogies
    to other cryptogamic families, and to the Phanerogamia. 6. Their
    value as an element of the picturesque in nature; and, 7. Their
    typical significance.

    He then adverted more especially to the subject of his
    communication, under the ten following heads:--

   I. The colors of the Thallus and apothecia of Lichens--their causes, and
      the circumstances which modify and alter them.

  II. History of the application of their coloring matters to the art of dyeing.

 III. Chemical nature and general properties of these coloring matters.

  IV. Tests and processes for estimating qualitatively, and quantitatively the
      colorific powers of individual species--with their practical applications.

   V. Processes of manufacture of the Lichen-dyes, on the large and small
      scale in different countries--with the principles on which they are founded.

  VI. Nomenclature of the dye-Lichens, and of the Lichen-dyes.

 VII. Botanical and commercial sources of the same.

VIII. Special applications of the Lichen-dyes in the arts.

  IX. Commercial value of the dye-Lichens, and their products.

   X. Geographical distribution of the dye-Lichens--with the effect of climate;
      situation, &c., on their colorific materials.

    Of the four first sections of his paper, the following is a very
    short summary or synopsis:--

    Under the first head, the author spoke of chlorophylle and various
    organic and inorganic substances, which enter into the formation of
    the colors of the thallus and apothecia of lichens, and of the
    modifications of these colors depending on various degrees of--1.
    Exposure to air and light. 2. Temperature. 3. Moisture, &c. 4.
    Atmospheric vicissitudes. 5. Season of the year. 6. Nature of the
    Gonidic reproduction (_i.e._, gemmation). 7. Nature of habitat. 8.
    Organic decomposition. 9. Coalescence of parts, monstrosities, &c.

    Under the second section, he traced historically the manufacture of
    Lichen-dyes, and the native use of Lichens as dye agents, among
    different nations, from the times of Theophrastus, Dioscorides, and
    Pliny, down to the present day, sketching briefly the ancient end
    modern history of orchil, cudbear, and litmus, and specifying the
    native use of lichen-dyes in different, countries of Europe, Asia,
    and America. He alluded more particularly to their application to
    the dyeing of yarns, &c., by the Scotch Highlanders, under the name
    of "_Crottles_." "The process of the manufacture of the various
    crottles, generally consisted in macerating the powdered lichen for
    two or three weeks, in stale urine, exposing the mass freely to the
    air by repeated stirring, and adding lime, salt, alum, or
    argillaceous and other substances, either to heighten the color or
    impart consistence. To such an extent did this custom at one time
    prevail, that, in several of our northern counties each farm and
    cottage had its tank or barrel of putrefying urine, a homely but
    perfectly efficient mode of generating the necessary amount of
    ammonia. In the county of Aberdeen, in particular, every homestead
    had its reservoir of "Graith,"[53] and the "Lit-pig,"[54] which
    stood by every fireside, was as familiar an article of furniture in
    the cots of the peasantry, as the "cuttie-stool," or the "meal
    girnel." So lately as 1841 (and I presume the practice continues to
    the present day), Mr. Edmonston stated that, of four or five native
    dyes, used by the Shetlanders to color cloth and yarns, two at least
    were furnished by lichens, viz., a _brown dye_ from _Parmelia
    saxatilis_, under the name of "Scrottyie," and a _red_ one from
    _Lecanora tartarea_, under that of "Korkalett." It is very probable,
    however, that steam and free trade have gradually dispelled this
    good old custom, even in the remoter corners of our island;
    machinery-made articles being now readily supplied, at a rate so
    extraordinarily cheap, as to render it absolutely expensive (as to
    time, if not also as to money) to prepare colors, even by a process
    so simple and inexpensive as that just mentioned."

    Under the third head, he examined, in a general way, the chemistry
    of the colorific and coloring matters of the lichens and the results
    to which it has led, avoiding as much as possible the technicalities
    inseparable from such a subject, and giving a short _vise_ of the
    researches of Heeren, Kane, Rochleder, and Heldt, Stenhouse,
    Schunck, Laurent, and Gerhardt, and others. "Our untaught senses
    should undoubtedly lead us to expect the lichens, whose thallus
    exhibits the brightest tints, to yield the finest dyes, and these,
    too, of a color similar to that of the thallus, but experience
    teaches us that the beautiful reddish or purplish coloring-matters
    are producible in the greatest abundance by the very species from
    which we should least expect to derive any, viz., in those most
    devoid of external color. This, though at first sight very
    remarkable, is easily explicable, when we remember that, in most of
    the so-called dye-lichens, colorific principles exist in a colorless
    form, and only become converted into colored substances under a
    peculiar combination of circumstances.

    "Some lichens contain coloring matters, ready formed, and these
    exhibit themselves in the tint of the thallus of the plants, _e.g._
    chrysophanic [or parietinic] acid in _Parmelia parietina_, and
    vulpinic acid in _Evernia vulpina_. In other species we find
    principles, which, while in the plant, and unacted on by chemical
    re-agents, are colorless, but which, when the lichens are exposed to
    the combined influence of atmospheric air, water, and ammonia, yield
    colored substances. This series of colored products is usually
    comprehended more for convenience sake than on account of chemical
    identity, under the generic term orceine."

    The whole subject of the chemistry of these bodies is at present in
    a most unsatisfactory condition, demanding fresh investigation and
    research, in illustration of which, the author exhibited tables of
    the colorific and coloring principles, so far as they are at present
    known, showing their chemical formulæ and the authority therefor,
    and various relative information. "It is highly probable that when
    the chemistry of the lichens has been more fully studied, and the
    whole subject of their color-educts and products better understood,
    we shall begin to reduce the present confused mass of complex
    substances, and find the same principles more extensively diffused
    through different lichen species." Dr. L. entered somewhat minutely
    on the chemical reactions of the better known colorific and coloring
    principles, and their derivatives, so far at least as these throw
    any light on the production and transmutation of the red or purple
    colors extracted from what may be termed _par excellence_, the
    _dye-lichens_. After a few remarks on the chemical constitution of
    orchil and litmus, as given by Kane, Gelis, Pereira, and others, he
    discussed the subject of decolorisation of weak infusions of orchil
    and litmus by exclusion of atmospheric air, and by various
    deoxidising agents, and the different theories as to the causation
    of this phenomenon. "I have repeatedly had occasion to notice that,
    when weak infusions of these substances are excluded for some time
    from atmospheric air, in a bottle, with a tightly fitting cork, they
    gradually lose color, but rapidly regain it on re-exposure. It is
    curious that both orchil and litmus are what are called transient or
    false colors, _i.e._, they slowly lose their bloom and tint by long
    exposure to the atmosphere; the coloring matter, therefore, appears
    to be decolorised both by exposure to, and exclusion from the air,
    phenomena apparently of very opposite characters. The cause of the
    latter phenomenon has never, so far as I am aware, been quite
    satisfactorily explained; but it has been variously supposed to be
    due:--

    1. To the mere negation of oxygen.

    2. To the development, in the liquids, of various substances,
    capable of exerting a decolorising influence on the coloring matter.

    3. To deoxidation of the coloring matter by substances, which have a
    great tendency to become oxidised or peroxised; _e.g._ hydrogen, in
    the case of decolorisation by sulphuretted hydrogen, nascent
    hydrogen, and the protoxides of iron and tin, &c.

    4. To the fixation of an additional amount of hydrogen in a new
    colorless body, formed by the union of the sulphuretted hydrogen or
    other substances with the coloring matter of the liquid. This view
    is chiefly supported by Kane, who says, "that precisely as the
    coloring matters combine with water, to form different shades of
    red-colored bodies--with ammonia to produce a series of bodies,
    which are blue and purple--so they combined with sulphuretted
    hydrogen to form colorless compounds in solution, which, if solid,
    very probably would be white." He supposes, in a word, that for
    every colored substance existing in orchil and litmus, there is a
    corresponding white one, producible by the action of sulphuretted
    hydrogen, &c.; and, in proof of this theory, he mentions having
    obtained from Azolitmine and Betaorceine colorless bodies, to which
    he gave the respective names of Leuco-litmine and Leuco-orceine.

    The author then gave a short summary of Dr. Westring's experiments
    on the dyeing powers of the Swedish lichens, which he found might be
    conveniently divided into four classes, according to the degree of
    heat employed in their maceration, viz.:--

    1. Lichens, whose coloring matter was easily extractable by _cold_
    water alone.

    2. Those which required for the elimination of their coloring
    matter, maceration in _tepid_ water (_i.e._ below 258 degs. Swedish
    thermometer).

    3. Those which required maceration in _warm_ water (_i.e._between 50
    and 60 degs. Swedish thermometer).

    4. Those requiring _boiling_ water alone, or with the aid of
    solvents.

    "It must be admitted that our knowledge of the true nature of the
    colorofic and coloring principles of the lichens is, as yet, very
    imperfect and confused, and one great cause of the dubity and
    obscurity overhanging the subject, is the fact that different
    analysts have arrived at most opposite results, even in the
    examination of the same species. For instance, in _Rocella
    tinctoria_, which has, of all the dye-Lichens, been most frequently
    selected for analytical investigation, on account of its important
    product orchil, the discrepancies between the results obtained are
    very striking. In it Heeren discovered his _Erythrine_; Kane his
    _Erythriline_; Schunk his _Erythric acid_; and Stenhouse three
    different substances in as many varieties of the plant; all of these
    bodies differing more or less from each other in composition and
    properties (at least, if we are to assume, as correct, the
    descriptions given of them by their respective discoverers").

    "I have already hinted that there is no ratio between the external
    and internal color or structure of a lichen, and the kind or amount
    of coloring matter it will be found to yield. It is exceedingly
    natural to suppose that such a ratio should exist; but, proceeding
    for some time on this supposition, I was frequently disappointed in
    my results--the most showy and brilliantly colored lichens often
    furnishing the dullest and most worthless colors. For instance, the
    bright yellow thallus of _Parmelia parietina_, and the beautiful
    scarlet apothecia of _Scyphophorus cocciferus_, instead of producing
    a rich yellow in the one case, and a deep crimson in the other,
    yielded, respectively, only dirty greenish-yellow and brownish
    colors. As a general rule I should almost be inclined to say that
    the finer the color of the thallus of any given lichen, the more is
    that lichen to be suspected of poverty in valuable coloring matters;
    and that, on the other hand, the palest pulverulent or crustaceous
    species, especially such as are saxicolous, may be expected to yield
    the most beautiful and valuable pigments (_e.g._ the Rocellas and
    Lecanoras). In such circumstances it is necessary to have some test,
    of easy applicability, of the kind and amount of colorific
    properties of any lichen, and this fortunately is readily
    attainable."

    The fourth section of the paper was devoted to the consideration of
    the various tests of colorific power, which have been recommended by
    different authors. "Of these, the greater number proceed on the
    principle of developing the coloring matter by some alkali, in
    conjunction with the decomposing action of atmospheric oxygen and
    water; others are founded on the reaction between colorific
    principles of certain of the dye lichens and some of our ordinary
    chemical re-agents." The author noticed in particular--

    1.  Helot's test,      }
    2.  Westring's tests,  }qualitative.
    3.  Stenhouse's test,  }
    4.             "        quantitative.

    Helot's test consists in digesting the dried and powdered lichen or
    a few hours, at a temperature of 130 degs., in a weak solution of
    ammonia, sufficiently strong, however, to be tolerably pungent. One
    that is fit for the dyer will yield a rich violet red liquor.

    Dr. Westring recommended simply macerating three or four drachms of
    the lichen in cool spring water, assisting, perhaps, the solvent
    action of the water by minute quantities of common salt, nitre,
    quicklime, sulphate of copper or iron, or similar re-agents. If
    these means failed, after a sufficient length of time had been
    allowed for the development of color, he digested a fresh portion of
    the pulverised lichen in water, containing small quantities of
    sal-ammoniac and quicklime [in the proportion of 25 parts of water,
    1-10th lime, and 1-20th sal-ammoniac for every part of lichen], for
    a period varying from eight to fourteen days, and by this process,
    he says, he never failed to develop all the color which the plant
    was capable of yielding.

    Dr. Stenhouse, of London, one of our latest and best authorities on
    the chemistry of the lichens, adds to an alcoholic infusion of the
    lichen, a solution of common bleaching powder (chloride of lime),
    whereby, if it contain certain colorific principles capable of
    developing, under the joint action of air, water, and ammonia, red
    coloring matters, a fugitive but distinct _blood-red color_ will be
    exhibited. The amount of this colorific matter may be estimated
    quantitatively by noting the quantity of the chloride of lime
    solution required to destroy this blood-red color in different
    cases: or the same result may be obtained by macerating for a short
    period in milk of lime--filtering--precipitating the filtered liquor
    by acetic or muriatic acid--collecting this precipitate on a weighed
    filter--drying at ordinary temperatures and again weighing.

    The author entered into a full analysis of these tests and
    processes--pointing out their respective advantages and
    disadvantages--and showing their practical value and applications.
    He stated that he had made use of these, and various other tests, in
    upwards of 300 experiments, and the one which he employed to the
    greatest extent, because most uniformly applicable, was Helot's
    ammonia test. The following combination is that most favorable for
    the development of the coloring matter of the lichens--viz., the
    presence

    1.  Of _water_ as a solvent menstruum.
    2.  Of  atmospheric _oxygen_.
    3.  Of _ammonia_, in the state of vapor or in solution, and
    4.  Of a moderate degree of _heat_;

    And according as the proportion of these combining elements varies,
    so do the kind and amount of color educed by them. This combination
    is the foundation of all the processes for the manufacture of the
    lichen dyes throughout the world, however different these may appear
    to be in detail or results.

    I believe it may come to be a matter of great commercial importance
    to discover, at home or abroad, some cheap and easily-procurable
    substitute for the _Roccellas_, which are gradually becoming scarce,
    and consequently valuable in European commerce, having sometimes
    fetched, in times of scarcity, no less than £1,000 per ton. No
    plants can be so easily collected and preserved as
    lichens--requiring merely to be cleaned, dried, pulverised, and
    packed; and if their bulk be an objection to transport, their whole
    colorific matter may be collected in the way I have already
    mentioned. Ascending to the verge of eternal snows, and descending
    to the ocean level--with a geographical diffusion that is
    co-extensive with the surface of our earth, it is difficult to say
    where lichens shall not be found. There are myriads of small rocky
    islets in the boundless ocean, and there are thousands of miles of
    barren rocky coast and sterile mountain range in every part of the
    world, which, though at present unfit to bear any of the higher
    members of the vegetable kingdom, are yet carpeted and adorned with
    a rich covering of lichens, and of those very species too, which I
    have already spoken of as prolific in colorific materials. I
    sincerely believe, therefore, that a more general attention to the
    very simple tests just enumerated, would ultimately result in a
    greatly extended use of the lichens as dye agents. What renders it
    very probable that efforts in this direction are likely to meet with
    success is the great similarity of species found all over the world.
    It has been repeatedly noticed that the European species, which, of
    course, are best known, differ little from those of North America.
    Dr. Robert Brown remarked the same fact with regard to New Holland
    species, and Humboldt also recognised the similarity in natives of
    the South American Andes. Of a large collection made by Professor
    Royle, in the Himalayas, Don pronounced almost every one to be
    identical with European species. From examining the raw vegetable
    products, sent by different countries to the Great Exhibition of
    1851, I am satisfied that, even now, there are many fields open for
    the establishment of an export trade in _Roccellas_ and other
    so-called orchella weeds." I there saw specimens of good dye lichens
    from almost every part of the world, including our own young
    colonies; and as a single instance of their probable value, I may
    introduce here the copy of a note appended to a specimen of orchella
    weed from the island of Socotra, contained in the Indian collection
    of that exhibition, "_abundant_, but _unknown_ as an article of use
    or commerce. Also abundant on the hills around (Aden) and _might_ be
    made an article of trade." Roccellas from this source are estimated
    as worth £190 to £380 per ton. I believe that a similar statement
    might be made with regard to the countless islands of the broad
    Atlantic and Pacific, which may, at some future period, perhaps not
    far distant, be found to be rich depots of orchella weeds, just as
    some of them are, at present, rich fields of guano, and may, as
    such, become new nuclei of British commerce and enterprise. Even at
    home, in the immediate vicinity of Edinburgh, or, to restrict our
    limits still more narrowly, within the compass of Arthur's Seat,
    there are not a few very good dye-lichens, which require merely to
    be scraped with an old knife or similar instrument, from the rocks
    to which they adhere, and subjected to the ammonia process already
    mentioned. Of twelve specimens thus collected at random one morning,
    I found no less than three yielded beautiful purple-red colors,
    apparently as fine as orchil or cudbear, while the others furnished
    rich and dark tints of brownish-red, brown and olive-green.

    Dr. Lindley's communication was illustrated with specimens of
    coloring matters yielded by various lichens collected in the
    neighbourhood of Edinburgh, &c.


BARKS FOR TANNING.

Let us now take a brief review of the sources from whence tanning
materials may be obtained, which will also enable us to form a fair
estimate of the prospect of future supplies. Only one medal was
awarded, at the Great Exhibition, for tanning substances, viz., to
Messrs. Curtis, Brothers (United Kingdom, No. 126), but honorable
mention was made of the following competitors:--One from Tunis, one
from Van Diemen's Land, one from New Zealand, one from Belgium, one
from the Cape of Good Hope, one from Canada, and one from the United
Kingdom.

The substance from which pure tannin is most frequently obtained for
chemical purposes is nutgalls, for tannin constitutes above 40 per
cent, of their weight. It may be procured also from several other
sources, such as oak, horse chestnut, sumach, and cinchona barks,
catechu, kino, &c.

The basis of the skins of animals is composed of a substance to which
the name of gelatine is given. One of the properties of this substance
is, that when combined with tannin, it forms the compound of tannate
of gelatine, or leather, a substance which is so useful to mankind.
From time immemorial, the substance employed to furnish the tannin to
the hides of animals, in order to convert them into leather, has been
oak bark. But as the purpose for which oaks are grown is their timber,
and not their bark, the supply of oak bark cannot be calculated upon,
and this is, perhaps, one of the causes why tanning as an art is in
such a backward state.

The consumption of tannin required in the leather manufacture may be
estimated from the fact that more than 672,000 cwts. of raw hides were
imported in 1851, besides the hides of the cattle, &c., consumed in
the United Kingdom. On the Continent and in the United States the
consumption of bark for this purpose is also considerable.

The imports of bark for the use of tanners and dyers has amounted
yearly to the very large quantity of 380,674 cwt., besides what we
obtain at home. Oak bark contains usually the largest proportion of
tannin, and according to Davy's experiments eight-and-a-half pounds of
oak bark are equivalent for tanning purposes to two-and-a-quarter of
galls, three of sumach, seven-and-a-half of Leicester willow, eleven
of Spanish chesnut, eighteen of elm, and twenty-one of common willow
bark. Tannin obtained from these sources, however, differs materially
in some of its characters. The tannin of nutgalls, which is that
generally employed for chemical purposes, is sometimes called
gallo-tannic acid, to distinguish it from other species.

Notwithstanding the number of different substances which have from
time to time been introduced for the use of tanners, it is,
nevertheless, pretty generally acknowledged that there is nothing
superior, or even equal, to good oak bark, and that all attempts to
hurry the process beyond a certain point by the use of concentrated
solutions of tan, &c., are for the most part failures, as the
manufacture of good leather, to a great extent, depends on the process
being conducted in a slow and gradual, but--at the same time--thorough
and complete matter.

Oak bark is, however, by no means the only astringent bark well suited
to the use of the tanner, and in various parts of the world other
similar substances are used with very great success. All these tanning
materials, though they may not be considered by the English tanner
equal to the best oak bark, are, nevertheless, of great value to him;
they may be employed in conjunction with oak bark, or even as a
substitute in times of scarcity, or when the price of oak bark is
high; in fact the very existence of such substances tends to keep down
and equalise the price of bark, and to prevent it from undergoing
those great fluctuations in value which would necessarily occur were
it the only tanning material available to our manufacture--("Prof.
Solly in Jury Reports of Great Exhibition.")

There are a vast number of bark and other substances useful for
tanning purposes, which are found in the tropics, that are
comparatively unknown or little regarded in Europe; but which might be
readily obtained in large quantities and at a trifling cost. The bark
of many species of _Acacia_ furnishes the tanning principle in a great
degree, particularly that of _A. arabica_, which, under the name of
Babul wood, is largely used about Scinde, Biliary, Gruzerat, and other
parts of India; where it is regarded as a powerful tonic. The fruit of
_A. vera_, termed Egyptian and Senegal "bablah," has been employed in
tanning and dyeing. Numerous species of this tribe are found abundant
in New South Wales and the Cape Colony, and these, particularly the
wattle bark of Australia, are in common use for tanning, from their
astringent properties. The bark and rind of the fruit of the
pomegranate (_Pumica Granata_) have similar properties.

The bark of _Avicenna tomentosa_ is in great use in the Brazils for
tanning. So are the curved pods of _Cæsalpinia Coriari_, in the East
and West Indies, under the name of Divi-divi. _Coriaria myrtifolia_ is
not only used in tanning leather, but also for staining black. It is
worth £9 to £10 per ton. _Pterocarpus marsupium_ furnishes about
Tellicherry the concrete exudation called kino, a powerful astringent
used for tanning.

The plants of the mangrove tribe, _Rhizophora Mangle_, and other
allied species, have frequently an astringent bark, which is in many
cases used for tanning and dyeing black. This tree is very common in
most tropical countries, where it forms dense thickets on the muddy
banks of rivers and the sea shores. The bark of _Bauhinia variegata_,
is made use of in Scinde and other parts of Asia. The bitter
astringent bark and the galls of several of the Tamarisk tribe are
also well suited for the purpose.

_Mesembryanthemum nodiflorum_, one of the numerous indigenous species
of the Cape, is used in making morocco leather.

The extract procured from the bark of the _Butea_, that of the
_Buchanania latifolia_, the _Scyzgium_ (_Calyptranthes_), _Jambolana_,
&c., are likely to be of consequence to the tanners, and could be
produced in India in large quantities. Specimens of these, and of the
bark of the Saul tree, of _Nychanthes arbortrista, Terminalia
angustifolia_, and of the gaub fruit (_Diospyros glutinosa_), were
shown by the East India Company. The bark of the hemlock tree is
extensively employed for tanning in New Brunswick.

The bark of yellow hercules (_Xanthoxylum ochroxylon_), and the pods
of _Acacia tortuosa_ are used for tanning in the West Indies.

In the instructions given by the Admiralty to Sir James Boss, when
proceeding on his Antarctic Expedition, his attention was particularly
called to the astringent substances adapted for tanning, and to the
various extracts of barks, &c., imported into England from our
Australian settlements, and which are employed by the tanner. Little
sterling information has as yet been obtained as to the qualities of
the astringent gums, barks, and dyes, yielded in such abundance by the
trees of those colonies, and the proportion of tannin they contained.

In 1846, 563 tons of bark for tanning were exported from Port Phillip.

A large quantity of tannin is extracted from various species of
Eucalyptus, the gigantic gum trees in Australia and Van Diemen's Land
(of which quarter all the species are natives), and sent to the
English market; it is said to be twice as powerful in its operations
as oak bark. Some of these trees attain a height of 200 feet. Their
bark separates remarkably into layers. A sort of kino gum, an
astringent resinous-like substance, is also extracted from _E.
resinifera_, the brown gum-tree of New Holland, which is sold in the
medicine bazaars of India. It exudes in the form of red juice from
incisions in the bark. A single tree will often yield 60 gallons. In
Brazil they use the bark of _Luhea panicata_, an evergreen climber,
for tanning leather; and in Peru the bark of some species of
_Weinmaunia_ serve the same purpose. Among other powerful astringents
I may notice the root of a species of Sea Lavender (_Statice
Caroliniana_), _Myrica cerifera_, and _Heuchera Americana_, all
natives of North America. Also the petals of _Hibiscus Rosa-sinensis_,
a native of Asia.

The sea-side grape (_Coccolaba uvifera_) yields an astringent
substance, known as Jamaica kino.

The bark of the _Cassia auriculata_, and the milky juice of the
_Asclepias gigantea_, are used for tanning in India.

The red astringent gum obtained from _Butea frondosa_, a middling
size tree, common in Bengal and the mountainous parts of India, is
used by the natives for tanning. English tanners, however, object to
its use on account of the color which it communicates to the leather.

The barks of the _Mora excelsa_, Benth; Courida (_Avicenna nutida_),
cashew (_Anicardium occidentale_), guava and hog-plum (_Spondius
lutea_, Linn.), have all been successfully used for tanning in
Demerara and the West India Islands, where they are very abundant.
Specimens were sent from British Guiana.

The root of the Palmetto palm (_Chaemaerops Palmetto_) is stated to be
valuable for the purposes of tanning. The leaves of _Nerium Oleander_
contain tannic acid. The bark of a species of Malphigia is much used
by the Brazilians.

The panke (_Gunnera scabra_) is a fine plant, growing in Chili, on the
sandstone cliffs, which somewhat resembles the rhubarb on a gigantic
scale. The inhabitants eat the stalks, which are subacid, tan leather
with the roots, and also prepare a black dye from them. The leaf is
nearly circular, but deeply indented on its margin. Mr. Darwin
measured one which was nearly eight feet in diameter, and therefore no
less than twenty-four in circumference. The stalk is rather more than
a yard high, and each plant sends out four or five of these enormous
leaves, presenting together a very noble appearance.

The barks replete with the tanning principle should be stripped with
hatchets and bills from the trunk and branches of trees in spring,
when their sap flows most freely. The average quantity of oak bark
obtained from our forests is estimated at 150,000 tons annually, of
which Ireland and Scotland furnish but a very small quantity.

The following table, given by Dr. Ure, shows the quantity of
extractive matter and tannin yielded by different substances:--

                      In 480 parts         In 100 parts
                        by Davy.            by Cadet.
  Sicilian sumach          78                  --
  Malaga ditto             79                  --
  Souchong tea             48                  --
  Green tea                41                  --
  Bombay catechu          261                  --
  Bengal ditto            231                  --
  Nutgalls                127                  46
  Bark of pomegranate      --                  32
    "   Virginian sumach   --                  10
    "   Carolina ditto     --                   5

Catechu and Gambier are very valuable for tanning, and are alluded to
under the heads GAMBIER and ARECA PALM.

CATECHU is obtained from the _Acacia Catechu_, an arboreous tree
growing from fifteen to twenty feet high, with a brown and scabrous
bark. The interior wood is brown, dark red or blackish, and the
exterior white, one or two inches thick. It inhabits various parts of
the East Indies, of which it is a native, and is also now common in
Jamaica. It bears whitish or pale yellow flowers.

The catechu obtained from this tree in Pegu, is celebrated throughout
India, and fetches £4 to £5 more per ton than gambier and other
astringent extracts. When of good quality, catechu is more powerful as
an astringent than kino. Of all the astringent substances we know,
catechu appears to contain the largest proportion of tannin, and Mr.
Purkis found that one pound was equivalent to seven or eight of oak
bark for tanning leather.

The term catechu, observes Dr. Pereira, is applied to various
astringent extracts imported from India and the neighbouring
countries. A few years ago the terms catechu, terra japonica, and
cutch were employed synonymously; they are now, however, for the most
part used in trade somewhat distinctively, though not uniformly in the
same sense. The manufacture of catechu from the _Acacia catechu_ as
practised in Canara and Behar, has been described by Mr. Kerr ("Med.
Obs. and Inquiries," vol. v.), and Dr. Hamilton ("Journey through
Mysore," &c., vol. iii.), while Professor Royle has explained the
process followed in Northern India. According to the last-mentioned
gentleman, "the kutt manufacturers move to different parts of the
country in different seasons, erect temporary huts in the jungles, and
selecting trees fit for their purpose, cut the inner wood into small
chips. These they put into small earthen pots, which are arranged in a
double row, along a fireplace built of mud; water is then poured in
until the whole are covered; after a considerable portion has boiled
away, the clear liquor is strained into one of the neighbouring pots,
and a fresh supply of the material is put into the first, and the
operation repeated until the extract in the general receiver is of
sufficient consistence to be poured into clay moulds, which, in the
Kheree Pass and Doon, where I have seen the process, are generally of
a quadrangular form. This catechu is usually of a pale red color, and
is considered there to be of the best quality. By the manufacturers it
is conveyed to Saharunpore and Moradabad, whence it follows the course
of commerce down the Ganges, and meets that from Nepaul, so that both
may be exported from Calcutta."


GAMBIER.

The Gambier plant (_Uncaria Gambler_, Roxburgh, _Nauclea Gambir_,
Hunter), has been described by Rumphius under the name of _Funis
uncatus_. It is a stout, scandent, evergreen shrub, which strongly
resembles the myrtle. It is generally cultivated in the same
plantation with pepper, as the leaves and shoots, after undergoing the
process by which their juice is extracted, to furnish a kind of
catechu, are found to be an excellent manure for the pepper vines. The
leaves and young shoots of the gambier plant are collected as soon as
they have attained a sufficient size, and boiled in iron pans until
the juice acquires the consistence of treacle. The decoction is poured
out into narrow troughs, dried, and afterwards cut up into small
cakes, and packed in baskets for exportation. The gambier extract,
which is of a yellowish brown color, and has the consistence of hard
cheese, is much esteemed by the Malays for mixing with the preparation
of betel, which they are in the habit of chewing; and considerable
quantities have lately been imported to this country, where it is used
for dyeing colors, and for tanning leather. The demand for gambier
here is on the increase; and when better known to our chemists, it
will probably be found applicable to many other purposes than those to
which it is at present applied.

There were, in 1850, 400 gambier and pepper plantations on the island
of Singapore; each measures or occupies on an average an area of 500
fathoms square, and employs eight to ten hands to cultivate and
manufacture the gambier and pepper. There are some pepper plantations
in addition, and they have been found to answer very well without any
gambier being cultivated with them. Gambier cultivation is generally a
losing undertaking, but it is adopted to obtain the refuse of the
leaves for manuring the pepper vines, and also to employ the people in
the plantations; it besides affords the proprietors the means of
getting monthly sums to carry on the cultivation of pepper, which
affords two crops yearly. There were formerly 600 plantations in
Singapore, but the reason already assigned, and the formation of spice
plantations contiguous have caused the abandonment of all those near
the town. Each plantation must have an equal extent of forest land to
that cultivated with gambier and pepper, to enable the manufacture of
the gambier being carried on, and each gambier plantation, of 500
fathoms square, contains about 3,500 pepper vines, which yield on an
average two catties per vine, or 70 piculs of pepper, and about 170
piculs of gambier annually;--a good plantation will, however, yield
sometimes as much as 120 piculs of pepper, and 200 piculs of gambier,
and a bad one as little as 40 to 50 piculs of pepper, and 60 to 80
piculs of gambier. Were it not for the enormous commission charged by
the agents of these plantations, from whom the cultivators get all the
advances, it would prove a profitable cultivation. The rates of
commission charged generally are as follows:--Per picul of gambier,
fifteen to twenty-five cents; per picul of pepper, thirty to forty
cents; and if the price of the former is below one-and-a-half dollars,
and the latter below three-and-a-half dollars per picul, a small
reduction is made in the rates of commission. On every picul of rice
supplied to the planters twenty to twenty-five cents commission is
charged; this includes the interest of money advanced, which is never
charged. A gambier and pepper plantation is valued or estimated at
about 400 dollars on an average. The following is supposed to be a
correct estimate, on an average, of the yearly expenditure and returns
of a gambier and pepper plantation of 500 fathoms square, viz:--

                                EXPENDITURE.
                                                   drs. c.   men.   drs. c.
  Eight men at 3½ dollars and 7 Java rupees per
  month, wages for  headman and labourers
  respectively                                      22.70     12     272.40
  Five piculs of rice, including commission, say     6.50     12      81.60
  Fish, &c.                                          5        12      60.0
  Boat or cart hire to carry rice and produce        1¾       12      21.0

                                                                     435.0

                                 PRODUCE.

  170 piculs of gambier, valued at l dollar 45 cents
  per picul, less 15 cents commission chargeable,
  nett                                              221.30    --     ---
  70 piculs of pepper, at 4½ dollars, less 40 cents
  per picul commission, nett                        287.0     --    508.0

Yearly profit, 73 dollars, or about £15.

Several gambier and pepper plantations have been abandoned in
Singapore, partly from the ground being impoverished, but more
particularly from the exhaustion of the forest adjacent to their
estates. The exhaustion of the trees by yearly consumption deprives
the planters of the necessary fire wood which is used for the boiling
down of the gambier. A gambier plantation gets exhausted in fifteen
years, either from the want of firewood or the land getting
impoverished.

There are about 200 plantations at Johore, and the produce of gambier
for the season of 1851 was calculated at 30,000 piculs.

This shrub was, at one period, cultivated with success at Pinang and
other places to the eastward, but as Java was the principal market for
the produce, and the Dutch had levied a duty of twelve Java rupees per
picul on it, the cultivation at the former island did not repay its
cost, and it was accordingly abandoned. Prices have been lately
advancing, and the Chinese are talking of trying it again. The plant
is partial to hilly land or slopes at the skirts of hills. Two hundred
plants are usually placed on one orlong of land, being six feet
asunder. They are raised from seed, and are topped to eight or ten
feet, when the gambier is to be prepared. The Chinese dry the seed
slightly, and sow in rainy weather.

The seeds vegetate in forty days, and are planted out in the second or
third month afterwards.

At the expiration of fourteen months, the first cutting of the
branches, with the leaves on, is made. These are put into a boiler,
and when the juice has been extracted, the branches and refuse are
thrown away, and the boiling is continued until the liquor has
obtained the proper consistence, when it is put into shallow troughs,
dried, and cut into slices for sale. The second cutting takes place
eight months subsequently to the first. The plant now grows strong and
admits of frequent cropping, and it will endure for twenty years. No
manure is used, but the plantation is kept clean.

Estimated cost of cultivating ten orlongs, about 13 acres, according
to Colonel Low:--

                                     Spanish dollars.
  Value of cleared land, ten orlongs       200
  Six laborers per annum                   360
  Quit rent                                  7
  Boilers, firewood, and implements         20
  Houses                                    50
  Incidental                                30

  Total first year                         667
  Second year                              397

                                         1,064

The six laborers on the plantation will, after the above period, be
constantly employed in cutting and preparing the gambier: the average
product will be 15 piculs monthly, which, at two dollars per picul,
will be 30 dollars monthly, or 360 dollars per annum. This is the
account obtained by collating different Chinese statements.

The _Nauclea Gambir_ is placed by Jussieu under the natural order
_Rubiaceæ_; it is a shrub attaining the height of six to eight feet,
branchy; the leaves are ovate, pointed, smooth, waving, distinctly
veined transversely underneath, of dark green color, and, when chewed,
they have a bitter astringent taste, leaving however, afterwards, a
sweetish taste in the mouth, not unlike liquorice; the flowers are
aggregate, globular, composed of numerous florets, crowded on a
globular naked receptacle; tubes of the corolla of a pinkish color;
the upper part of the corolla fine, cleft, and of a greenish yellow
color; the staminæ are five in number, and short; the pistil is longer
than the corolla; the flowers are destitute of fragrance; the capsules
(as correctly stated by Mr. Hunter) are stalked oblong, incrusted, and
crowned with a calyx; tapering to a point below; two celled, two
valved, the valves adhering at the apex, splitting at the sides; seeds
very numerous, oblong, very small, compressed, furnished at both ends
with a membraneous pappus.

The gambier plant is propagated either by seeds or cuttings, but the
latter are preferred. It is cultivated to some extent at Singapore,
but it is said that the gambier can be imported cheaper from the
islands in the vicinity, more especially at the Dutch settlement at
Rhio. The extract is used extensively by the natives of India, Eastern
Archipelago, Cochin-China, and Cambodia, as a masticatory, wrapped up
with the betel.

There are three different qualities of extract; the first and best is
white, brittle, and has an earthy appearance when rubbed between the
fingers (which earthy appearance gave it the name of Terra Japonica,
being supposed, at first also, to come from Japan), and is formed into
very small round cakes. This is the dearest sort, and most refined,
but it is not unfrequently adulterated with sago; this kind is brought
in the greatest quantity from the island of Sumatra. The second
quality is of a brownish yellow color, is formed into oblong cakes,
and, when broken, has a light brown earthy appearance; it is also made
into a solid cube form; it is sold in the bazars in small packets,
each containing five or six. The third quality contains more
impurities than the preceding, is formed into small circular cakes,
and is sold in packages of five or six in the bazar.

The method employed in preparing the extract is thus correctly related
by Finlayson:--"The leaves are collected three or four times a year;
they are thrown into a large cauldron, the bottom of which is formed
of iron, the upper part of bark, and boiled for five or six hours,
until a strong decoction is obtained; the leaves are then withdrawn,
and allowed to strain over the vessel, which is kept boiling for as
many hours more, until the decoction is inspissated; it is then
allowed to cool, when the catechu subsides, The water is drawn off; a
soft soapy substance remains, which is cut into large masses; these
are further divided by a knife into small cubes, about an inch square,
or into still smaller pieces, which are laid in frames to dry. This
catechu has more of a granular, uniform appearance than that of
Bengal; it is, perhaps, also less pure."

The younger leaves of the shrub are said to produce the whitest and
best gambier; the older, a brown and inferior sort. There are other
species of _Nauclea_ indigenous to Singapore, but they do not produce
any extract.

Dr. Bennett has particularised four qualities of gambier:--

1. Small round cakes, about the size of a small lozenge. Color pale,
purplish, yellowish, white.

2. Cubes, in which shape it is principally imported into England, and
square prisms, or oblong pieces.

3. Circular discs, or short cylindrical pieces.

4. Cubical amylaceous pieces, of a darker brown than the other kinds.

Gambier is one of the most powerful of the pure astringents.

The chief places of manufacture are Saik, Malacca, Singapore, and Rhio
or Bintang. Bennett, in his "Wanderings," says there are 60,000
plantations of gambier on this island. After that of Rhio, the next
best gambier is that of Lingin. That used by the Malays, with the
leaves of betel, in the same manner as cutch in other parts of India,
is the finest and whitest; the red being stronger tasted and rank, is
exported to Batavia, China, and England, for the purposes of tanning
and dyeing. It is frequently adulterated with sago powder, but it may
be detected by solution in water.

Large quantities of gambier are imported, under the corrupted name of
cutch, into Calcutta, from Pegu. The quantity of gambier produced in
Rhio, by the Chinese settlers, amounts to about 4,600 tons a year,
about 2,000 of which are exported for the consumption of Java, the
rest being sent to Cochin-China and other neighbouring countries.

Two methods of obtaining gambier are described. One consists in
boiling the leaves in water, and in inspissating the decoction; the
other, which yields the best gambier, consists in infusing the leaves
in warm water, by which a fecula is obtained, which is inspissated by
the heat of the sun, and formed into cakes.

The injudicious practice adopted by the Land Office in Singapore, of
granting indiscriminate licenses, or "cutting papers" as they are
formed, seems open to objection, and is driving many of the Chinese
cultivators to the neighbouring island of Johore, where they readily
obtain permission to cultivate, without obstruction, this important
article of commerce. Parties of 300 or 400 at a time left in 1846. It
appears that, under his permissive license, the squatter obtains
permission to clear as much land as he possibly can, but the order
does not define any extent beyond which no cutting should take place.
The squatter clears as much land as the means at his disposal will
allow, in the hope and expectation that the jungle contiguous to the
cleared ground will be at his command for fuel--a supply of fuel, easy
of access, and adequate to the number of plants grown, being
indispensable to the culture and manufacture of gambier. When the time
for gathering the leaves arrives, another squatter (perhaps from
motives of envy or malice) obtains a "cutting paper," and commences
clearing in close proximity to the already-formed gambier plantation;
obviously depriving the owner of the fuel he has reasonably calculated
upon. The established planter cannot of course eject the intruder from
the land, since the latter possesses an equal right to it, in virtue
of his "cutting paper," which, as it specifies no limits, leaves him
the disposer or destroyer of the crop of the industrious planter.
Instead of the present system, a better practice ought to be
introduced, defining the boundaries to be included in a "cutting
paper," and effectually preventing a trespass on the fuel-land of the
industrious planter. This might easily be effected by specifying the
number of acres, as well as the direction, in every clearing paper
granted.

The average produce of gambier in Singapore is between 7,000 and 8,000
piculs monthly. The ordinary price is about 1¼ dollars per picul. A
deficiency of rain, labor, or other causes, will occasionally reduce
the annual produce from 90,000 or 100,000 piculs, to 60,000 or 70,000,
and this diminished supply will raise the market price of the article
probably 35 cents per picul. But, in addition to the effect occasioned
by a deficient supply, there are other causes in operation exercising
a powerful influence in reducing prices. Gambier was first exported in
1830, from Singapore, to the extent of 2,587 piculs, at 4½ dollars per
picul. As a rival to bark it failed at so costly a price to meet with
encouragement; the culture and manufacture consequently declined until
1834, when 1,858 piculs were shipped to England at a somewhat lower
rate. The demand then became active, the exportations were at first
multiplied, then doubled every succeeding year, until they reached, in
1846-47 no less than 173,117 piculs. The price has gradually declined
to 1¼ dollars per picul, at which rate it displaces its rival, bark.
This price, however, is unremunerative to the grower, so that, unless
more encouragement offers, the supply will decline.

The number of Chinese employed in the cultivation, &c., of gambier
and pepper in Singapore is about 11,000. Their rate of wages
fluctuates with the price of gambier. If a picul of gambier realizes
1½ dollars, the monthly pay will be about three dollars; if gambier
fetches two dollars, their pay will amount to four dollars in the
month. The workmen who clean the plantation always receive a dollar
less than those who cut and boil the gambier.

A good deal of gambier seems now to be grown in Java, for 58,305
piculs were exported from that island in 1843. A small quantity is
taken by the Chinese ports, but whether as a masticatory or for
tanning and dyeing I am not aware.

  VALUE OF THE TERRA JAPONICA IMPORTED INTO CEYLON.
               £
  1840        611
  1841      1,053
  1842        768
  1843        471
  1844      1,153
  1845        537
  1846        824
  1847      1,549
  1848      1,095
  1849        896
  1850        265
  1851        386

In the Customs' returns of imports to this country, two articles are
enumerated, under the separate names of cutch and terra japonica; the
former is catechu and the latter the produce of the gambier plant. The
imports of gambier were, in 1836, 970 tons; 1837, 2,738 tons; 1838,
1,600 tons; 1839, 5,213 tons.

                                        Cutch.   Terra Japonica.
                                         tons.         tons.
  1848  Imported to the United Kingdom   1,186         5,623
        Retained for home consumption      765         5,102
  1849  Imported                         1,636         6,851
        Retained for home consumption      869         5,400
  1850  Imported                         1,172         4,585
        Home consumption                   787         3,655
  1851  Imported                         2,401         4,783
        Home consumption                 2,020         4,431
  1852  Imported                         2,236         3,244
        Home consumption                 1,708         3,003

Catechu, imported under its Indian name of cutch, is brought over in
bales or baskets of from one to four cwt., the price being £18 to £25
per ton. About 450 cwt. of terra japonica or gambier is annually
imported into Hull from the East Indies. The imports of the two
substances into Liverpool is about 900 tons. Gambier is only worth £13
to £14 the ton; a few years ago it fetched 26s. the cwt. The imports
into the port of London average 1,500 tons annually.

4,679 bales, and 14,436 baskets of terra japonica were imported into
Liverpool in 1851, and 14,000 bales and baskets in 1852. The imports
of cutch were 10,290 bags, and 2,592 baskets, in 1851, and 11,873 bags
and baskets in 1852; the prices, which were from 16s. 6d. to 18s. per
cwt. for each article, in 1851, were rapidly run up in Liverpool, in
1853, owing to short supplies, to 25s. for gambier, and 22s. to 24s.
per cwt. for cutch, or catechu.

  EXPORTS OF GAMBIER FROM SINGAPORE, WITH THE OFFICIAL VALUE IN RUPEES.

                                  Piculs.   Value in rupees.
  1840-41   Exported               79,508      457,560
     "      Growth of Singapore    59,325
  1841-42   Exported               93,340      470,790
     "      Growth of Singapore    47,696
  1842-43   Exported              148,746      548,281
     "      Growth of Singapore   110,151
  1843-44   Exported              139,050      584,449
     "      Growth of Singapore   121,791
  1844-45   Exported              157,654      539,978
     "      Growth of Singapore   134,528
  1845-46   Exported              110,766      425,643
     "      Growth of Singapore    75,797
  1846-47   Exported              173,117      591,943
     "      Growth of Singapore   143,795

The exports of gambier from Singapore were as follows:--

        To England.  To the Continent.  Total.
           piculs.       piculs.        piculs.
  1849    134,546         6,121        140,667
  1850     87,611        16,166        103,777
  1851     68,365        11,639         80,004
  1852     68,045         9,006         77,051

The exports of cutch from Pinang, in the last four years, have
been:--1849, 3,693 piculs; 1850, 900; 1851, 4,143; 1852, 3,880; or, on
an average, 197 tons.

DIVI-DIVI is the commercial name for the curved pod of a leguminous
shrub, _Cæsalpinia coriaria_, which is sometimes imported from
Carthage. Its tannin differs materially from that of nutgalls. The
quantity of mucilage which it contains precludes it from the use of
dyers; but, as it furnishes nearly 50 per cent. of tannin, it is
largely used by curriers. It is imported into Liverpool from Rio de la
Hacha, Maracaibo, and Savanila. 400 tons of the seed pods and bark of
the Algaroba, or Locust-tree (_Prosopis pallida_) were imported in
1849 into Liverpool from Valparaiso, as a substitute for divi-divi in
tanning. 3,200 lbs. of divi-divi were exported from the port of
Augostara, in 1846.

Specimens of divi-divi which had been raised at Calcutta were shown in
the Indian department of the Great Exhibition.

Dr. Hamilton states that, according to some admirably conducted
experiments of Mr. Rootsey, of Bristol, undertaken at his request, the
pods of divi-divi contain above 50 per cent. of tannin. It appears
also, from trials made, that one part of divi-divi is sufficient for
tanning as much leather as four parts of bark, and the process
occupies but one-third of the time.

The average produce of pods from a full-grown tree has been estimated
at 100 lbs. weight, one-fourth of which consists of seeds or refuse,
leaving about 75 lbs. of marketable matter.

At an interval of six feet apart, an acre of ground will contain 1,210
trees, yielding an average of 810 cwts., and 30 pounds, or above 40½
tons of marketable matter, worth, at only £5 per ton, £200. Should the
interval between the trees be extended two feet more, we shall still
have 680 to the acre, the produce of which would not improbably be
increased by the increased space given for the extension of the
branches.

The ground in which this tree admits of being cultivated is that which
is least adapted to the staple products of tropical agriculture;
guinea grass may be profitably raised beneath its shade and as with
the exception of the three years which precede the commencement of its
bearing, there is hardly any deduction to be made from its returns, it
promises to be among the most valuable objects of a planter's
attention.

Jacquin describes the _Cæsalpinia coriaria_ as a handsome branching
tree, of about fifteen feet in stature, covered with a dark spotted
bark. Its leaves are doubly pinnate, and the leaflets of twelve pair
without a terminal one; they are oblong, obtuse, smooth, very entire.
The flowers are disposed in spikes issuing from the extremities of the
branches; they are small, yellowish, and slightly fragrant. To these
succeed oblong, compressed, somewhat obtuse pods, curved laterally,
the inner side being concave and the other convex. The seeds rarely
exceed three or four in each pod, and are of a brownish color.

Divi-divi resembles a dried pea-shuck curled up, filled with yellow
powder, and a few dark brown seeds. The price ranges from £8 to £13
per ton.

The imports into the United Kingdom in 1844, were 3,900 tons; in 1845
and 1846, about 1,400 tons each year; during the subsequent three
years the imports were merely nominal, but in 1850 a renewed demand
seems to have sprung up, for 2,770 tons were imported into Liverpool,
and a few tons into London.

CORK-TREE BARK (_Quercus suber_) has been imported into Ireland to a
considerable extent, frequently to the amount of 1,500 tons annually.
The quantity of cork imported annually into the United Kingdom is
about 3,000 tons. It is brought from Spain, Italy, and Barbary. Oak
bark and valonia being very cheap and plentiful, the price of cork
hark is only nominal, being, for Spanish cork-tree bark, £7 10s. to £8
per ton; Leghorn ditto, £6 to £7 per ton. It is less astringent than
oak bark, and is more generally useful for stoppers of bottles and
bungs for casks. 160 tons of cork-tree bark were imported into
Liverpool from Rabat in 1849, and 150 tons in 1850.

1,867 cwts. of bark for tanning were imported from Chili in 1844, of
which 292 were Quillai bark.

MIMOSA BARK.--The bark of the _Mimosa decurrens_, which abounds in
Australia and Van Diemen's Land, is found to be a very powerful
tanning agent.

The first shipment of tannin was made from Sydney to England as far
back as 1823, in the shape of an extract of the bark of two species of
mimosa, which was readily purchased by the tanners at the rate of £50
per ton. One ton of bark had produced four cwts. of extract of the
consistency of tar.

In 1843, 3,078 tons of mimosa bark was shipped from Port Phillip to
Great Britain. The price then realised in the London market was £12 to
£14 per ton, but it has since declined to £8 a ton. The quantity of
this bark to be procured in the colony is quite inexhaustible. The
price of chopped mimosa bark in Australia, for export, in the close of
1846, was £2 5s. per ton. Bark valued at £912 was exported from Van
Diemen's Land in 1848.

The imports of mimosa bark have only been to a limited extent within
the last few years, reaching 350 tons in 1850, against 110 tons in
1849, 230 tons in 1848, and 600 tons in 1847. The prices realised were
£10 to £11 for chopped, £12 to £12 10s. for ground, and £8 to £9 per
ton for unchopped bark. Whilst the imports were 3,900 tons in 1814,
they dwindled to less than 400 tons in 1850.

From an experiment, conducted by Professor Brandt, the strength of the
mimosa bark, as compared with that of young English oak bark, is found
to be in the proportion of 57 to 39, so that the mimosa bark is half
as strong again as the best English bark.

Mr. Samuel Mossman, in a communication to the Botanic Society of
Edinburgh, in 1851, stated that the bark of _A. dealbata_ pays to ship
to England, notwithstanding the distance, from the fact of its
containing a greater per centage of tannin than any other bark. It is
a handsome tree, from fifteen to thirty feet high, forming luxuriant
groves on the banks of streams, most abundant in Port Phillip and
Twofold Bay, between the parallels of latitude 34 and 30 degrees.

New Zealand is rich in barks and dyes. The bark of the Tanahaka
(_Phyllodadus trichomanoides_, of Don) is used by the natives as a red
dye for the ornamental parts of their kaitahas, their best border
garments. There is also another red dye, called Tawaivwai, the bark of
which is very profuse. A black dye is procured from the hinau. They
are of a rich hue, and exceedingly fast colors. The barks are to be
found all over the colony. The hinau and tanahaka are employed in
tanning, all the leather used in the colony being tanned either at the
Bay of Islands or Port Nicholson.

The bark of the Rimu or red pine (_Dacrydium Cupressinum_, of
Solander), a very common tree, possesses tanning qualities far
superior to any of the Australian barks. One pound of the bark yields
85 grains of extract.

The native tanning barks of New Zealand are various and easily
obtained. Specimens of the bark and dye, &c., of most of these trees
were sent home to the Great Exhibition. One pound of the Tanahaka bark
is said to yield 63 grains of tannin. The sails of boats are dyed with
it to preserve them. The Towai (_Licospermum racemosum_, of Don,
_Weinmaunia racemosa_, Decandole), is supposed to be valuable for the
purposes of the tanner, and is said to yield 104 grains of tannin for
every pound of bark. The bark of the Pohutu kawa of the natives, the
_Metrosideros tomentosa_of Richard, and _Callistemon ellipticum_ of
Allan Cunningham, would also be useful for tanning, one pound of it
furnishing about 60 grains of tannin.

The bark of the Hino tree, the _Elæocarpus hinau_ of Cunningham, the
_Dicera dentata_ of Forster, is used by the natives for dyeing black.

The black mangrove (_Rhizophora mangle_) is a tree attaining an
altitude of from 30 to 50 feet, and occupying marshy situations in the
vicinity of the sea. Almost every part of the mangrove--the bark,
roots, and the fruit more particularly--abounds in an astringent
principle, which is successfully applied to the purposes of tanning.
As the tree is so abundant within the tropics, it might be worth the
while of some practical speculator to make an extract on the spot, and
introduce it into the English market, for the use of tanners and
dyers. For tanning, the mangrove is said to be infinitely superior to
oak bark, completing in six weeks an operation which with the latter
occupies at least six months, and the sole-leather so tanned is said
to be more durable than any other. The bark and leaves, which contain
nearly as much tannin as the oak, are made use of in the West Indies,
as well as in Scinde and other parts of Asia.

3,713 piculs of mangrove bark, valued at £819, were shipped from
Shanghae, one of the Chinese ports, in 1849.

MYROBALANS.--This is a name applied to the almond-like kernels of a
nut or dried fruit of the plum kind, of which there are several sorts
known in the East. They are the produce of various species of
_Terminalia_, as _T. Bellerica, chebula, citrina_, and _angustifolia_.
They vary from the size of olives to that of gall nuts, and have a
rough, bitter, and unpleasant taste. Many of the trees of this tribe,
which are all natives of the tropical regions of Asia, Africa, and
America, are used for tanning, and some for dyeing. They are highly
valued by dyers, creating, when mixed with alum, a durable dark brown
yellow. Myrobalans fetch in the Bombay market 8s. to 26s. the Surat
candy of 821 lbs. The bark and leaves of _T. Catappa_ yield a black
pigment, with which Indian ink is made; the seeds are eaten like
almonds. A milky juice is said to flow from _T. angustifolia_, which,
when dried, is fragrant, and, resembling Benzoin, is used as a kind of
incense in the Catholic churches in the Mauritius. The fruit of _T.
Bellerica_, and of _T. Chebula_, both useful timber trees, indigenous
to the East Indies, are used medicinally as a tonic and astringent.
117 cwts. of myrobalans were shipped from Ceylon in 1845.

The annual imports of myrobalans into Hull, amount to about 1,600
cwts. The quantity which arrived at Liverpool was 185 tons in 1849,
851 tons in 1850; 27,212 bags in 1851, and 19,946 bags in 1852; they
come from Calcutta and Bombay, and are also used for dyeing yellow and
black. The price in January, 1853, was 6s. to 12s. per cwt. The
average annual imports into the United Kingdom may be taken at 1,200
tons.

KINO.--The Kino, of Botany Bay and Van Diemen's Land, is the produce
of the iron bark tree, _Eucalyptus resinifera_. White ("Journal of a
Voyage to New South Wales"), says this tree sometimes yields, on
incision, 60 gallons of juice. Kino is imported in boxes. The
tincture of kino is used medicinally, but an inconvenience is
frequently found to arise, from its changing to the gelatinous form.
Dr. Pereira seems to think this species of kino consists principally
of pectin and tannic acid. That chiefly used as East Indian kino, is
an extract formed by inspissating a decoction of the branches and
twigs of the gambler plant. Vauquelin analysed it, and found it to
consist of, tannin and peculiar extractive matter, 75; red gum, 24;
insoluble matter, 1.

The East Indian kino, imported from Bombay and Tellicherry, is the
produce of _Pterocarpus marsupium_, a lofty, broad-spreading forest
tree, which blossoms in October and November. The bark is of a greyish
color, and is upwards of half an inch in thickness on the trunk. When
cut, a blood-red juice speedily exudes and trickles down; it soon
thickens, and becomes hard in the course of fifteen or sixteen hours.
The gum is extracted in the season when the tree is in blossom, by
making longitudinal incisions in the bark round the trunk, so as to
let the gum ooze down a broad leaf, placed as a spout, into a
receiver. When the receiver is filled it is removed. The gum is dried
in the sun until it crumbles, and then filled in wooden boxes for
exportation.

_P. erinaceus_, a tree 40 to 50 feet in height, a native of the woods
of the Gambia and Senegal, furnishes kino, but none is collected in or
exported from Africa. _Butea frondosa_, or the dhak tree of the East
Indies, furnishes a similar product, in the shape of a milky, colored,
brittle, and very astringent gum. Kino is used as a powerful
astringent, and is administered in the form of powder and tincture.
Some specimens of Butea kino, analysed by Prof. Solly, after the
impurities had been separated, yielded 73¼ per cent. of tannin.

VALONIA is the commercial name of the cupula or cup of the acorn,
produced by the _Quercus ægilops_ and its varieties, the Balonia or
Valonia oak, natives of the Levant, from whence, and the Morea, they
form a very considerable article of export; containing abundance of
tannin they are largely used by tanners. The tannin differs materially
from that of nutgalls. The bark of _Q. tinctorea_, a native of North
America, yields a yellow dye.

The quantity of valonia imported for home consumption, in 1836, was
80,511 cwts., of which Turkey furnished 58,724 cwts., and Italy and
the Ionian islands 7,209 cwts. Of 163,983 cwts. imported in 1840,
143,095 cwts. were brought from Turkey, 15,195 cwts. from Italy, and
the residue from Greece and the Ionian Islands. The entries for home
consumption in the three years ending with 1842, amounted to about
8,200 tons a year. The increase since has been considerable, the
imports having been, in 1848, 10,237 tons; in 1849, 16,671 tons; in
1850, 12,526 tons; in 1851, 10,639 tons; in 1852, 13,870 tons. We
receive about 14,000 to 20,000 cwts. annually from Leghorn. The
imports into the port of Hull are 3,900 cwts. per year.

The prices of Smyrna valonias are from £13 to £14 per ton; those of
picked Morea, £10 per ton. The duty received on valonias imported in
1842 was about £4,000.

The annual produce is sufficient to meet the wants of all Europe. It
can be had in Turkey to any extent and at all periods. Many cargoes
are sent to Dublin, and the German markets. A little valonia is
exported from Manila, the shipments having been about 150 tons per
annum.

Camata and Camatina are two varieties of very young valonias, which
are found more valuable for some processes of tanning than the common
kinds.

Extensive as has been the enumeration of the vegetable substances used
in the various branches of art and manufacture which have formed the
principal subjects of this section, it is probable that with the
progress of knowledge, of scientific experiment, and of investigation
into the properties of given commodities, the list will be
indefinitely increased. What I have stated will suffice to give the
reader an idea of the surprising variety of sources from which we
receive the raw materials which enable us to perfect some of the most
elegant processes of manufacturing skill and ingenuity, and will
further afford some criterion--though, of course, not a perfect
one--for estimating the relative importance of the tanning and dyeing
substances.




SECTION V.

OLEAGINOUS PLANTS, AND THOSE YIELDING FIXED OR ESSENTIAL OILS.


Few cultivators are probably aware of the great importance of oil to
this country, and the number of purposes for which it is employed in
the arts and manufactures. It is extensively used for candle and soap
making, for burning in lamps, for diminishing friction in machinery of
all kinds, and especially for locomotives--in wool-dressing, in the
manufacture of paints and varnishes, as an article of food, for
medicinal purposes, &c.

So important are vegetable oils deemed, that the Society of Arts, in
its prize list for 1851, offered gold medals for the importation or
introduction into this country of any new plants or trees from China,
India, or elsewhere, producing oils or fatty substances, such as can
be used as food, or are applicable to manufacturing purposes; and also
to the person who shall manufacture and import the finest specimen of
oil, not less than ten gallons, the produce of olives grown in any
British colony in Africa or Australasia.

The time of burning of equal quantities of the following oils has been
found to be--

                                     Hours.
  Oil of poppy                        14
    "    sunflower                    13
    "    rape                         11
    "    mustard                      11½
    "    flax seed                    10
    "    gold of pleasure
        (_Camelina sativa_)       9½
    "    olives                        9
    "    hemp seed                     8
    "    tallow                       10½


                     FOREIGN VEGETABLE  OILS   IMPORTED.

                       1821.         1845.         1850.
                       tuns.         tuns.         tuns.
  Coco-nut oil          --           2,148        98,040
  Olive oil           1,900         12,315        20,783
  Palm oil            3,200         25,285       448,589 cwts.
  Rape seed oil         800          3,973          --
  Linseed oil        10,500         38,634          --

                     16,400         82,355
  Fish oils          32,356         22,626        21,328

The total quantity of all kinds of wool annually consumed in England
and Wales, in 1843, was estimated at 801,566 packs. Now, five gallons
of olive, rapeseed or other oils, being used in the preparation of
every pack of wool, for cloth (independent of the quantity used in
soap, applicable to the woollen manufactures), it follows that five
gallons on 801,566 packs are equal to 4,007,830 gallons, or 15,904
tuns; and adding for olive or sperm oil used in machinery 1-11th of
the whole, 1,446 tuns, the total quantity consumed is 17,350
tuns.--("Enderby on the South Whale Fishery.")

_Fixed oils_ are found in the cells and intercellular spaces of the
fruit, leaves, and other parts of plants.

Some of these are drying oils, as linseed oil, from _Linum
usitatissimum_; some are fat oils, as that from olives (fruit of _Olea
sativa_ or _Europæa_); whilst others are solid, as palm oil.

The solid oils or fats procured from plants are, butter of cacao, from
_Theobroma cacao_; of cinnamon from _Cinnamomum verum_; of nutmeg,
from _Myristica moschata_; of coco-nut, from _Cocos nucifera_; of
laurel, from _Laurus nobilis_; of palm oil, from _Elais guianiensis_;
Shea butter, from _Bassia Parkii_; Galam butter, or Ghee, from _Bassia
butyracea_; and vegetable tallow, from _Stillingia sebifera_ in China,
from _Vateria indica_ in Canara and China, and from _Pentadesma
butyracea_ in Sierra Leone, and from the almond. These oils contain a
large amount of stearine, and are used as substitutes for fat. Some of
them are imported in large quantities, and enter into the composition
of soap, candles, &c.

Castor oil, from the seeds of _Ricinus communis_, differs from other
fixed oils in its composition.

Decandolle states the following as the quantity of oil obtained from
various seeds:--

                                           Per cent.
                                           in weight.
  Hazel-nut                                   60
  Garden cress                                57
  Olive                                       50
  Walnut                                      50
  Poppy (_Papaver somniferum_)                48
  Almond                                      46
  Caper-spurge (_Euphorbia Lathyris_)         41
  Colza (_Brassica oleracea_)                 39
  White mustard (_Sinapis alba_)              36
  Tobacco                                     34
  Plum                                        33
  Woad                                        30
  Hemp                                        25
  Flax                                        22
  Sunflower                                   15
  Buckwheat                                   14
  Grapes                                      12

The following table, quoted from Boussingault, shows the results of
some experiments made by M. Grauzac, of Dagny:--

                 Seed produced    Oil obtained per
                   per acre.        acre, in lbs.    Oil per    Cake
                 cwts. qrs. lbs.     lbs. ozs.        cent.   per cent.

  Colewort         19    0   15       875   4           40        54
  Rocket           15    1    3       320   8           18        73
  Winter rape      16    2   18       641   6           33        62
  Swedish turnips  15    1   25       595   8           33        62
  Curled colewort  16    2   18       641   6           33        62
  Turnip cabbage   13    3   19       565   4           33        61
  Gold of pleasure 17    1   16       545   8           27        72
  Sunflower        15    3   14       275   0           15        80
  Flax             15    1   25       385   0           22        69
  White poppy      10    1   18       560   8           46        52
  Hemp              7    3   21       229   0           25        70
  Summer rape      11    3   17       412   5           30        65

The subjoined list will serve to exhibit the richness of the produce
of different Indian seeds, from which varieties of oil are extracted;
it gives the proportion of oil per cent. in weight:--

  Sesame oil (_Sesamum indicum_)                              46.7
  Black til, coloured variety of ditto (_Verbesena sativa_)   46.4
  Gingelie oil (_S. orientale_)                               46.7
  Ground nuts, produced by _Arachis hypogoea_                 45.5
  Wounded seeds obtained from the Poonnay-tree (_Calophyttum
        Inophyllum_), a bitter lamp oil                       63.7
  Karunj seeds, from the _Pongamia glabra_                    26.7
  Ram til, the seeds of the nuts Ellu, or _Guizotia oleifera_ 35
  Poppy seeds (_Papaver somniferum_)                    43 to 58
  Silaam, an oil seed from Nepaul                             41
  Rape seed (_Brassica napus_)                                33

The foregoing are not all the seeds from which oil is extracted by the
natives of the East. In addition to this there are cottonseed oil,
used for their lamps. Castor oil and Argemone seed, similarly used.
Oil obtained from the fruit of _Melia Azadriachta_, for medicine and
lamps. Apricot oil in the Himalayas, sunflower oil, oil of
cucumber-seed for cooking and lamps, oil of colocynth seed, a lamp
oil.

The seeds of bastard saffron (_Carthamus tinctorius_) yield oil.

Mustard oil, the produce of various species of _Sinapis_, &c. Shanghae
oil, from _Brassica Chinensis_. Illiepie oil, from _Bassia
longifolia_, which is used for frying cakes, &c., in Madras; and
Muohwa oil, from another species of the same genus in Bengal, _B.
latifolia_. Oil is expressed from the seeds of _Cæsalpina oleosperma_,
a native of the East. The neem tree seeds afford a very clear or
bitter oil, used for burning.

Wood oil is a remarkable substance, obtained from several species of
_Dipterocarpus_, by simply tapping the tree.

The horse-eyes and cacoons of Jamaica (_Fevillea scandens_) yield a
considerable quantity of oil or fat, as white and hard as tallow. It
has been employed for similar purposes on the Mosquito shores.

The seeds of the _Argemone mexicana_, and of the _Sanguinaria
canadensis_, also contain a bland, nutritious, colorless, fixed oil.
The mass from which the seed is expressed is found to be extremely
nutritious to cattle.

The _Camelina sativa_ is cultivated in Europe, for the extraction of
an oil used only by the soap makers, and for lamps.

A solid oil, of a pale greenish color, a good deal resembling the oils
of the Bassia in character, though rather harder, and approaching more
in properties to myrtle wax, was shown at the Great Exhibition, from
Singapore. It is supposed to be the produce of the tallow tree of
Java, called locally "kawan," probably a species of Bassia. It is very
easily bleached; indeed, by exposure to air and light, it becomes
perfectly white; if not too costly, it promises to become a valuable
oil.

According to Mr. Low, there are several varieties of solid oil
commonly used in the Islands of the Archipelago, and obtained from the
seeds of different species of _Dipterocarpus_.

Piney tallow is obtained from the fruit of the _Vateria Indica_, a
large and quick-growing tree, abundant in Malabar and Canara. It is a
white solid oil, fusible at a temperature of 97 degrees, and makes
excellent candles, especially when saponified and distilled in the
manner now adopted with palm oil, &c. It has one great advantage over
coco-nut oil, that the candles made of it do not give out any
suffocating acrid vapors when extinguished, as those made with the
latter oil do.

An oil is produced from the inner shell of the cashew-nut (_Anacardium
occidentale_ var. _indicum_), in the East.

In Japan a kind of butter, called _mijo_, is obtained from a species
of the Dolichos bean (_Dolichos soya_).

The kernel of the seeds of the tallow tree of China, _Stillingia
sebifera_, an evergreen shrub, contains an oil, which, when expressed,
consolidates through the cold to the consistence of tallow, and by
boiling becomes as hard as bees' wax. The plant also yields a bland
oil. A similar fatty product is obtained from a shrub in British
Guiana, the _Myristica (Virola) sebifera_.

Oil is obtained in South America from the sand box tree _(Hura
crepitans_), and from the _Carapa guianensis_.

A fatty oil is obtained in Demerara from the seeds of the butter tree,
_Pekea_ (?) _Bassia butyrosa_, and also from the Saouari (_P.
tuberculosa_).

The fleshy seeds contained in the woody capsules of the Monkey pot
(_Lecythis Tabucajo_), which derive their generic name from their
similarity to an oil jar, are common in the West India Islands and
South America, and yield a considerable quantity of oil.

The seeds of the plants of the cucumber family frequently supply a
bland oil, which is used in the East as a lamp oil and for cooking.
Among the vegetable oils imported into Ningpo, and other Chinese
ports, from Shantong, Leatong, and Teisin, are oil of teuss, obtained
from green and dried peas; black oil of the fruit of the tree _kin_
(?) and oil from the pea of suchau.

The seeds of _Spergula saliva_, a large, smooth-seeded variety of the
common cow spurrey, which is cultivated in Flanders as a pasture grass
and green crop, afford, on expression, a good lamp oil.

A pale brownish yellow oil is obtained from the seeds of _Carthamus
tinctorius_, in Bombay; the seeds contain about 28 per cent. of oil.

Excellent oil is expressed in various parts of India from the seeds of
different species of _Sinapis_, especially from the black mustard
seed. _S. glauca, S. dichotorna_, and _S. juncea_ are extensively
cultivated in the East for their oil. The _Erysimum perfoliatum_ is
cultivated in Japan for its oil-seeds.

A beautiful pale yellow oil is procured from the seeds of the
angular-leaved physic nut, _Jatropha curcas_, a shrub which is often
employed in the tropics as a fence for enclosures. It is used by the
natives in medicine and as a lamp oil. About 700 tons of this oil was
imported into Liverpool in 1850 from Lisbon, for the purpose of
dressing cloth, burning, &c.

A rich yellow oil, perfectly clear and transparent, is obtained from
the seeds of _Bergera koenigii_.

RAPE OIL.--The imports of rape oil, from _Brassica napus_, into
Liverpool, are about 15 to 20 tuns annually.

Rape oil has been found to be better suited than any other oil for the
lubrication of machinery, when properly purified from the mucilage,
&c., which it contains in the raw state. Rape oil is now used
extensively for locomotives, for marine engines, and also for burning
in lamps. It is stated that a locomotive consumes between 90 and 100
gallons of oil yearly; and the annual consumption of oil by the London
and North-Western Railway, for this purpose alone, is more than 40,000
gallons. The oil obtained from good English rape seed is purer and of
superior quality to that from foreign or colonial seed; and as an acre
of land yields nearly five quarters of seed, which is worth at present
50s. per quarter, it is a profitable crop.

Rape seed is now largely imported for expressing oil. The imports,
which in 1847 were but 87,662 quarters, weighing 17,532 tons, had
reached, in 1851, 107,029 quarters, weighing 21,606 tons. The price of
new seed is £25 to £27 the last of ten quarters. The oil is £34 per
tun.

The refuse cake, after the seed is crushed for oil, is in demand as
food for cattle, being worth £4 the ton.

We imported in 1851, from Trance, 289 tuns of rapeseed oil, worth
about £17,000, on which there was no duty levied.

There are exported annually from Hesse Darmstadt, 34,660 cwts. of
poppy and rape oils.

The oil of the colza is much used in Europe, and highly prized. In
France it has been adopted for all the purposes of lighthouses. In
this country it has lately come into extensive domestic use, for
burning in the French moderateur lamps, being retailed at from 3s. 4d.
to 4s. the gallon.

DOMBA OIL.--The Poonay or Palang tree (_Calophyllum Inophyllum_), the
Alexandrian laurel, is a beautiful evergreen, native of the East
Indies, which flourishes luxuriantly on poor sandy soils, in fact
where scarcely anything else will grow. The seeds or berries contain
nearly 60 per cent. of a fragrant, fixed oil, which is used for
burning as well as for medicinal purposes, being considered a cure for
the itch. As commonly prepared it has a dark green color. It is
perfectly fluid at common temperatures, but begins to gelatinise when
cooled below 50 degrees.

THE EARTH-NUT (_Arachis hypogæa, or hypocarpogea_).--This very
singular plant has frequently been confounded with others, partly
through the carelessness of travellers, and by the improper use of
names, which tended to mislead and confuse. Its common appellative,
the earth-nut, has led to the conclusion that it was a species of nut,
such as is known in England under the name of "pig nut," "hawk nut,"
and "ground nut." This, as well as the "earth chesnut," belongs to a
totally different genera. On the Continent and in the East Indies a
similar confusion had long existed by the appellation of "ground
pistachio," which caused the fruit to be confounded with the nut of
the tree _Pistacia vera_. Some resemblance, on the other hand,
existing between these--as well as from their being eaten by different
nations, and used as an article of food, and also for producing
oil--rendered the true description still more difficult. Botanists
are, however, no longer at a loss, having well established the nature
and character of all these plants. The Arachis "nut" partakes of the
nature of the pea or bean of our own country, and is a low annual
plant of the order _Diadelphia decandria_ of Linn.; originally from
Africa, but now extensively cultivated in every quarter of the globe.
It has been naturalised in Europe, and with the climate of the South
of France it may be turned to good account.

It has been said to be indigenous in Florida, Peru, Brazil, and
Surinam; but the plant may be grown on a light sandy soil, under a
moderate heat, equal to that of Italy or the South of France. The
class to which it belongs approaches to the pea tribe; but its
remarkable difference to this, as to the pulse we know as a bean, is
the circumstance of its introducing its fruit or pod--if we may so
call it--into the earth, for the purpose of ripening its seed. The
Arachis, or earth nut, has obtained its name from this operation. The
flowers, leaves, and stems are produced in the ordinary manner we see
in the pea tribe. When the yellow flower has withered and the seed
fertilised, there is nothing left but the bare stem which had
supported it. This stem, in which is the germ of the future fruit and
pod, now grows rapidly in a curved manner, with a tendency to arrive
shortly on the surface of the ground, into which it penetrates this
now naked stem, and sinks into the earth several inches. It is in this
obscure position that the fruit takes its ripened form, and is either
gathered from its hiding place or left to the future season, when its
time of rising into new existence calls it from what was thought its
unnatural position.

When mature, it is of a pale yellow color, wrinkled, and forms an
oblong pod, sometimes contracted in the middle; it contains generally
two seeds. The nuts or peas are a valuable article of food in the
tropical parts of Africa, America, and Asia. They are sweetish and
almond-like, and yield an oil, when pressed, not inferior in use and
quality to that obtained from the olive. The leaf resembles that of
clover, and, like it, affords excellent food for cattle. The cake,
after the oil is expressed, forms an excellent manure.

The Arachis is usually sown in dry, warm weather, from May to June,
and are placed at the distance of eighteen inches from each other.
Insects are fond of them; and if the season is cold and unfavorable to
them, or the growth retarded, they become musty and bad, or are eaten
by insects.

The mode of obtaining the oil is nearly the same as for other pulse or
seeds; and under favorable circumstances the Arachis will produce half
its weight of oil. When heated and pressed the quantity is very
considerably increased. This oil is good for every purpose for which
olive or almond oil is used. For domestic purposes it is esteemed, and
it does not become rancid so quickly as other oils. Experiments have
been made on its inflammable properties, and it is proved that the
brilliancy of light was superior to that of olive oil, and its
durability was likewise proved to be seven minutes per hour beyond the
combustion of the best olive oil, with the additional advantage of
scarcely any smoke. In Cochin-China and India it is used for lamps. It
is known as Bhoe Moong or Moong Phullee in Bengal, and as Japan or
Chinese pulse in Java.

From China this plant was probably introduced into the continent of
India, Ceylon, and the Malayan Archipelago, where it is generally
cultivated.

In South Carolina the seed is roasted and used as chocolate. The
leaves are used medicinally.

It is grown in Jamaica, and there called Pindar nut.

That the culture of the Arachis in warm climates, or even in a
temperate one, under favorable circumstances, should be encouraged,
there can be but one opinion. And when it is considered that its
qualities are able to supersede that of the olive and the almond,
which are but precarious in their crops--to which may be added, that
as a plant it is greedily devoured in the green state by cattle--how
much may it not serve to assist the new settler in regions of the
world which have a climate suited to it.

It is known by various local names--such as _mani manoti_ by the
Spaniards, and has obtained also that of _cacahuete_ in some
countries. It has the additional term _hypogea_ attached to it, which
literally signifies subterranean. This is apt to mislead; for the
plant grows above ground as other pulse, whereas only its seed and
pericarp are inserted, after blooming, into the earth. Hence the
better term _hypocarpogea_.

It appears to form an important article of cultivation along the whole
of the west coast of Africa, and probably on the east coast, on
several parts of which it was found by Loureiro ("Flor. Cochin," p.
430). It was doubtless carried from Africa to various parts of
equinoctial America, for it is noticed in some of the early accounts
of Peru and Brazil. 800 quarters of this nut were imported into
Liverpool from the West Coast of Africa, in 1849, for expressing oil,
and about half that quantity in 1850.

Eighty to 90 tuns of the expressed oil are now annually imported. The
seeds contain about 44 per cent. of a clear pale yellow oil, which is
largely used in India as food, and for lamps, particularly at Malwa
and Bombay, &c. Two varieties are grown in Malacca, the white seed and
the brown seed, and also in Java, in the vicinity of sugar
plantations; the oil cake being used as manure. It is there known as
katjang oil.

This plant, which seems to be a native of many parts of Asia, has
within the last ten years been much cultivated about Calcutta. The
seeds contain abundance of fixed oil, have a faint odor, and very mild
agreeable taste; 1,950 parts of seed, separated from their coverings
and blanched, give 1,405 of kernels, from which, by cold pressure,
703 parts of oil are procured. The seeds are consumed as a cheap
popular luxury, being half roasted, and then eaten with salt. The oil
is calculated to serve as an efficient and very cheap substitute for
olive oil, for pharmaceutical purposes. It burns with little smoke,
with a clear flame, and affords a very full bright light, answering
perfectly in Argand lamps.

The oil cake affords, also, an excellent food for cattle.

The ground nut has of late become of considerable importance as an
article of exportation, by English houses; yet more so by French
houses at Ghent, Rouen, and Bordeaux; some of whom have contracted
with the merchants of the African colonies for large quantities,
sending shipping for the cargoes. One house alone contracted for
60,000 bushels in the years 1844 and 1845. This nut oil is so very
useful to machinery that the naval steam cruisers on the coast have
adopted it. A ground-nut oil factory exists in the colony of Sierra
Leone; but from the want of steam power and proper machinery, and from
bad management, together with the inferior attainments of the African
artisan, when compared with the European mechanic, and their
facilities in quantity or quality, there is abundant scope for
improvement. The price in the colony is 4s. 6d. per gallon. It is
capable of being refined so as to answer the purpose of a salad oil;
the nut is prolific, and eaten by the natives and Europeans, boiled,
roasted, or in its raw state; and frequently introduced at the table
as we do the Spanish Barcelona nut at dessert. It grows in the rainy
season, and is collected in the dry, and sold in the colony for one
shilling to eighteen-pence per bushel, in goods and cash. Form of the
nut, long, light shell, contains two kernels covered with a brown
rind, when shelled white in appearance.

It is a low creeping plant, with yellow flowers; after they drop off,
and the pods begin to form, they bury themselves in the earth, where
they come to maturity. The pod is woody and dry, containing from one
to three peas, or nuts, as they are called, hence the common names,
ground-nut or pea-nut. They require to be parched in an oven before
they are eaten, and form a chief article of food in many parts of
Africa.

From a narrow strip of land, extending about 40 miles northerly from
Wilmington (North Carolina), comes nearly the entire quantity of earth
nuts (known as pea-nuts) grown in the United States for market. From
that tract and immediate vicinity, 80,000 bushels have been carried to
Wilmington market in one year.

The plant has somewhat the appearance of the dwarf garden-pea, though
more bushy. It is cultivated in hills. The pea grows on tendrils,
which put out from the plant and take root in the earth, where the nut
is produced and ripened. The fruit is picked from the root by hand,
and the vines are a favorite food for horses, mules, and cattle. From
30 to 80 bushels are produced on an acre. There are some planters who
raise from 1,000 to 1,500 bushels a year.--("Hunt's Merchant's
Magazine," vol. xv., p. 426.)

The ground-nut is exceedingly prolific, and requires but little care
and attention to its culture, while the oil extracted from it is quite
equal to that yielded by the olive. Almost any kind of soil being
adapted for it, nothing can be more simple than its management. All
that is required is the soil to be turned over and the seed sown in
drills like potatoes; after it begins to shoot it may be earthed with
a hoe or plough. In many parts of Western Australia they are now grown
in gardens for feeding pigs, the rich oil they are capable of yielding
being entirely overlooked. In regard to their marketable value at
home, I will give a copy of a letter of a friend of mine, received
from some London brokers, largely engaged in the African trade:--

    "Wilson and Rose present compliments to Mr. N., and beg to inform
    him the price of African ground nuts is as under:--Say for River
    Gambia, £11 per ton here. Say for Sierra Leone, £10 per ton here.
    For ground nuts free on board at the former port, £8 per ton is
    demanded; these are the finest description of nut, the freight would
    be about £4 per ton; the weight per bushel imperial measure, and in
    the shell, is about 25 lbs."

The following, also, is an extract from a letter written in 1842, by
Mr. Forster (the present M.P. for Berwick), an eminent African
merchant. Speaking of the staple of Africa, he says:--

    "I have lately been attempting to obtain other oils from the coast,
    and it was only yesterday I received from the hands of the oil
    presser the result of my most recent experiment on the ground nut,
    which I am happy to say is encouraging. I send you a sample of the
    oil extracted from them. They are from the Gambia. It is a pure
    golden colored oil, with a pleasant flavor, free from the frequent
    rancidity of olive oil."

Since then the cultivation has gone on, and the exportation largely
increased. The French also have entered into the trade, and several
vessels are exclusively employed in exporting this product from the
river Gambia, conveying it to oil factors on the continent, who
extract its oil. Seeing, then, the many advantages the cultivation of
such a product bestows, and its adaptation to the soil and climate of
Australia, I cannot refrain from expressing a hope that some of the
influential landowners in the cultivated districts will give the
matter their consideration.

I am informed by an American merchant that he cleared 12,000 dollars
in one year, on the single article of ground or pea nuts obtained from
Africa. Strange as it may appear, nearly all these nuts are
transhipped to France, where they command a ready sale; are there
converted into oil, and thence find their way over the world in the
shape of olive oil; the skill of the French chemists enabling them to
imitate the real Lucca and Florence oil, so as to deceive the nicest
judges. Indeed, the oil from the pea nuts possesses a sweetness and
delicacy that cannot be surpassed.

Advices from the West Coast of Africa to the 16th August, 1853, report
that the ground nut season had closed; the quantity shipped during the
season having exceeded 900,000 bushels. The yield has increased 20 per
cent, each year for the last three years, and it is expected the
increase will be still greater in the forthcoming season.

TEUSS OIL.--The Chinese use what is called teuss or tea oil, for food
and other purposes. I have alluded to it under the head of pulse, at
page 312. It is obtained, however, from a species of the ground nut,
and is sold in Hong Kong, at 2s. 6d. the gallon, being imported from
the main land. By a local ordinance it is imperative on every
householder at Victoria, Hong-Kong, to have a lamp burning over his
door at night. When burning, this oil affords a clear, bright light,
and is not so offensive to the smell as train and other common lamp
oils.

TOBACCO SEED OIL.--A discovery, which may prove of some commercial
importance, appears to have been made by a British resident in Russia,
namely, that the seed of the tobacco plant contains about fifteen per
cent. of an oil possessing peculiar drying properties, calculated to
render it a superior medium, especially for paints and varnishes. The
process employed for the extraction of the oil is to reduce the seed
to powder, and knead it into a stiff paste with _quantum sufficit_ of
hot water, and then submit it to the action of strong fires. The oil
thus obtained is exposed to a moderate heat, which, by coagulating the
vegetable albumen of the seed, causes all impurities contained in the
oil to form a cake at the bottom of the vessel employed, leaving the
oil perfectly limpid and clear.

POPPY OIL.--About 80 cwt. of poppy seed is imported annually into
Hull, and small quantities come into other ports to be crushed into
oil. The seeds of the poppy yield, by expression, 56 per cent. of a
bland and very valuable oil, of a pale golden color, fluid to within
ten degrees of the freezing point of water. It dries easily, is
inodorous, and of an agreeable flavor like olive oil.

Dr. J.V.C. Smith, writing from Switzerland, to the editor of the
"Boston Medical Journal," says:--

    "Immense crops are raised here of articles wholly unknown to the
    American farmers, and perhaps the kinds best fitted to particular
    localities where grain and potatoes yield poorly under the best
    efforts. One of these is poppies. Thousands of acres are at this
    moment ready for market--which the traveller takes for granted, as
    he hurries by, are to be manufactured into opium. They are not,
    however, intended for medical use at all, but for a widely different
    purpose. From the poppy seed a beautiful transparent oil is made,
    which is extensively used in house painting. It is almost as
    colorless as water, and possesses so many advantages over the flax
    seed oil that it may ultimately supersede that article. Where flax
    cannot be grown poppies often can be, in poor sandy soil. Linseed
    oil is becoming dearer, and the demand for paint is increasing. With
    white lead, poppy oil leaves a beautiful surface, which does not
    afterwards change, by the action of light, into a dirty yellow.
    Another season some one should make a beginning at home in this
    important branch of industry. The oil may be used for other
    purposes, and even put in the cruet for salads."

TALLICOONAH or KUNDAH OIL, is obtained from the seeds of the _Carapa
Touloucouna_ (of the Flore de Senegambie). The tree grows to the
height of 40 feet; the fruit is a large, somewhat globular five-celled
capsule. The seeds (of which there are from 18 to 30 in each capsule),
vary in size from that of a chesnut to a hen's egg. They are
three-cornered, of a brownish or blackish red color. It is found
abundantly in the Timneh country, and over the colony of Sierra Leone.
It is manufactured in the following manner:--The nuts having been well
dried in the sun, are hung up in wicker racks or hurdles, and exposed
to the smoke of the huts, after which they are roasted and subjected
to trituration in large wooden mortars, until reduced to a pulp. The
mass is then boiled, when the supernatant oil is removed by skimming.
The natives principally prepare the oil to afford light; the leaves
are used by the Kroomen as a thatch. It is held in high estimation as
an anthelmintic. The oil is sold in Sierra Leone at 2s. a gallon, and
could be procured in abundance from the coast as an article of
commerce.

CARAP or CRAB OIL (_Carapa guianensis_).--This is a sort of vegetable
butter, being sometimes solid and sometimes half fluid, which is
obtained from the seed of a large tree abundant in the forests of
Guiana, and also found in Trinidad. It is said to turn rancid very
soon when exposed to the air, but this is probably caused by the
presence of impurities, arising from the crude and imperfect way in
which it is prepared by the natives, who boil the kernels, leave them
in a heap for a few days, then skim them, and lastly reduce them into
a paste in a wooden mortar, which is then spread on an inclined board,
and exposed to the heat of the sun, so that the oil may melt and
gradually trickle down into a vessel placed below to receive it. A
prize medal was awarded for this oil at the Great Exhibition in 1851.

Carap oil in Trinidad is highly esteemed as an unguent for the hair,
and also for applying to the wounds of animals, for destroying ticks
and other insects which infest cattle--also for the cure of
rheumatism. An oil called Carap oil is also obtained in the East, from
the almonds of _Xylocarpus granatum_, or _Carapa Molluccensis_, of
Lanark, which is used by the natives to dress the hair and anoint the
skin, so as to keep off insects.

Cacao fat, the butter-like substance obtained from the seeds of
_Theobroma cacao_, is esteemed as an emollient.

The nuts of the Great Macaw tree (_Acrocomia fusiformis_), a majestic
species of palm, furnishes much oil. This tree is the _Cocos
fusiformis_, of Jacquin, and other intertropical botanists. It is a
native of Trinidad and Jamaica, and is found also very commonly in
South America.

The method of extracting the oil is as follows:--The nut or kernel is
slightly roasted and cleaned, then ground to a paste, first in a mill,
and then on a livigating stone. This paste, gently heated and mixed
with 3-10ths of its weight of boiling water, is put into a bag, and
the oil expressed between two heated plates of iron; it yields about
7-10ths or 8-10ths of oil. If discolored it can be purified, when
melted, by filtration. It is then of the consistence of butter, of a
golden yellow hue, the odor that of violets, and the taste sweetish.
If well preserved it will keep several years without spoiling, which
is known to have taken place by the loss of its golden hue and
delightful aroma.

It is frequently sold in the shops as palm oil, and of late has
entered largely into the composition of toilet soaps. As an emollient
it is said to be useful in some painful affections of the joints; the
negroes deem it a sovereign remedy in "bone ache." The nut itself is
sometimes fancifully carved by the negroes, and is highly ornamental,
being of a shining jet black, and susceptible of a very high polish.
This tree may be increased from suckers.

_A. sclerocarpa_ is the Macahuba palm of Brazil.

THE AGAITI, as it is called by the Portuguese, or napoota by the
natives and Arabs (_Didynamia Gymosperma?_), much cultivated in all
Eastern Africa for its oil, which is considered equal to that of
olives, and fetches as high a price in the Indian market. The plant,
which is as tall and rank as hemp, and equally productive, having
numerous pods throughout the stems, is found everywhere in a wild as
well as cultivated state.

The "Cape Shipping Gazette," of August, 1850, says:--

    "The attention of the George Agricultural and Horticultural Society
    having been drawn to the fact that an excellent oil, equal to the
    olive oil of Italy, can be extracted from the kernel of the fruit
    known by the name of "T Kou Pijte" and "Pruim Besje," they have
    offered a reward of £10 for the best sample, not less than a half
    aum of this oil--and £15 if it shall be adjudged equal to the best
    oil of Italy. This fact is deserving of notice, as an instance of
    the advantages which are likely to result from the attention now
    being devoted to the natural productions of the colony."

_Madia sativa_ is a handsome annual plant, native of Chili, which has
been naturalised in Europe. It grows about two feet high, and produces
flowers in July and August, of a pale yellow color.

The whole plant is viscid and exhales a powerful odor, which is
somewhat like heated honey. It requires rather a rich soil, of a
ferruginous character. The root is fusiform, the stem cylindrical, and
furnished with sessile, three to five longitudinally-nerved leaves,
which are apposite on the lower portion of the stem, and alternate on
the upper. M. Victor Pasquier, who has written on the culture of the
plant, analysed the seed, and found 100 parts to consist of 26.5 of
testa, and 73.5 of kernel; 100 parts of the latter yielded 31.3 of
vegetable albumen, gum, and lignine, 56.0 of _fixed oil_, and 12.5 of
water. In dry seasons the oil is both more abundant and better than in
damp seasons. The produce of oil, compared with that of the poppy, is
equal; with colza, as 32 to 28; with linseed, 32 to 21; with the
olive, 32 to 16.

The leaves and stems of this plant are rejected by cattle; but the
oil-cake, which always contains a considerable portion of the oil,
forms a nutritive food, of which they are very fond. The oil expressed
without heat is transparent, of a golden yellow color, inodorous,
rather fatter than the oil of rape or olives, and of a soft,
agreeable, nutty taste. It is fit to be employed in the preparation of
food, in salads, and for all the purposes of the best and mildest
fixed oils. It burns with a brilliant, reddish-white flame, and leaves
no residue. It is little liable to become rancid, and is completely
decolorised by animal charcoal.

The oil of the seeds of this plant, now extensively cultivated in
France, will yield, according to the observations of Braconnet, a
solid soap, similar to that made from olive oil. Boussingault obtained
from the oil a solid, as well as a fluid acid. The solid one is
probably palmic acid, it fuses at exactly 140 degrees of Fahrenheit.
The fluid acid in its properties resembles the oleic acid discovered
by Chevreul, and seems to dry easily.

The following is the composition of each, as determined by his
analysis:--

                  Solid acid.     Fluid acid.
  Carbon             74.2            76.0
  Hydrogen           12.0            11.0
  Oxygen             13.8            13.0

                    100.            100.

COCUM OIL, or butter, is obtained from the seeds of a kind of
mangosteen (_Garcinia purpurea_), and used in various parts of India
to adulterate ghee or butter. It is said to be exported to England for
the purpose of mixing with bears' grease in the manufacture of
pomatum. It is a white, or pale greenish yellow, solid oil, brittle,
or rather friable, having a faint but not unpleasant smell, melting at
about 95 degrees, and when cooled after fusion remaining liquid to 75
degrees.

An excellent solid oil, of a bright green color, is obtained from
Bombay, having a consistence intermediate between that of tallow and
wax, fusible at about 95 degrees, and easily bleached; it has a
peculiar and somewhat aromatic odor. There is some uncertainty as to
the plant from which it is obtained. It was referred to the _Salvadora
persica_, and to the _Vernonia Anthelminticea_, a plant common in
Guzerat and the Concan Ghats.

A pale yellow clear oil is obtained from the seed of _Dolichos
biflorus_(_?_). Oil is also expressed in India from the seed of the
_Argemone mexicana_, which is used for lamps and in medicine; and from
the seeds of the cashew nut (_Anacardium occidentale_), from _Sapindus
marginatus_, and the country walnut (_Aleurites triloba_.) The fruit
of the _Chirongia sapinda_, (or _Buchanania latifolia_,) yields oil.
From the seeds of the _Pongamia glabra_, or _Galidupa arborea_, a
honey brown and almost tasteless oil is procured, which is fluid at
common temperatures, but gelatinises at 55 degrees.

Other sources of oil are the _Celastrus paniculatus_ (_?_) _Balanites
Egyptictca_ and the saul tree (_Shorea Robusta_).

THE CANDLE-TREE or PALO BE VELAS, (_Parmentiera cereifera_,
Seemann.)--This tree, in the valley of the Chagres, South America,
forms entire forests. In entering them a person might almost fancy
himself transported into a chandler's shop. From all the stems and
lower branches hang long cylindrical fruits, of a yellow wax color, so
much resembling a candle as to have given rise to the popular
appellation. The fruit is generally from two to three, but not
unfrequently four feet long, and an inch in diameter. The tree itself
is about 24 feet high, with, opposite trifoliated leaves, and large
white blossoms, which appear throughout the year, but are in greatest
abundance during the rainy season. The _Palo de Velas_ belongs to the
natural order _Crescentiaceae_, and is a _Parmentiera_, of which genus
hitherto only one species, the _P. edulis_, of De Candolle, was known
to exist. The fruit of the latter, called _Quauhscilote_, is eaten by
the Mexicans, while that of the former serves for food to numerous
herds of cattle. Bullocks especially, if fed with the fruit of this
tree, guinea-grass, and _Batatilla_ (_Ipomoea brachypoda_, Benth.),
soon get fat. It is generally admitted, however, that the meat
partakes in some degree of the peculiar apple-like smell of the fruit,
but this is by no means disagreeable, and easily prevented, if, for a
few days previous to killing the animal, the food is changed. The tree
produces its principal harvest during the dry season, when all the
herbaceous vegetation is burned up, and on that account its
cultivation in tropical countries is especially to be recommended; a
few acres of it would effectually prevent that want of fodder which is
always most severely felt after the periodical rains have
ceased.--("Hooker's Journal of Botany.")

CINNAMON SUET is extracted by boiling the fruit of the cinnamon. An
oily fluid floats on the surface, which on cooling subsides to the
bottom of the vessel, and hardens into a substance like mutton suet.
The Singhalese make a kind of candles with it, and use it for culinary
purposes. It emits a very pleasant aroma while burning. According to
the analysis of Dr. Christison, it contains eight per cent, of a fluid
not unlike olive oil; the remainder is a waxy principle.

CROTON OIL is obtained by expression from the seeds or nuts of _Croton
Tiglium_, an evergreen tree, 15 to 20 feet in height, belonging to the
same order as the castor oil plant, producing whitish green flowers,
and seeds resembling a tick in appearance, whence its generic name. It
is a native of the East Indies. 100 parts of seeds afford about 64 of
kernel. 50 quarters of croton nuts for expressing oil were imported
into Liverpool from the Cape Verd Islands, in 1849.

The _Croton Tiglium_ grows plentifully in Ceylon, and the oil, if
properly expressed, might be made an article of trade. The best mode
of preparing it is by grinding the seeds, placing the powder in bags,
and pressing between plates of iron; allow the oil to stand for
fifteen days, then filter. The residue of the expression is triturated
with twice its weight of alcohol, and heated on the sand-bath from 120
to 140 degs. Fahrenheit, and the mixture pressed again. In this step
the utmost caution is necessary in avoiding the acrid fumes. One seer
of seed furnishes by this process rather more than eleven fluid ounces
of oil, six by the first step, and five by alcohol.

The oil acts as an irritant purgative in the dose of one drop. In
large doses it is a dangerous poison. When applied externally it
produces pustules.

In 1845, eight cases of croton oil and six cases of the seed were
exported from Ceylon.

Other species of Croton, as _C. Pavana_, a native of Ava and the
north-eastern parts of Bengal, and _C. Roxburghii_, yield a purgative
oil. The bark of _C. Eleuteria_, _C. Cascarilla_, and other species is
aromatic, and acts as a tonic and stimulant. It forms the cascarilla
bark of commerce already spoken of. When bruised, it gives out a musky
odor and is often used in pastilles.

The oil obtained from the seeds of _Jatropha curcas_, a native of
South America and Asia, is purgative and emetic, and analagous in its
properties to croton oil. It is said to be a valuable external
application in itch. In India it is used for lamps.

OIL OF BEN, known as Sohrinja in Bengal, and Muringo in Malabar is
obtained from the seeds or nuts of the horseradish tree, _Moringa
pterygosperma_, Burmann; the _Hyperanthera Moringa_, of Linnæus. This
clear limpid oil having no perceptible smell, is much esteemed by
watchmakers and perfumers; it is expensive and not often to be
procured pure, consequently the oil would be a very profitable export.
It grows rapidly and luxuriantly everywhere in Jamaica, particularly
on the north side of the island--as well as Trinidad and other
quarters of the West. It is easily propagated either by cuttings from
the tree (the branches) or by seeds, and bears the second year. The
produce of each tree may be estimated at from one to two gallons. From
the flowers a very pleasant perfume might be easily distilled.

The following account I derive from my friend Dr. Hamilton--

    "It is a small tree, of about twenty feet in height, of most rapid
    growth, coming into flower within a few months after it has been
    sown, and continuing to produce seeds and blossoms afterwards
    throughout the year. The tree is now naturalised in the West Indies.
    The timber is said to dye a fine blue, and the gum, which, exudes
    from wounds in the bark, bears a strong resemblance to that obtained
    from the _Astragalus tragacantha_, for which it might, no doubt, be
    substituted.

    The numerous racemes of white blossoms with which the tree is
    constantly loaded, are succeeded by long triangular pods, somewhat
    tourlose at the ends, and about two feet in length, when arrived at
    the full growth. These pods, while yet young and tender, are not
    unfrequently cooked and served up at the planter's tables like
    asparagus, for which they are not a bad substitute. The pods, when
    full grown, contain about fifteen seeds; each considerably larger
    than a pea, with a membraneous covering expanding into three wings,
    whence the specific name of _pterygosperma_. On removing the winged
    envelope the seeds appear somewhat like pith balls; but upon
    dividing them with the nail, they are found to abound in a clear,
    colorless, tasteless, scentless oil, of which the proportion is so
    large that it may be expressed from good fresh seeds by the simple
    pressure of the nail. Geoffry informs us, that he obtained 30½
    ounces of oil from eight pounds of the decorticated seeds, being at
    the rate of very nearly 24 lbs. of oil from 100 lbs. of seed.

    Notwithstanding the great value of its oil, and the facility with
    which it can be obtained in the West Indies, the moringa has been
    hitherto valued merely as an ornamental shrub, and cultivated for
    the sake of its young pods or the horseradish of its roots, as
    luxuries for the table.

    The oil is peculiarly valuable for the formation of ointments, from
    its capability of being kept for almost any length of time without
    entering into combination with oxygen. This property, together with
    the total absence of color, smell, and taste, peculiarly adapts it
    to the purposes of the perfumer, who is able to make it the medium
    for arresting the flight of those highly volatile particles of
    essential oil, which constitute the aroma of many of the most
    odoriferous flowers, and cannot be obtained by any other means, in a
    concentrated and permanent form. To effect this, the petals of the
    flowers, whose odor it is desired to obtain, are thinly spread over
    flakes of cotton wool saturated with this oil, and the whole
    enclosed in air tight tin cases, where they are suffered to remain
    till they begin to wither, when they are replaced by fresh ones, and
    the process thus continued till the oil has absorbed as much as was
    desired of the aroma; it is then separated from the wool by
    pressure, and preserved under the name of _essence_, in well stopped
    bottles.

    By digesting the oil thus impregnated in alcohol, which does not
    take up the fixed oil, a solution of the aroma is effected in the
    spirit, and many odoriferous tinctures or waters, as they are
    somewhat inaccurately termed, prepared. By this process most
    delicious perfumes might be obtained from the flowers of the _Acacia
    tortuosa_, _Pancratium carribeum_, _Plumeria alba_, _Plumeria
    rubra_, and innumerable other flowers, of the most exquisite
    fragrance, which abound within the tropics, blooming unregarded, and
    wasting their odors on the barren air."


THE OIL PALM.

There are several species of this genus of beautiful palms of the
tribe _Cococinæ_, but that chiefly turned to account is _Elais
guineensis_, a native of the Coast of Guinea to the south of Fernando
Po, which furnishes the best oil.

There are three other varieties--_E. melanococca_, a native of New
Granada, _E. Pernambucana_, common on the coast of Brazil, and _J.
occidentalis_, indigenous to Jamaica. All the species grow well in a
sandy loam and may be increased by suckers.

The value of the oil of this palm, as an article of commerce, is
exemplified by the large annual imports, averaging more than 516,000
cwt. for many years past.

Our supplies of palm oil are almost wholly derived from the West Coast
of Africa, of which it is the staple article of export.

Palm oil has the greatest specific gravity of any of the fixed
vegetable oils. It is used principally in this country for making
yellow soap. But the inhabitants of the Guinea coast employ it for the
same purposes that we do butter.

The trade in palm oil has almost driven out the slave trade from the
Bight of Benin, which was a few years ago one of its principal seats.
The old slave traders at Whydah have generally gone into the palm oil
trade, and are carrying it on to a very great extent. In August 1849,
no less than twelve vessels were lying at that port taking in oil;
whilst, only three years before, it was rare to see three vessels
there at once, and of those in all probability two would be slavers.

This palm is called Maba by the natives about the Congo river. It is
moneocious, which indeed Jacquin, by whom the genus was established,
concluded it to be, although first described as dioecious by Gaertner,
whose account has been adopted, probably without examination, by
Schroder, Willdenow, and Persoon.

The average imports of this oil into Liverpool alone, have now been
for some years upwards of 18,000 tons, worth nearly £800,000 sterling,
and giving employment to upwards of 30,000 tons of shipping; thus
proving that the natives who formerly exported their brethren as a
matter of traffic, now find, at least, an equally profitable trade in
the exportation of the vegetable products of their native soil.

Palm oil is produced by the nut of the tree, which grows in the
greatest abundance throughout Western Africa. The demand for it, both
in Europe and America, is daily increasing, and there is no doubt it
will, ere long, become the most important article of African trade.

          IMPORTS  INTO  LIVERPOOL.
                    casks.            tons.
  1835              28,500            9,500
  1836              33,500           11,000
  1837              26,000            9,900
  1838              27,520           10,320
  1839              36,500           14,300
  1852    about       --             23,500

In the colony of Liberia, I notice the manufacture of a new article of
African production, which is called "Herring's Palm Kernel Oil or
African Lard." It is thus spoken of in the newspapers of that Republic
:--

    We had been for a long time impressed with an idea that the oil
    contained in the kernel of the palm nut, was superior both in
    quality and appearance to that of palm oil, which is obtained from
    the exterior part.

    On making an effort to extract the oil from the kernel (which was by
    means of a little machine, of our own invention and contrivance), we
    found that our thoughts upon the matter were correct, that the oil
    possessed admirable beauty in its appearance, with a taste, when
    used for cooking purposes, unexcelled by that of the best lard.

    After being made and set by, it assumes a consistence like that of
    hard butter, and has to be cut out with a knife or spoon; its
    appearance in this state is very beautiful, presenting such
    richness, clearness, and adaptedness to table purposes, that one
    would not suppose that this oil is obtained from the same tree from
    which palm oil is, for there is as much disparity both in their
    appearance and taste as there is between lard and butter.

    The exquisite transparency which the kernel oil bears in a liquid
    state, especially when undergoing the purifying process, is a cause
    of admiration. On showing some of it to several foreigners, I was
    asked in two instances which was the oil and which the water, or
    whether it was oil or water; thus you may have an idea of its
    clearness. We make two qualities of this oil, differing however in
    taste only, the one being for table uses and the other for
    exportation and for whatever use they may choose to put it to
    abroad.

    There have been many conjectures in respect to the uses to which
    this oil might he put in foreign countries; but that it will be a
    useful article, and especially in our trade, when made more
    extensively, there can be no doubt, for the quantity in which it
    might be had would undoubtedly introduce it to a respectable rank
    among the other commodities of our productive country so eagerly
    sought after.

    There is nothing, to my knowledge, that can be turned to as good
    account and at the same time so abundant and easily obtained, as the
    palm kernel, for they are as common as the pebbles of stony land,
    especially in this section of the country, where we have palm
    orchards of spontaneous growth for miles together, and interspersing
    the surrounding country in almost innumerable numbers.

    According to statistical ascertainment, there is on an average
    exported from this port, thirty thousand gallons of palm oil
    annually, from which fact we ascertain demonstratively that the palm
    kernels which are thrown away here (leaving out the whole leeward
    coast of our possessions) are sufficient to make thirty thousand
    gallons of oil, more or less. This is not at all a problematical
    speculation of ours, but we feel authorised to advance this
    assertion from the fact that one bushel of kernels, completely
    worked up, will make two gallons of oil. But to work them up is the
    thing, plentiful as they are; we however, hesitate not to say, that
    it can be done and probably will be.

    Having now so far conquered the difficulties attending the
    manufacture of this oil, as that we can safely vouch a reasonable
    supply for home consumption, we most cheerfully recommend it to the
    citizens of this Republic, whose demands for it, for eating
    purposes, we doubt not can be supplied, and on very reasonable
    terms.

    We will assure our customers that there will not be an ounce of dirt
    or sediment in a hundred pounds of our oil.

The recent abolition of the soap duty, by stimulating the demand for
palm oil, will have an instant effect on the trade and commerce of
Western Africa, by confirming the suppression of the slave trade, and
giving an additional impetus to negro improvement. It will also
increase the production for England of ground nuts, whence the oil so
largely used in making continental soaps is expressed. "When (observes
a recent writer) the Portuguese first treated with that coast, they
found palm oil and ground nuts articles of native food, and so they
remained down to a period within living memory. So used, they neither
required any cultivation nor gave rise to any notions of property.
Though whole tracts of country are crowded by the oil-palm tree,
little care was taken of what was, in fact, superabundant; and as for
ground nuts, they were simply dug up as prudence or necessity
dictated. Some thirty years ago a cask or two of palm oil was sent
home from the Gold Coast; it met so ready a sale that it was further
inquired after, and the total amount now imported into England ranges
from 25,000 to 30,000 tons annually. The exportation of ground nuts is
even larger; but, owing to our excise on soap, they had heretofore
gone principally to France---to Marseilles especially.

"Of these two articles, it is to be observed, the Western Coast of
Africa appears to have a monopoly; and with respect to palm oil, it is
further to be remarked, that it is exactly behind those ports and up
those rivers, which were formerly the great nests of the slave trade,
that its production is largest; and just as the slave trade there has
been crushed, a commerce in palm oil has sprung up and replaced it.
There are men alive who recollect the slave trade flourishing on the
Gold Coast; it has long been extinct there, and palm oil is now
largely exported. It is but a very few years ago since that traffic
appeared to be irrepressible at the mouths of the Niger: it is now
expelled, and thence Liverpool obtains, instead, its supplies of palm
oil. So also, later still, at Whydah, and the other ports of the
kingdom of Dahomy, and along the Lagoon, which connects Dahomy with
the Benin River, there the Spanish slave dealers are themselves
inaugurating a commerce in palm oil. Already the trade in that quarter
is considerable, and it would have extended much more rapidly than it
has done, were it not that disorder and warfare in the interior have
been promoted and prolonged by the indiscreet zeal of some of our own
naval officers and by the desire of some of our missionaries to rule
at Abeeokutu, at Lagos, and at Badagray. When, however, order and
tranquillity are restored, a most important trade will undoubtedly
arise there. A generation ago, when palm oil was merely an article of
food, there was, we have said, no property in palm trees. Since,
however, a large foreign demand has arisen for this oil, the
plantations, as already they are called, begin to be cared for; and
lately the title to some of them has been disputed in our courts on
the Gold Coast: a contention which constitutes the first evidence we
have received of the value of land, not actually under their own
cultivation, being recognised by the natives. Thus the feeling of
property and the desire for accumulation are springing up out of the
palm oil trade; and they are everywhere the germs of nascent
civilisation. It is no light question, therefore, thus involved in an
increased demand for this article; it may produce African consequences
of incalculable importance to the whole human race. It is in France
hitherto that the great consumption of ground nut oil has occurred. It
is there used in the manufacture of soaps, which, though preferred
abroad, are little used in England--very much because of the Excise
laws. The specific gravity of the soap made out of ground nut oil is
higher than those laws permitted; in consequence we could neither make
it for our own use nor for foreign exportation; and thus France has
substantially the soap trade of the world. By the repeal of the duty,
England will be enabled to compete--in this, as in all other
trades--with France abroad."

The price, in Liverpool, for palm oil, in October, 1853, was £38 10s.
to £39 per ton.

We export annually nearly four million gallons of oil made from
linseed, hemp seed, and rape seed.

  PALM  OIL  RETAINED  FOR  HOME  CONSUMPTION
                 cwts.
  1835          242,733
  1836          234,357
  1837          211,919
  1838          272,991
  1839          262,910
  1840          314,881
  1841          300,770
  1842          353,672
  1843          377,765
  1844          363,335
  1848          510,218
  1849          493,331
  1850          448,589
  1851          493,598
  1852          408,577

The quantity of the four principal vegetable oils annually imported
into Great Britain, is shown by the following figures:--

              Palm oil.     Coco-nut oil.  Castor oil.   Olive oil.
               cwts.            cwts.        cwts.         tuns.
  1848        510,218          85,463        4,588        10,086
  1849        493,331          64,452        9,681        16,964
  1850        448,589          98,040          --         20,738
  1851        608,550          55,995          --         11,503
  1852        623,231         101,863          --          8,898

THE OLIVE-TREE (_Olea Europea_).--There are several varieties of this
plant, two of which have been long distinguished--the wild and the
cultivated. The former is an evergreen shrub or low tree, with spiny
branches and round twigs; the latter is a taller tree, without
spines, and with four-angled twigs. The fruit is a drupe about the
size and color of a damson. Its fleshy pericarp yields by expression
olive oil, of which the finest comes from Provence and Florence.
Spanish or Castile soap is made by mixing olive oil and soda, while
soft soap is made by mixing the oil with potash.

The wild olive is indigenous to Syria, Greece, and Africa, on the
lower slopes of Mount Atlas. The cultivated species grows
spontaneously in Syria, and is easily reared in Spain, Italy and the
South of France, various parts of Australia and the Ionian Islands.
Wherever it has been tried on the sea-coasts of Australia, the success
has been most complete. There are several fine trees near Adelaide,
some of them fourteen feet high, bearing fruit in abundance.
Unfortunately no one has attempted to cultivate the plant on a large
scale, but in a few years Australia ought to suply herself with olive
oil.

The olive tree is also grown in Hong-Kong.

There are five or six varieties of _O. Europoea_, or _sativa_, grown in
the south of Europe, of which district they are for the most part
natives.

The entire exports of olive oil from the kingdom of Naples have been
estimated at 36,333 tuns a year, which, taken at its mean value when
exported at £62 per tun, is equivalent to the annual sum of
£2,252,646.

There are one or two distinct species, natives of the East Indies and
the Cape of Good Hope. This genus of plants, besides their valuable
products of oil and fruit, are also much admired for the fragrance of
their white flowers. There is a yellow-blossomed variety, native of
China, _O. fragrans_, the Lan-hoa of the Chinese, which is used to
perfume their teas.

Olive oil now forms an article of export from Chili, being grown in
most parts of that republic, particularly in the vicinity of St. Jago,
where trees of three feet in diameter, and of a proportionate height,
are common. The olive was first carried from Andalusia to Peru in
1560, by Antonio de Ribera, of Lima. Frezier speaks of the olive being
used for oil in Chili, a century and a half ago.

The culture of the olive has been recommended for Florida and most of
the Southern States of America. Formerly, on account of its slow
growth, the olive was not considered very useful; but some years since
a new variety was introduced into France, and into some parts of Spain
and Portugal, which yields an abundant crop of fruit the second year
after planting. They are small trees or rather shrubs, about four or
five feet high. The fruit is larger than the common olive, is of a
fine green color when ripe, and contains a great deal of oil, The
advantages accruing from this new mode of cultivating the olive tree,
are beyond all calculation. By the old method an olive tree does not
attain its full growth, and consequently does not yield any
considerable crop under thirty years; whereas the new system of
cultivating dwarf trees, especially from cuttings, affords very
abundant crops in two or three. An acre of land can easily grow 2,500
trees of the new variety, and the gathering of the fruit is easy, as
it can be done by small children. At Beaufort, South Carolina, the
olive is cultivated from plants which were obtained in the
neighbourhood of Florence, Italy.

A gentleman in Mississippi is stated, by an American agricultural
journal, to have olive trees growing, which at five years from the
cutting bore fruit, and were as large at that age as they usually are
in Europe at eight years old. The olive then, it is added, will yield
a fair crop for oil at four years from the nursery, and in eight years
a full crop, or as much as in Europe at from fifteen to twenty years
of age.

The lands and climate there are stated to be as well adapted to the
successful cultivation of the olive for oil, pickles, &c., as any part
of Europe. Some hundreds of the trees are grown in South Carolina, and
the owner expressed his conviction that this product would succeed
well on the sea-coast of Carolina and Georgia. The frosts, though
severe, did not destroy or injure them, and in one case, when the
plant was supposed to be dead, and corn was planted in its stead, its
roots sent out shoots. It is well known to be a tree of great
longevity, even reaching to 1,000 or 1,200 years; so that, when once
established, it will produce crops for a great while afterwards. The
expense of extracting the oil is also stated to be but trifling.

The olive is of slow growth; trees 80 years of age measure only from
27 to 30 inches in circumference at the lower part of their trunks. An
olive tree is mentioned by M. Decandolle as measuring above 23 feet in
circumference, which, judging from the above inferences, may be safely
estimated at 700 years old. Two other colossal olives are recorded,
one at Hieres, measuring in circumference 36 feet, and one near Genoa,
measuring 38 feet 2 inches. The produce in fruit and oil is regulated
by the age of the trees, which are frequently little fortunes to their
owners. One at Villefranche produces on an average, in good seasons,
from 200 to 230 pounds of oil. The tree at Hieres, above-mentioned,
produces about 55 imperial gallons.

The olive is found everywhere along the coast of Morocco, but
particularly to the south. The trees are planted in rows, which form
alleys, the more agreeable because the trees are large, round, and
high in proportion. They take care to water them, the better to
preserve the fruit. Oil of olives might be here plentifully extracted
were taxation fixed and moderate; but such has been the variation it
has undergone, that the culture of olives is so neglected as scarcely
to produce oil sufficient for domestic consumption.

Olive oil might form one of the most valuable articles of export from
Morocco. It is strong, dark, and fit only for manufacturing purposes.
This is, perhaps, not so much the fault of the olive as of the methods
by which it is prepared. No care is taken in collecting the olives.
They are beaten from the trees with poles, as in Portugal and Spain,
suffered to lie on the ground in heaps until half putrified, then put
into uncleaned presses, and the oil squeezed through the filthy
residuum of former years. Good table oil might be made, if care were
taken, as in France and Lucca, to pick the olives without bruising
them, and to press only those that were sweet and sound. But such oil
would ill suit the palate of a Maroqueen, accustomed to drink by the
pint and the quart the rancid product of his country.

The olive is the great staple of Corfu, which has, in fact, the
appearance of an extensive olive grove. It produces annually about
200,000 barrels. Olive oil is also produced for the purposes of
commerce, and for local consumption, by France, Algiers, Tuscany,
Spain, Sardinia, Portugal, Madeira, and South Australia.

Olive plantations are extending considerably both in Upper and Lower
Egypt. Large quantities of trees were planted under the direction of
Ibrahim Pasha.

The olive tree might be expected to be quickly matured at the Cape.
The native olive, resembling the European, is of spontaneous growth
and plentiful, so that if the Spanish or Italian tree were introduced,
there is no doubt of its success. The wood of the olive is exceedingly
hard and heavy, of a yellowish color, a close fine grain, capable of
the highest polish, not subject to crack nor to be affected by worms.
The root, in consequence of its variety of color, is much used for
snuff-boxes and similar bijouterie.

The wood is beautifully veined, and has an agreeable smell. It is in
great esteem with cabinet makers, on account of the fine polish of
which it is susceptible.

The sunny slopes of hills are best suited to its natural habits.
Layering is the most certain mode of propagating this fruit, although
it grows freely from the seed, provided it has first been steeped for
twelve hours in hot water or yeast.

Olives intended for preservation are gathered before they are ripe. In
pickling, the object is to remove their bitterness and preserve them
green, by impregnating them with a brine. For this purpose various
methods are employed. The fruit being gathered are placed in a lye,
composed of one part of quicklime to six of ashes of young wood
sifted. Here they remain for half a day, and are then put into fresh
water, being renewed every 24 hours; from this they are removed into a
brine of common salt dissolved in water, to which add some aromatic
plants. The olive will in this manner remain good for twelve months.
For oil, the ripe fruit is gathered in November; the oil, unlike other
plants, being obtained from the pericarp, and immediately bruised in a
mill, the stones of which are set so wide as not to crush the kernel.
The pulp is then subjected to the press in bags made of rushes; and,
by means of a gentle pressure, the best or virgin oil flows first. A
second, and afterwards a third quality of oil is obtained, by
moistening the residuum, breaking the kernel, &c., and increasing the
pressure. When the fruit is not sufficiently ripe, the recent oil has
a bitterish taste, and when too ripe it is fatty.

The following are the present market prices of olive oil in
Liverpool, (October, 1853,) and they are 40 per cent, higher than a
few years ago:--Galipoli, per tun of 252 gallons, £68; Spanish, £64;
Levant, £60. French olives, in half barrels of two gallons, are worth
£3 to £4; Spanish, in two gallon kegs, 9s. to 10s.

The preserved or pickled olives, so admired as an accompaniment to
wine, are, as we have seen the green unripe fruit, deprived of part of
their bitterness by soaking them in water, and then preserved in an
aromatised solution of salt.

The marc of olives after the oil has been expressed, indeed, the
refuse cake of all oil plants, is most valuable, either as manure or
for feeding cattle.

More than 29,000 acres are under culture with the olive in the
Austrian empire, Venice, Dalmatia, Lombardy, Carinthia, and Carniola.
The climate of Dalmatia is highly suitable for the olive, and the oil
is better than that produced in most parts of Italy. Nearly 17,000
cwt. are annually obtained.

In 1837 there were 11,526 acres of ground under cultivation with
olives in Southern Illyria, which yielded 261,800 gallons. Olives and
sumach form the principal crops of the landholder. I have not been
able to get any recent correct statistics of the culture and produce.
The oil of Istria is considered equal to that of Provence. The stones
and refuse are used there for fuel. The olive is also extensively
cultivated in the Quarnero Islands, especially Veglia and Cherso, and
in Corfu. There were in 1836, 219,339 acres under cultivation in the
Ionian Islands, producing 113,219 barrels. The olive is gathered there
in December. The average price of the barrel of olive oil was 48s. 3d.
Nearly two millions of gallons of olive oil were exported from Sicily
in 1842. Naples alone shipped five millions of gallons in 1839, and
about 2,500 cwts. of oil is shipped annually from Morocco. Russia
imports about 500,000 poods (40 lbs. each) of olive oil annually.

"Provence oil, the produce of Aix, is the most esteemed. Florence oil
is the virgin oil expressed from the ripe fruit soon after being
gathered; it is imported in flasks surrounded by a kind of network
formed by the leaves of a monocotyledonous plant, and packed in half
chests; it is that used at table under the name of salad oil. Lucca
oil is imported in jars holding nineteen gallons each. Genoa oil is
another fine kind. Galipoli oil forms the largest portion of the olive
oil brought to England, it is imported in casks. Apulia and Calabria
are the provinces of Naples most celebrated for its production; the
Apulian is the best. Sicily oil is of inferior quality; it is
principally produced at Milazzo. Spanish oil is the worst. The foot
deposited by olive oil is used for oiling machinery, under the name
of' droppings of sweet oil.'"--("Pereira's Materia Medica.")

The manufacture of olive oil in Spain has undergone very considerable
improvement during the last few years; in particular, the process for
expressing the oil has been rendered more rapid and effectual by the
introduction of the hydraulic press, and thus the injurious
consequences which resulted from the partial fermentation of the fruit
are avoided.

There are four different kinds of oil known in the districts where it
is prepared.

1. _Virgin oil_--A term which is applied, in the district Montpellier,
to that which spontaneously separates from the paste of crushed
olives. This oil is not met with in commerce, being all used by the
inhabitants, either as an emollient remedy, or for oiling the works of
watches. A good deal of virgin oil is, however, obtained from Aix.

2. _Ordinary oil_.--This oil is prepared by pressing the olives,
previously crushed and mixed with boiling water. By this second
expression, in which more pressure is applied than in the previous
one, an oil is obtained, somewhat inferior in quality to the virgin
oil.

3. _Oil of the infernal regions_.--The water which has been employed
in the preceding operation is in some districts conducted into large
reservoirs called the _infernal regions_, where it is left for many
days. During this period, any oil that might have remained mixed with
the water separates and collects on the surface. This oil being very
inferior in quality, is only fit for burning in lamps, and is
generally locally used.

4. _Fermented oil_ is obtained in the departments of Aix and
Montpellier, by leaving the fresh olives in heaps for some time, and
pouring boiling water over them before pressing the oil. But this
method is very seldom put in practice, for the olives during this
fermentation lose their peculiar flavor, become much heated, and
acquire a musty taste, which is communicated to the oil.

The fruity flavor of the oil depends upon the quality of the olives
from which it is pressed, and not upon the method adopted in its
preparation,"--(French "Journal de Pharmacie.")

The price of olive oil is sufficiently high to lead to its admixture
with cheaper oils. The oil of poppy seeds is that which is usually
employed for its adulteration, as it has the advantage of being cheap,
of having a sweet taste, and very little smell. M. Gobley has invented
an instrument which he calls an areometer, to detect this fraud. It is
founded on the difference between the densities of olive oil and oil
of poppies.

The imports, which in 1826 were only 742,719 gallons, had risen in
1850 to 5,237,816 gallons. The following figures show the progressive
imports and consumption:--

              Imported.    Retained for home consumption.
               gallons.         gallons.
  1827        1,028,174        1,070,765
  1831        4,158,917        1,928,892
  1835          606,166          554,196
  1839        1,793,920        1,806,178
  1843        3,047,688        2,516,724
  1847        2,190,384               --
  1848        2,541,672               --
  1849        4,274,928               --
  1850        5,860,806               --
  1851        2,898,756        2,749,572
  1852        2,242,296        1,066,400

The imports of olive oil into the port of Liverpool were 9,815 tuns
in 1849, and 10,038 tuns in 1850. It was brought from Manila, Malaga,
and Corfu, but chiefly from Barbary, Palermo, Gallipoli, and the
Levant. In 1850 we imported from France 259,646 imperial gallons of
olive oil, officially valued at £34,638; the average in ordinary years
is only about 20,000 gallons from the continent.


ALMOND OIL.--To the south of the Empire of Morocco there are forests
of the Arzo tree, which is thorny, irregular in its form, and produces
a species of almond exceedingly hard. Its fruit consists of two
almonds, rough and bitter, from which an oil is produced, very
excellent for frying. In order to use this oil it requires to be
purified by fire, and set in a flame, which must be suffered to die
away of itself; the most greasy particles are thus consumed, and its
arid qualities wholly destroyed. "When the Moors gather these fruits
they drive their goats under the trees, and as the fruit falls the
animals carefully nibble off the skins, and then greedily feed.

The oil of almonds is more fluid than olive oil, and of a clear,
transparent, yellowish color, with a very slight odor and taste. It is
occasionally employed for making the finer kinds of soap, and also in
medicine.

In manufacturing it the fruit are first well rubbed or shaken in a
coarse bag or sack, to separate a bitter powder which covers their
epidermis. They are then pounded to a paste in mortars of marble,
which paste is afterwards subjected to the action of a press, as in
the case of the olive.

About 80 tuns of almond oil are annually imported into this country,
the price being about 1s. per pound. Five-and-a-half pounds of almond
oil will yield by cold expression one pound six ounces of oil, and
three-fourths of a pound more if the iron plates are heated.


SESAME OR TEEL.--Of this small annual plant there are two or three
species. _Sesamum orientale_, the common sort; and _S. indicum_, a
more robust kind, cultivated at a different season, are both natives
of the East Indies. _S. indicum_ bears a pale purple flower, and _S.
orientals_ has a white blossom. It is the latter which is chiefly
grown, and the seeds afford the Gingellie oil or suffed-til, already
extensively known in commerce in the East. The expressed oil is as
clear and sweet as that from almonds, and probably the Behens oil,
used in varnish, is no other. It is called by the Arabs "Siriteh," and
the seed, "bennie " seed, in Africa. _S. orientals_ is grown in the
West Indies under the name of "wangle." It is said to have been first
brought to Jamaica by the Jews as an article of food. 1,050 bags of
gingelly teel, or sesame seed, were imported into Liverpool, in 1849,
from the East, South America, and Africa, for expressing oil, and
3,700 bags in 1850. There are two kinds of seed, light and dark, and
it is about the same size as mustard seed, only not round.

A hectare of land in Algeria yields 1,475 kilogrammes of seed, which
estimated at 50 cents the kilogramme, amounts to 737 francs, whilst
the cost of production is only 259 francs, leaving a profit of 478
francs (nearly £20). The oil obtained from this seed is inferior to
good olive oil, but is better adapted for the manufacture of soap.

This plant is not unlike hemp, but the stalk is cleaner and
semi-transparent. The flower also is so gaudy, that a field in blossom
looks like a bed of florist's flowers, and its aromatic fragrance does
not aid to dispel such delusion. It flourishes most upon land which is
light and fertile. The fragrance of the oil is perceptibly weaker when
obtained from seed produced on wet, tenacious soils. A gallon of seed
seems to be the usual quantity sown upon an acre. In Bengal, _S.
orientale_ is sown during February, and the crop harvested at the end
of May; but _S. indicum_ is sown on high, dry soil, in the early part
of the rains of June, and the harvest occurs in September. About
Poonah it is sown in June and harvested in November. In Nepaul two
crops are obtained annually; one is sown as a first crop in April and
May, and reaped in October and November; the other as an autumn crop,
after the upland rise in August and September, and reaped in November
and December.

In Mysore, after being cut it is stacked for a week, then exposed to
the sun for three days, but gathered into heaps at night; and between
every two days of such drying, it is kept a day in the heap. By this
process, the pods burst and shed their seeds without thrashing.

The seeds contain an abundance of oil, which might be substituted for
olive oil; it is procured from them in great quantities, in Egypt,
India, Kashmir, China, and Japan, where it is used both for cooking
and burning. It will keep for many years and not acquire any rancid
smell or taste, but in the course of a year or two becomes quite mild,
so that when the warm taste of the seed, which is in the oil when
first expressed, is worn off, it is used for all the purposes of salad
oil. It possesses such qualities as fairly entitle it to introduction
into Europe; and if divested of its mucilage, it might perhaps compete
with oil of olives, at least for medicinal purposes, and could be
raised in any quantity in the British Indian Presidencies. It is
sufficiently free from smell to admit of being made the medium for
extracting the perfume of the jasmine, the tuberose, narcissus,
camomile, and of the yellow rose. The process is managed by adding one
weight of flowers to three weights of oil in a bottle, which being
corked is exposed to the rays of the sun for forty days, when the oil
is supposed to be sufliciently impregnated for use. This oil, under
the name of Gingilie oil, is used in India to adulterate oil of
almonds.

The flour of the seed, after the oil is expressed, is used in making
cakes, and the straw serves for fuel and manure.

The oil is much used in Mysore for dressing food, and as a common lamp
oil. From 200 to 400 quarters under the name of Niger seed are
imported annually into Liverpool for expressing oil.

Three varieties of Til are extensively cultivated throughout India,
for the sake of the fine oil expressed from their seeds, the white
seeded variety, the parti-colored, and the black. It is from the
latter that the sesamum or gingelly oil of commerce is obtained.
Sesamum seed contains about 45 per cent. of oil. Good samples of the
oil were shown at the Great Exhibition from Vizianagram, Ganjain,
Hyderabad, Tanjore, the district of Moorshedabad, and Gwalior. The
gingelly seed is stated to be worth about £4 per ton in the North
Circars.

An oil resembling that of sesamum is obtained from the seed of
_Guizotea oleifera_ and _Abyssinica_, a plant introduced from
Abyssinia, and common in Bengal. The ram til, or valisaloo seeds,
yield about 34 per cent, of oil. The oil is generally used for
burning, and is worth locally about 10d. per gallon.

BLACK TIL (_Verbesena sativa_).--This is known as kutsela or kala til,
in the Deccan. It is chiefly cultivated in Mysore and the western
districts of Peninsular India, as well as in the Bombay presidency.

About Seringapatam, as soon as the millet crop has been reaped the
field is ploughed four times, and the seed sown, a gallon per acre,
during the month of July or August, after the first heavy rain. No
manure or weeding is required, for the crop will grow on the worst
soils. It is reaped in three months, being cut close to the ground,
and stacked for a week. After exposure to the sun for two or three
days, the seed is beaten out with a stick. The crop in Mysore rarely
yields two bushels per acre, but about Poonah the produce is much
larger. The seed is sometimes parched and made into sweetmeats, but is
usually grown for its oil. This is used in cooking, but it is not so
abundant in the seed, nor so good as that of the sesame. Bullocks will
not eat the stems unless pressed by hunger.

About 5,000 maunds are exported annually from Calcutta. 3,703 bags
were imported into Liverpool in 1851. The price per quarter of eight
bushels, in January, 1853, was from 30s. to £2; of teel oil, in tins,
weighing 60 to 100 pounds, £2 to £2 4s.

Bombay linseed was worth £2 11s. to £2 12s. the quarter of eight
bushels, in January, 1853. Bengal ditto 2s. less. The imports into
Liverpool were 68,468 bags and 54,834 pockets in 1851, and 14,490 bags
and 33,700 pockets in 1852. About 9,000 bags of mustard seed and from
18,000 to 20,000 bags of rape seed are also imported thence. The price
of the latter is about £2 the quarter.

NATIVE OIL MILLS.--The principal native oil mill of India, of which,
however, there are some varieties, consists of a simple wooden mortar
with revolving pestle. It is in common use in all Belgaum and
Bangalore. Two oxen are harnessed to the geering, which depends from
the extremity of the pestle,--a man sits on the top of the mortar, and
throws in the seeds that may have got displaced. The mill grinds twice
a day; a fresh man and team being employed on each occasion. When
sesame oil is to be made, about seventy seers measure, or two and a
half bushels of seeds are thrown in; to this ten seers, or two quarts
and three-quarters of water, are gradually added; this on the
continuance of the grinding, which lasts in all six hours, unites with
the fibrous portion of the seeds, and forms a cake, which, when
removed, leaves the oil clean and pure at the bottom of the mortar.
From this it is taken out by a coco-nut shell cup, on the pestle being
withdrawn. Other seed oils are described by Dr. Buchanan, as made
almost entirely in the same way as the sesamum. The exceptions are the
hamlu, or castor oil, obtained from either the small or large
varieties of _Ricinus_. This, at Seringapatam, is first parched in
pots, containing something more than a seer each. It is then beaten in
a mortar, and formed into balls; of these from four to sixteen seers
are put in an earthenware pot and boiled with an equal quantity of
water, for the space of five hours; frequent care being taken to stir
the mixture to prevent it from burning. The oil now floats on the
surface, and is skimmed off pure. The oil mill made use of at Bombay,
and to the northward, at Surat, Cambay, Kurrachee, &c., differs a
little from that just described, in having a very strong wooden frame
round the mouth of the mortar; on this the man who keeps the seeds in
order sits. In Scinde a camel is employed to drive the mill instead of
bullocks.

Castor oil seed is thrown into the mill like other seeds, as already
described; when removed it requires to be boiled for an hour, and then
strained through a cloth to free it from the fragments of the seed.

It is a curious fact, and illustrative of the imperfect manner in
which the oil is separated from the seeds, that while the common
pressman only obtained some 26¼ per cent., Boussingault, in his
laboratory, from the same seeds, actually procured 41 per cent. When
the oil cakes are meant for feeding stock, this loss is of little
consequence, inasmuch as the oil serves a very good purpose, but when
the cake is only intended to be used as a manure, it is a great loss,
inasmuch as the oil is of little or no use in adding any food for
crops to the soil.

The chief oil made on the sea board of India, is that yielded by the
coco-nut palm. The nut having been stripped of the husk or coir, the
shell is broken, and the fatty lining enclosing the milk is taken out.
This is called cobri, copra, or copperah in different localities.
Three maunds, or ninety pounds of copperah, are thrown into the mill
with about three gallons of water, and from this is produced three
maunds, or seven and three-quarter gallons of oil. The copperah in its
unprepared state is sold, slightly dried in the market. It is burned
in iron cribs or grates, on the top of poles as torches, in
processions, and as means of illumination for work performed in the
open air at night. No press or other contrivance is made use of by the
natives in India for squeezing out or expressing the oil from the
cake, and a large amount of waste, in consequence of this, necessarily
ensues.--_Bombay Times_, June 5, 1850.

Oil, of the finest kind, is made in India by expression from the
kernels of the apricot. It is clear, of a pale yellow color, and
smells strongly of hydrocyanic acid, of which it contains, usually,
about 4 per cent.

"On inquiring into the use made of the sunflower, we were given to
understand that it is here (in Tartary) raised chiefly for the oil
expressed from it. But it is also of use for many other purposes. In
the market places of the larger towns we often found the people eating
the seeds, which, when boiled in water, taste not unlike the boiled
Indian corn eaten by the Turks. In some districts of Russia the seeds
are employed with great success in fattening poultry; they are also
said to increase the number of eggs more than any other kind of grain.
Pheasants and partridges eat them with great avidity, and find the
same effects from them as other birds. The dried leaves are given to
cattle in place of straw; and the withered stalks are said to produce
a considerable quantity of alkali."--_Bremner's Interior of Russia._

658 barrels linseed oil were brought down to New Orleans from the
interior in 1849, and 1009 in 1848.

During the period of the Great Exhibition special enquiry was made by
many manufacturers as to the different oils of Southern India,
suitable for supplying the place of animal fat in the manufacture of
candles, and generally adapted for various other purposes. Enquiries
should be directed to the specific gravity, the boiling point, the per
centage of pure oil in the seeds, and the means of obtaining a regular
supply. The demand for vegetable oils in European commerce has been
steadily on the increase for several years past, and the quantities
consumed are now so large that the oleaginous products of India and
the colonies must sooner or later have a considerable commercial
importance, from the value which they are likely to acquire. Indeed
some have already established a footing in the home market, and Drs.
Hunter, Cleghorn, and others in India, have specially directed the
attention of the natives and merchants to the subject.

MARGOSE, OR NEEM OIL.--From the pericarp or fleshy part of the fruit
of the _Melia Azederachta_, the well known Margosa oil is prepared;
which is cheap and easily procurable in Ceylon. Dr. Maxwell, garrison
surgeon of Trichinopoly, states that he has found this oil equally
efficacious to cod-liver oil in cases of consumption and scrofula. He
began with half-ounce doses, morning and evening, which were gradually
reduced.

ILLEPE OIL.--The seeds of three species of Bassia, indigenous to
India, yield solid oils, and are remarkable for the fact, that they
supply at the same time saccharine matter, spirit, and oil, fit for
both food and burning in lamps. The Illepe( _B. longifolia_) is a tree
abundant in the Madras Presidency, the southern parts of Hindostan
generally, and the northern province of Ceylon. In Ceylon the
inhabitants use the oil in cooking and for lamps. The oil cake is
rubbed on the body as soap, and seems admirably adapted for removing
the unctuosity of the skin caused by excessive perspiration, and for
rendering it soft, pliable, and glossy, which is so conducive to
health in a tropical climate. The oil is white and solid at common
temperatures, fusing at from 70 to 80 degrees. It may be
advantageously employed in the manufacture of both candles and soap;
in Ceylon and some parts of India this oil forms the chief ingredient
in the manufacture of soap.

Mahower (_B. latifolia_) is common in most parts of the Bengal
Presidency. The oil a good deal resembles that last described,
obtained from the Illepe seeds; and may be used for similar purposes.
It is solid at common temperatures, and begins to melt at about 70
degrees.

Vegetable butter is obtained from the Choorie (_B. butyracea_). This
tree, though far less generally abundant than the other two species,
is common in certain of the hilly districts, especially in the eastern
parts of Kumaon; in the province of Dotee it is so abundant that the
oil is cheaper than ghee, or fluid butter, and is used to adulterate
it. It is likewise commonly burnt in lamps, for which purpose it is
preferred to coco-nut oil. It is a white solid fat, fusible at about
120 degrees, and exhibits very little tendency to become rancid when
kept.

Shea, or galam butter, is obtained in Western Africa from the _Bassia
Parkii_, or _Pentadisma butyracea_, a tree closely resembling the _B.
latifolia_, and other species indigenous to Hindostan. According to
Park, the tree is abundant in Bambara, the oil is solid, of a
greyish-white color, and fuses at 97 degrees. Its product is used for
a variety of purposes--for cooking, burning in lamps, &c.

This tree has much of the character of the laurel, but grows to the
height of eighteen or twenty feet. Its leaf is somewhat longer than
the laurel, and is a little broader at the point; the edges of the
leaf are gently curved, and are of a dark sap green color. The nut is
of the form and size of a pigeon's egg, and the kernel completely
fills the shell. When fresh it is of a white drab color, but, if long
kept, becomes the color of chocolate. The kernel, when new, is nearly
all butter, which is extracted in the following manner:--The shell is
removed from the kernel, which is also crushed, and then a quantity is
put into an earthen pot or pan, placed over the fire with a portion of
water and the nut kernels. After boiling slowly about half an hour the
whole is strained through a grass mat into a clean vessel, when it is
allowed to cool. Then, after removing the fibrous part from it, it is
put into a grass bag and pressed so as to obtain all the oil. This is
poured into the vessel along with the first-mentioned portion, and
when cold is about the consistence of butter.

The nuts hang in bunches from the different boughs, but each nut has
its own fibre, about seven or eight inches long, and about the
thickness and color of whip-cord. The nut is attached to the fibre in
a very singular manner. The end of the fibre is concealed by a thin
membrane, about half an inch wide and three-quarters of an inch long.
This membrane is attached to the side of the nut, and, when ripe,
relinquishes its hold, and the nut falls to the ground, when it is
gathered for use. A good-sized healthy tree yields about a bushel of
nuts, but the greater number are not so prolific. The trees close to
the stream present a more healthy appearance, probably on account of
being better watered, and the fire being less powerful close to the
stream.

THE CANDLE NUT TREE (_Aleurites triloba_, of Foster) grows in the
Polynesian Islands, and is also met with in some parts of Jamaica and
the East Indies. In the latter quarter it is known as the Indian
Akhrowt. A very superior kind of paint oil is produced from the nut,
and the cake, after the expression of the oil, forms an excellent food
for cattle, and a useful manure. 31½ gallons of the nut yield ten
gallons of oil, which bears a good price in the home markets.

The yearly produce of this oil in the Sandwich Isles, where it is
called kukui oil, is about 10,000 gallons. It has been shipped to the
markets of Chili, New South Wales, and London, but not as yet with
much profit. It realized about £20 per imperial ton in the port of
London. In 1843, about 8,620 gallons were shipped from Honolulu,
valued at 1s. 8d. per gallon.

In Ceylon the oil is known as kekune oil, and a good deal of it might
be obtained there from the district of Badulla. From the trials made
it appears that it cannot be used as a drying oil, but will probably
answer best as a substitute for rape oil. Samples have been sent to
several clothiers, and the nature and quality of the oil renders it
most applicable to their purposes.

COLZA (_Brassica oleracea_), a variety of the common cabbage, is much
grown in the South of Europe and other parts, for the oil obtained by
pressure from its seeds, and which is used for lamps and other
purposes. The plant will not thrive on sand or clay, but requires a
rich light soil. After the ground has been well ploughed and manured,
the seed should be sown in July, in furrows eight or ten inches
asunder. The plants are transplanted about October. When ripe the
stalks are reaped with a sickle, and the seeds threshed out with a
flail. The cake, after the oil is expressed, is an excellent food for
cattle.

Like all the oleaginous plants cultivated for their seed, colza
greatly impoverishes the soil.

In Peru the caoutchouc is used as a substitute for candles. A roll of
it (which is generally about a yard long and three inches in diameter)
is cut lengthways into four parts, but before it is lighted the piece
is rolled up in a green plantain leaf, to prevent it from melting or
taking fire down the sides. The natives of Peru also bruize the beans
of a species of wild cacao after they have been well dried, and use
the substance instead of tallow in their lamps.

Mr. Dearman, writing from Dacca, to Dr. Spry, Secretary to the
Agricultural and Horticultural Societies of India, in 1839, says--"I
will send you some seeds from a tree, which resemble chestnuts. One of
these seeds, after taking off the shell, being stuck on the point of
a penknife, and lighted at a candle flame, will burn without the least
odor for four or five minutes, giving a light equal to two or three
candles. From the flower of the tree (he adds), I am told, is
distilled a delightful scent." [I presume this must be the candle-nut
tree.]

At the Feejee and Hawaian islands, the seeds of the castor oil plant
and of the candle-nut tree (_Aleurites triloba_) are strung together
and used for candles. Species of torches are also made from the candle
wood in Demerara.

THE CANDLEBERRY MYRTLE (_Myrica cerifera_) abounds in the Bahama
Islands. The shrub produces a small green berry, which, like the hog
plum, puts out from the trunk and larger limbs. Much patient labor is
required in gathering these berries, and from them is obtained a
beautiful green wax, which burns very nearly, if not fully, as well as
the spermaceti, or composition candles imported from abroad. Not long
since Mr. Thos. B. Musgrove, of St. Salvador (or Cat Island), obtained
about 80 lbs. of this wax, and made some excellent candles of it. The
method of procuring this wax is by boiling the berries in a copper or
brass vessel for some time. Iron pots are found to darken and cloud
the wax. The vessel after a sufficient time is taken from the fire,
and when cool the hardened wax, floating on the top of the water, is
skimmed off.

MYRTLE WAX.--According to the experiments of M. Cadet and Dr. Bostock,
myrtle wax differs in many respects from bees' wax, Specimens of it
assume shades of a yellowish green color. Its smell is also different;
myrtle wax, when fresh, emitting a fragrant balsamic odor. It has in
part the unctuosity of bees' wax, and somewhat of the brittleness of
resin. Its specific gravity is greater, insomuch that it sinks in
water, whereas bees' wax floats upon it; and it is not so easily
bleached to form white wax. The wax tree of Louisiana contains immense
quantities of wax.

Mr. Moodie ("Ten Tears in South Africa") says,--

    "I occasionally employed my people, at spare times, in gathering wax
    berries that grow in great abundance upon small bushes in the sand
    hills, near the sea, and yield a substance partaking of the nature
    of wax and tallow, which is mixed with common tallow, and used by
    the colonists for making candles. The berry is about the size of a
    pea, and covered with a bluish powder. They are gathered by
    spreading a skin on the sand, and beating the bush with a stick.
    When a sufficient quantity of the berries are collected, they are
    boiled in a great quantity of water, and the wax is skimmed off as
    fast as it rises; the wax is then poured into flat vessels and
    allowed to cool, when it becomes hard and brittle, and has a
    metallic sound when struck. The cakes thus formed are of a deep
    green color, and are sold at the same price as tallow. The wild pigs
    devour these berries when they come in their way, and seem very fond
    of them."

A good specimen of myrtle, or candleberry wax, accompanied by candles
made from it in the crude unbleached state in New Brunswick, was shown
at the Great Exhibition.

Vegetable wax was also sent from Shanghae, in China; from St. Domingo,
in the northern parts of which the plant is indigenous; and a
remarkable specimen from Japan. This substance, from its high melting
point and other physical characteristics, has of late attracted a good
deal of attention; it is admirably suited as a material for the
manufacture of candles.

At a meeting of the Central Board, at Cape Town, in March, 1853, the
members voted about £300, to employ some 20 or 30 men, in gathering
berries from the Downs, and making wax during the winter months, that
is, from the beginning of May to the end of September. The wax fetches
a good price in the Cape market.

    In the annual report of the Cape of Good Hope Agricultural Society,
    in May, 1853, a very fine sample of myrtle, or terry wax, grown on
    the Cape Flats, was exhibited by Mr. Feeny, Superintendent of the
    Road Plantation, by direction of the Commissioners of the Central
    Road Board, in different stages of purification, from green to
    white, as also some candles; and it being conceived by the meeting
    that this article might ultimately become one of considerable
    importance for purposes of export, a letter of thanks was addressed
    to Mr. Feeny; and Nathaniel Day, the constable who assisted him, was
    presented with the sum of £5, as a remuneration for his trouble in
    assisting to purify and prepare the wax. On reference to the juror's
    report on the Great Exhibition, it will be gratifying to find that
    the berry wax, forwarded by this Society, had attracted peculiar
    notice, and a prize medal been awarded for it; the following
    reference is therein made to it: "some fine specimens of myrtle or
    berry wax, from the Cape of Good Hope, are exhibited by J.
    Lindenberg, of Worcester. This is an excellent material for the
    manufacture of candles, when employed in conjunction with other
    solid fats. The jury awarded a prize medal for these specimens."

    Your Committee would suggest every possible attention being drawn to
    this subject, in which they are gratified to state, the
    Commissioners of the Central Road Board have evinced a readiness to
    co-operate, by offering to place at the Society's disposal the sum
    of £10 10s., "to be given as a premium for the best information
    respecting the wax berry plant, the soils and situations in which it
    is found to grow most luxuriantly: the best mode of propagating and
    cultivating it, of collecting the berries, and extracting and
    preparing the wax, &c." And from a letter received from the
    Secretary to the Central Road Board, it appears that the Board had
    authorised the shipment to England of 2,561 lbs. of the wax, by the
    _Queen of the South_ in November last, which, from the account sales
    lately received from Messrs. J.R. Thomson & Co., realised as
    follows, viz.:--

    4 cases weighing nett    856 lbs. à  8d.    £28  10   8
    4              "        1040 lbs. à  9d.     39   0   0
    3              "         745 lbs. à 11d.     34   2  11
    3              "           6 lbs. à 11d.      0   5   6

                                               £101  19   1
            Discount 2½ per cent.                 2  11   0

                                                             £99   8   1

                                          CHARGES.
    Warehouse Entry 3s.  6d. Fire Insurance
      2s., Ports 2s. 6d                          £0   8   0
    Freight                                       7   3   3
    Primage                                       0  14   4
    Dock Charges                                  3   9   6
    Sale Expenses                                 0   9   0
    Brokerage                                     1   0   6

                                                             £13   4   7

    Commission at 2½ per cent                     2  11   0

    Carried forward                                          £16  15  7

    Brought forward                                £15 15  7

                                                   £83 12  6
    Deduct Bills of Lading, &c.                      0 19  6

                                                   £82 13  0
    Deduct the Board's expenses for gathering and
    preparing, &c                                   28  8  7

    Leaving a clear profit of                      £54  4  5

    This statement shows that from a plant, which is indigenous to the
    colony, and might he cultivated to almost any extent, and mostly on
    soils unavailable for other purposes, an article of great export
    could be derived at a comparatively small expense; it is with that
    view that I desire to direct public attention more prominently to
    it.

In the Museum of the Royal Botanic Gardens, at Kew, wax is shown as
scraped from the trunk of the wax palm (_Ceroxylon andicola_), and
candles made from it, as also some made of acorns and closely
resembling common tallow. Concrete milk and butter made from the Shea
butter tree, and others growing in Para, are also exhibited.

Wax candles have been made from the seeds of _Myrica macrocarpa_ in
Colombia, and also from vegetable wax in Java. Some of these are to be
seen in the Museum of the Pharmaceutical Society of London.


CASTOR OIL PLANT.

Castor oil is expressed from the seeds of _Ricinus communis (Palma
Christi)_, a plant with petale-palmate leaves, which is found native
in Greece, Africa, the South of Spain, and the East Indies, and is
cultivated in the West Indies, as well as in North and South America.
In the temperate and northern parts of Europe, the plant is an
herbaceous annual, of from three to eight feet high; in the more
southern parts it becomes scrubby and even attains an height of twenty
feet; while in India it is often a tree thirty to forty feet high. The
best oil is obtained by expression from the seeds without heat, and is
hence called "cold drawn oil." A large quantity of oil may be produced
by boiling the seeds, but it is less sweet and more apt to become
rancid than that procured by expression.

The _Palma Christi_ grows continuously for about four years, and
becomes a large tree in constant bearing, ripening its rich clusters
of beans in such profusion, that 100 bushels may be obtained annually
from an acre, and their product of oil two gallons per bushel.

There are several species, all of which yield oil of an equally good
quality. A shrubby variety is common in South Australia, and other
parts of New Holland. _Ricinus lividus_ is a native of the Cape of
Good Hope. It is a hardy plant, of the easiest culture, and will
thrive in almost any soil, whether in the burning plains or the
coldest part of the mountains. The seed should be planted in the
tropics in September, singly, and at the distance of 10 or twelve feet
apart. They will bear the first season, and continue to yield for
years. When the seed-pods become brown, they are in a fit state to
pluck. It is often grown in the East intermixed with other crops. The
primitive mode of obtaining the oil is to separate the seeds from the
husks, and bruise them by tying them up in a grass mat. In this state
they are put into a boiler amongst water, and boiled until all the oil
is separated, which floats at the top, and the refuse sinks to the
bottom; it is then skimmed off, and put away for use. The purest oil
is obtained, as before-mentioned, by crushing the seeds (which are
sewed up in horsehair bags), by the action of heavy iron beaters. The
oil, as it oozes out, is caught in troughs, and conveyed to receivers,
whence it is bottled for use.

Castor oil is used for lamps in the East Indies, and the Chinese have
some mode of depriving it of its medicinal properties, so as to render
it suitable for culinary purposes.

That which we import from the East Indies comes from Bombay and
Calcutta, and is obtained at a very low price. It is exceedingly pure,
both in color and taste.

In the West Indies the shrub grows about six feet high. The stalks are
jointed, and the branches covered with leaves about eighteen inches in
circumference, forming eight or ten sharp-pointed divisions, of a
bluish green color, spreading out in different directions. The flowers
contain yellow stamina; the seed is enclosed in a triangular husk, of
a dark brown color, and covered with a light fur, of the same color as
the husk. When the capsule is thoroughly ripened by the sun, it
bursts, and expels the seeds, which are usually three in number.

In Jamaica this plant is of such speedy growth, that in one year it
arrives at maturity, and I have known it to attain to the height of
twenty feet. A gallon of the seed yields by expression about two
pounds of oil.

The wholesale price in Liverpool, in October, 1853, was 3d. to 5d. per
lb.

It is brought over from the East Indies in small tin cases, soldered
together and packed in boxes, weighing about 2 cwt. each.

In Ceylon castor oil is obtained from two varieties of the plant, the
white and the red.

The native mode of preparing the oil is by roasting the seed; this
imparts an acridity to the oil, which is objectionable. By attending
to the following directions, the oil may be prepared in the purest and
best form. The modes of preparation are--1. By boiling in water. 2. By
expression. 3. Extraction by alcohol. In the first the seeds are
slightly roasted to coagulate the albumen, cleaned of the integuments,
bruised in a mortar, and the paste boiled in pure water. The oil which
rises on the surface is removed, and treated with an additional
quantity of fresh water; 10,000 parts of clean seed give by this
process (in Jamaica) 3,250 of oil, of good quality, though
amber-colored. 2. Expression is the simplest and most usually adopted
process; the cleaned kernels are well bruised, placed in cloth bags,
and compressed in a powerful lever and screw press. A thick oil is
obtained, which must be filtered through cloth and paper to separate
the mucilage. In Bengal the manufacturers boil the oil water, which
coagulates some albumen, and they subsequently filter through cloth,
charcoal, and paper. 3. The extraction by alcohol is practised by some
druggists. Each pound of paste is triturated with four pounds of
alcohol, specific gravity 8.350, and the mixture subjected to
pressure. The oil dissolved by the alcohol escapes very freely: one
half is recovered by the distillation of the spirit, the residue of
the distillation is boiled in a large quantity of water. The oil
separates and is removed, and gently heated to expel any adherent
moisture; then filtered at the temperature of 90 deg. Fahrenheit;
1,000 parts of the paste have by this process given 625 of colorless
and exceedingly sweet oil.

The cultivation of the _Palma christi_, and the manufacture of castor
oil, is extensively carried on in some parts of the United States, and
continues on the increase. A single firm at St. Louis has worked up
18,500 bushels of beans in four months, producing 17,750 gallons of
oil, and it is stated that 800 barrels have been sold, at 50 dollars
per barrel. The oil may be prepared for burning, for machinery, soap,
&c., and is also convertible into stearine. It is more soluble in
alcohol than lard-oil.

American castor oil is imported for the most part from New York and
New Orleans, but some comes from our own possessions in North America.
In the United States, according to the "American Dispensatory," the
cleansed seeds are gently heated in a shallow iron reservoir, to
render the oil liquid for easy expression, and then compressed in a
powerful screw press, by which a whitish oily liquid is obtained,
which is boiled with water in clean iron boilers, and the impurities
skimmed off as they rise to the surface. The water dissolves the
mucilage and starch, and the heat coagulates the albumen, which forms
a whitish layer between the oil and water. The clear oil is now
removed, and boiled with a minute portion of water until aqueous
vapors cease to arise: by this process an acrid volatile matter is got
rid of. The oil is put into barrels, and in this way is sent into the
market. American oil has the reputation of being adulterated with
olive oil. Good seeds yield about 25 per cent. of oil. A large
proportion of the drug consumed in the eastern section of the Union is
derived by way of New Orleans from Illinois and the neighbouring
States, where it is so abundant that it is sometimes used for burning
in lamps.

In Jamaica the bruised seeds are boiled with water in an iron pot, and
the liquid kept constantly stirred. The oil which separates swims on
the top, mixed with a white froth, and is skimmed off. The skimmings
are heated in a small iron pot, and strained through a cloth. When
cold it is put in jars or bottles for use.

          Castor oil imported.     Retained.
                   lbs.               lbs.
  1826           263,382            453,072
  1831           393,191            327,940
  1836           981,585            809,559
  1841           871,136            732,720
  1846         1,477,168               --
  1849         1,084,272               --
  1850         3,495,632               --

The imports of castor oil come chiefly from the East India Company's
possessions, and were as follows, nearly all being retained for home
consumption:--

                 lbs.
  1830         490,558
  1831         343,373
  1832         257,386
  1833         316,779
  1834         685,457
  1835       1,107,115
  1836         972,552
  1837         957,164
  1838         837,143
  1839         916,370
  1840       1,190,173
  1841         869,947
  1842         490,156
  1843         717,696

In 1841, 12,406 Indian maunds of castor oil were shipped from Calcutta
alone, and 7,906 ditto in 1842.

In 1842, 8 cases were shipped from Ceylon, 10 in 1843, 24 in 1844, and
14 in 1845.

1,439 barrels were shipped from New Orleans in 1847. The quantity
brought down to that city from the interior was 1,394 barrels in 1848,
and 1,337 barrels in 1849.

Within the last year or two, an attempt has been made to introduce the
cake obtained in expressing the seeds of the castor oil plant as a
manure, which is deserving attention, both because it is in itself
likely to prove a serviceable addition to the list of fertilizers
which may be advantageously employed, and because it may lead to the
use of similar substances, which are at present neglected, or thrown
aside as refuse.

The castor oil seed resembles in chemical composition the other oily
seeds. It consists of a mixture of mucilaginous, albuminous, and oily
matters; and the former two of these are identical in constitution and
general properties with the substances found in linseed and rape cake,
while the oil is principally distinguished by its purgative
properties. The cake obtained is in the form of ordinary oil-cake, but
is at once distinguished from it by its color, and by the large
fragments of the husk of the seeds which it contains. It is also much,
softer, and may be easily broken down with the hand. I have analysed
two samples of castor cake, stated to have been obtained by different
processes; and though I have not been informed of the exact nature of
these processes, I infer, from the large quantity of oil, that one
must have been cold-drawn. The first of the following analyses is that
of the sample which I believe the cold-drawn. It is the most complete
of the two, and contains a determination of the amount of oil. In the
other analysis this was not done, but there was no doubt on my mind
that its quantity was much smaller.

                            No. 1.       No. 2.
  Water                      8.32        16.31
  Oil                       24.32          --
  Nitrogen                   3.05         3.35
  Ash                        7.22         4.95

  The ash contains--
  Siliccous matters          1.96          --
  Phosphates                 3.36         2.27
  Excess of phosphoric acid  0.64          --

In order to give a proper idea of the value of this substance as a
manure, I shall quote here, for comparison sake, the average
composition of rape cake, as deduced from the analyses contained in
the Transactions of the Highland Society of Scotland:--

  Water                      10.68
  Oil                        11.10
  Nitrogen                    4.63
  Ash                         7.79
  The ash contains--
  Siliccous matters           1.18
  Phosphates                  3.87
  Excess of phosphoric acid   0.39

It will be at once seen that there is a close general resemblance
between these two substances, although there is no doubt that the
castor cake is inferior to rape cake; still I believe that this
inferiority is fully counterbalanced by the difference in price, which
is such that, compared with rape cake, the castor cake is really a
cheap manure. There is only one of its constituents which it contains
in larger quantity, and that is the oil. No weight is, however, to be
attached to the quantity of oil in a manure. In a substance to be used
as food, it is of very high importance; but so far as we at present
know, its value as manure is extremely problematical. Whale, seal, and
other coarse oils have been used as manures, and by some few observers
benefits have been derived from their application, but the general
experience has not been favorable to their use, nor should we
chemically be induced to expect any beneficial effect from them. We
have every reason to believe that the oils which are found in plants
are produced there as the results of certain processes which are
proceeding within the plant, and there is no evidence to show that any
part of it is ever absorbed in the state of oil by the roots when they
are presented to them. On the other hand, the oils are extremely inert
substances, and undergo chemical changes very slowly; so that there is
no likelihood of their being converted into carbonic acid, or any
other substance which may be useful to the plant; and as they contain
no nitrogen, and consist only of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, they
can yield only those elements of which the plant can easily obtain an
unlimited supply. I can conceive cases in which the oil might possibly
produce some mechanical effect on the soil, but none in which it could
act as a manure, in the proper sense of the term.

KANARI on.--Mr. Crawfurd, in his "History of the Indian Archipelago,"
speaks most favorably of an oil obtained from the "Kanari," a tree
which, he says, is a native of the same country as the sago palm, and
is not found to the westward, though it has been introduced to Celebes
and Java. I have not been able to distinguish its botanical name; but
Mr. Crawfurd describes it as a large handsome tree, and one of the
most useful productions of the Archipelago. It bears a nut of an
oblong shape, nearly the size of a walnut, the kernel of which is as
delicate as that of a filbert, and abounds with oil. The nuts are
either smoked and dried for use, or the oil is expressed from them in
their recent state. It is used for all culinary purposes, and is purer
and more palatable than that of the coco-nut. The kernels, mixed up
with a little sago meal, are made into cakes and eaten as bread.


THE COCO-NUT PALM.

This palm (_Cocos nucifera_) is one of the most useful of the
extensive family to which it belongs, supplying food, clothing,
materials for houses, utensils of various kinds, rope and oil; and
some of its products, particularly the two last, form important
articles of commerce. An old writer, in a curious discourse on palm
trees, read before the Royal Society, in 1688, says, "The coco nut
palm is alone sufficient to build, rig, and freight a ship with bread,
wine, water, oil, vinegar, sugar, and other commodities. I have sailed
(he adds) in vessels where the bottom and the whole cargo hath been
from the munificence of this palm tree. I will take upon me to make
good what I have asserted." And then he proceeds to describe and
enumerate each product. Another recent popular writer speaks in
eloquent terms of the estimation in which it is held, and the various
uses to which it is applied.

"Its very aspect is imposing. Asserting its supremacy by an erect and
lofty bearing, it may be said to compare with other trees, as man with
inferior creatures. The blessings it confers are incalculable. Year
after year the islander reposes beneath its shade, both eating and
drinking of its fruit; he thatches his hut with its boughs, and weaves
them into baskets to carry his food; he cools himself with a fan
plaited from the young leaflets, and shields his head from the sun by
a bonnet of the leaves; sometimes he clothes himself with the
cloth-like substance which wraps round the base of the stalks, whose
elastic rods, strung with filberts, are used as a taper. The larger
nuts, thinned and polished, furnish him with a beautiful goblet; the
smaller ones with bowls for his pipes; the dry husks kindle his fires;
their fibres are twisted into fishing-lines and cords for his canoes.
He heals his wounds with a balsam compounded from the juice of the
nut; and with the oil extracted from its pulp embalms the bodies of
the dead. The noble trunk itself is far from being valueless. Sawn
into posts, it upholds the islander's dwelling; converted into
charcoal, it cooks his food; and, supported on blocks of stones, rails
in his lands. He impels his canoe through the water with a paddle of
the wood, and goes to battle with clubs and spears of the same hard
material. In Pagan Tahiti, a coco-nut branch was the symbol of regal
authority. Laid upon the sacrifice in the temple, it made the offering
sacred; and with it the priests chastised and put to flight the evil
spirits which assailed them. The supreme majesty of Oro, the great god
of their mythology, was declared in the coco-nut log from which his
image was rudely carved. Upon one of the Tonga Islands there stands a
living tree, revered itself as a deity. Even upon the Sandwich Islands
the coco palm retains all its ancient reputation; the people there
having thought of adopting it as the national emblem."

Besides the foregoing and following uses, I am aware of several scents
and spirituous liquors being procured from the flowers and pulp of the
coco-nut.

This palm tree is one of the finest objects in nature. Its stem is
tall and slender, without a branch; and at the top are seen from ten
to two hundred coco-nuts, each as large as a man's head: over these
are the graceful plumes, with their green gloss, and beautiful fronds
of the nodding leaves. Nothing can exceed the graceful majesty of
these intertropical fruit trees, except the various useful purposes to
which the tree, the leaf, and the nut are applied by the natives.

1. The stem is used for--Bridges, posts, beams, rafters, paling,
ramparts, loop-holes, walking sticks, water butts, bags (the upper
cuticle), sieves in use for arrowroot.

2. The coco-nut is used for--milk, a delicious drink; meat from the
scraped nut, for various kinds of food; jelly, _kora_, pulp, nut, oil,
excellent and various food for man, beast, and fowl.

The shell for vessels to drink out of, water pitchers, lamps, funnels,
fuel, _panga_ (for a game).

The fibre for sinnet, various cordage, bed stuffing, thread for tying
combs, scrubbing-brushes, girdle (ornamental), whisk for flies,
medicines, various and useful.

3. The leaf is used for--Thatch for houses, lining for houses,
_takapau_ (mats), baskets (fancy and plain), fans, _palalafa_ (for
sham fights), combs (very various), bedding (white fibre), _tafi_
(brooms), _Kubatse_ (used in printing), _mama_ (candles), screen for
bedroom, waiter's tray.

Here are no less than forty-three uses of which we know something; and
the natives know of others to which they can apply this single
instance of the bounty of the God of nature. For house and clothes,
for food and medicine, the coco-nut palm is their sheet anchor, as
well as their ornament and amusement, who dwell in the torrid zone.

This fine palm, which always forms a prominent feature in tropical
scenery, is a native of Southern Asia. It is spread by cultivation
through almost all the intertropical regions of the Old and New
Worlds; but it is cultivated nowhere so abundantly as in the Island of
Ceylon, and those of Sumatra, Java, &c. On the shores of the Red Sea
it advances to Mokha, according to Niebuhr; but it does not succeed
in Egypt. It is cultivated in the lower and southern portions of the
Asiatic Continent, as on the coasts of Coromandel and Malabar, and
around Calcutta. In the island of Ceylon, where the fruit of this tree
forms one of the principal aliments of the natives, the nuts are
produced in such quantities that in one year about three millions were
exported, besides the manufactured produce in oil, &c. According to
Marshall it requires a mean temperature of 72 deg. Its northern limit,
therefore, is nearly the same as the southern limit of our cereals.

Rumphius enumerates thirteen varieties of this palm, but many of these
have now been placed under other genera, and Lindley resolves them
into three species--_C. nucifera_, the most generally diffused
species, a native of the East Indies; and _C. flexuosa_ and _plumosa_,
natives of Brazil. The trunk, which is supported by numerous, small
fibrous roots, rises gracefully, with a slight inclination, from forty
to sixty feet in height; it is cylindrical, of middling size, marked
from the root upwards with unequal circles or rings, and is crowned by
a graceful head of large leaves. The terminal bud of this palm, as
well as that of the cabbage palm (_Euterpe montana_), is used as a
culinary vegetable. The wood of the tree is known by the name of
porcupine wood. It is light and spongy, and, therefore, cannot be
advantageously employed in the construction of ships or solid
edifices, though it is used in building huts; vessels made of it are
fragile and of little duration. Its fruit, at different seasons, is in
much request; when young, it is filled with a clear, somewhat sweet,
and cooling fluid, which is equally refreshing to the native and the
traveller. When the nut becomes old, or attains its full maturity, the
fluid disappears, and the hollow is filled by a sort of almond, which
is the germinating organ. This pulp or kernel, when cut in pieces and
dried in the sun, is called copperah, and is eaten by the Malays,
Coolies, and other natives, and from it a valuable species of oil is
expressed, which is in great demand for a variety of purposes. The
refuse oil cake is called Poonae, and forms an excellent manure.

A calcareous concretion is sometimes found in the centre of the nut,
to which peculiar virtues have been attributed.

Along the Gulf of Cariaco there are many large coco walks. In moist
and fertile ground it begins to bear abundantly the fourth year; but
in dry soils it does not produce fruit until the tenth. Its duration
does not generally exceed 80 or 100 years, at which period its mean
height is about 80 feet. Throughout this coast a coco tree supplies
annually about 100 nuts, which yield eight flascos of oil. The flasco
is sold for about 1s. 4d. A great quantity is made at Cumana, and
Humboldt frequently witnessed the arrival there of canoes containing
3,000 nuts.

Throughout the South Sea Islands, coco-nut palms abound, and oil may
be obtained in various places. Some of the uninhabited islands are
covered with dense groves, and the ungathered nuts, which have fallen
year after year, lie upon the ground in incredible quantities. Two or
three men, provided with the necessary apparatus for pressing out the
oil, will, in the course of a week or two, obtain enough to load one
of the large sea canoes. Coco nut oil is now manufactured in different
parts of the South Seas, and forms no small part of the traffic
carried on with trading vessels. A considerable quantity is annually
exported from the Society Islands to Sydney. They bottle it up in
large bamboos, six or eight feet long, and these form part of the
circulating medium of Tahiti. The natives use the bruised fronds of
_Polypodium crassifolium_ to perfume this oil. _Evodia triphylla_, a
favorite evergreen plant with the natives of the Polynesian Islands,
is also used for this purpose.

The most favorable situation for the growth of the coco palm is the
ground near the sea-coast, and if the roots reach the mud or salt
water, they thrive all the better for it. The coco-nut walks are the
real estates of India, as the vineyards and olive groves are of
Europe. I have seen these palms growing well in inland situations,
remote from the sea, but always on plains, never upon hills or very
exposed situations, where they do not arrive to maturity, wanting
shelter, and being shaken too violently by the wind. The stems being
tall and slight, and the whole weight of leaves and fruit at the head,
they may not unaptly be compared to the mast of a ship with round top
and topmast without shrouds to support it. Ashes and fish are good
manures for it.

The coco-nut is essentially a maritime plant, and is always one of the
first to make its appearance on coral and other new islands in
tropical seas, the nut being floated to them, and rather benefiting
than otherwise by its immersion in the salt water. Silex and soda are
the two principal salts which the coco-nut abstracts from the soil,
and hence, where these do not exist in great abundance, the tree does
not thrive well. I do not know myself what is the practice in Ceylon,
but in Brazil, Dr. Gardner tells me, salt is very generally applied to
the coco-nut when planted. Far in the interior, he states, he has seen
as much as half a bushel applied to a single tree, and that too when
it cost about 2s. a pound, from the great distance it had to be
brought. That the application, therefore, of salt, of seaweed, and
saline mud, does more than supply soda, must be very evident, if we
only recollect how difficult it is to dry any part of our dress that
has been soaked in salt water, and what effect damp weather has on
table salt, which, in a balance, has often been made use of as an
hydrometer. Moisture is always attracted by salt, and the more sea mud
and other such little matters that coco-nut planters can apply round
the roots of their trees, there will most assuredly be the less
occasion for watering them in the dry season. Sea weed contains but
very little fibrous matter, being chiefly composed of mucilage and
water; and the experiments of Sir J. Pringle and Mr. C. W. Johnson,
prove that salt in small quantities assists the decomposition of both
animal and vegetable substances. Decomposed poonac, or oil-cake, is
one of the best manures that can be applied, as it returns to the soil
the component parts of which it has beau deprived to form the fruit.

The primary direction of the planter's industry will be to the
establishment of a nursery of young plants. In Ceylon, for this
purpose, the nuts are placed in squares of 400, covered with one inch
of sand, or salt mud; are watered daily till the young shoots appear,
and are planted out after the rains in September. Sand and salt mud
are to be found on almost all the coasts where it would be desirable
to plant nuts, and if they are put into the ground at the commencement
of the rainy season, artificial watering will scarcely be necessary.
Any period, when there are showers, would answer for transplanting
them. I should say from the middle to the end of January would be
best, when they are placed in the nursery in October and November; and
in October when they are planted in June.

It is said that they should be allowed from 20 to 30 feet space apart,
but I will calculate their return when planted 27 feet apart every
way. This will give 58 coco-nut trees per acre. If manured, for the
first two years, with seaweed and salt mud, and supplied with water in
dry weather, there need be no loss, and the plants will thrive the
better. The land must be kept clear of weeds till the plants are
matured, in order to permit them abundance of air and light. In five
years, when well cared for, the flower may be expected, but the plants
will not be in full bearing before the seventh or eighth year. From 50
to 80 nuts are the annual crop of a tree; but I will calculate at the
lowest rate. One hundred nuts will yield, when the oil is properly
expressed, at least two gallons and a half. I shall not take into
account the making of jaggery sugar and toddy, or spirit from the sap,
as I do not consider that the manufacture would be remunerative; and
it must be attended with much trouble, besides requiring a great deal
of care and some skill.

Take the case now of a plantation of 100 acres in extent. This would
give us 5,800 trees, which, at 50 nuts per tree, 290,000 nuts, at 2½
gallons of oil per hundred, would yield 7,250 gallons of oil, the
value of which any person may calculate, but which, at the low rate of
3s. over charges, would furnish, as the gross plantation return in
oil, a sum of £1,087 10s. sterling. If the cultivator, instead of
making his produce into oil, were to sell it in its natural state, his
gross return in the West Indies would be nearly £600 sterling, at the
rate of ten dollars per thousand.

Either of these sums would be a handsome return from 100 acres of any
land, _requiring no cultivation or care whatever, after the fourth
year, and yielding_ the same amount for upwards of half a century! But
this is not all. An outlay of a few pounds will secure other
advantages, and ought to enable the owner of a coco-nut plantation to
turn his gross receipts for oil into nett profits. The coir made from
the husk of the nut is calculated to realise nearly one-fourth of the
proceeds of the oil, but if we put it down at one-fifth, we shall
have, in addition to the value of the oil, £217 10s., thus making a
total of £1,305 sterling. If we obtained 60 nuts from each tree, the
return would be £1,566 sterling, and if 75, £1,957 8s. sterling; and
this from 100 acres of sea side sand! But even _this_ does not exhibit
the whole return of this article of culture. Each nut may be
calculated to give a quarter of a pound of poonac, or oil-cake, being
the refuse after expression, fit for feeding all kinds of stock, which
may be estimated as worth £10 per ton. We must, therefore, add on this
account to our first calculation, the sum of say £325; to the second,
£390; and to the third, £485. This would give, in round numbers, the
entire returns of the 100 acres planted:--At 50 nuts per tree, £1,630;
at 60 ditto, £1,957; at 75, ditto, £2,446.

These are striking results, and may appear exaggerated; but I will, to
show how very moderate has been my calculation, give two returns, with
which I have been favored from Ceylon. These, it will be seen, differ
materially, but the latter I can rely on as a practical result, from a
plantation in Jaffna, the peninsula of the northern portion of the
island. After estimating the expense of establishing the plantation,
the first writer sets down his return thus:--

"The produce, calculating 90 trees to an acre, and 75 nuts to a tree,
sold at £2 per 1,000, would yield 675,000 nuts, worth £1,350; or if
converted into oil, calculating 30 to give one gallon, it would
produce 22,500 gallons, or about 90 tons from 100 acres."

From Jaffna, the following is an abridged estimate of return of 100
acres in full bearing:--"At 27 feet apart, 58 trees per acre, 5,800
trees, at 60 nuts per tree, 3,480 nuts per acre, 100 acres, 348,000
nuts, at 40 nuts per imperial gallon, 8,700 gallons of oil, at 2s. per
gallon, netted £8 14s. per acre. The poonac left will pay the expense
of making the oil. If shipped to England, at the present time (close
of 1848), the selling price there being 55s. per cwt., measuring 12
imperial gallons, say, 4s. 7d. per gallon, and the cost and charges of
sending it home and selling it being 23s., it would leave 3s. per
gallon, or £13 per acre." This sum is _nett proceeds_.

It will be seen by the above, that I have been extremely moderate in
my computation of the return which may be anticipated, for there is no
doubt that planters can, in favorable localities, on the coasts of
most of our colonies, cultivate this palm with as much success as
attends its culture in Ceylon. By the first of the calculations I have
cited from, that island, the gross return appears thus:--

  22,500 gallons at 4s. 7d                                   £5,156   5
  Coir--one-fifth of value                                    1,031   4
  Cake from 675,000 nuts, say ¼ lb. each, 75 tons at £10        750   0

  Total gross return from 100 acres                           6,937   9

According to the other calculation, the return will stand thus:--

  8,700 gallons at 4s. 7d                                    £1,993  15
  Coir                                                          398  15
  Cake from 348,000 nuts, 34 tons                               340   0

  Total gross return from 100 acres                           2,732  10

It will be seen that in my calculation I have set down the return
lower than it is rendered in the less favorable statement from Ceylon
by a sum of upwards of £1,000 sterling. But even supposing _one-half_
of the amount of the lower Ceylon estimate could be realised, we
should have a return of £1,366 5s. sterling from 100 acres of sea side
sand.

I now proceed to point out the very small outlay required to obtain
these results. In places where the coco-nut would be grown, there is
generally no heavy woodland requiring great labor with axe and fire,
and consequently one able-bodied man should get through the felling
and clearing away bush, on an acre of the land to be prepared for the
plant, in a short period,--say, on an average, four days. I will
calculate, that for wages and rations, each hand employed will cost
sixteen dollars per month, an outside price. Let us then say that ten
laborers shall be at work. They fell two acres and a half per diem. In
one month there should be nearly 70 acres felled; but I will say that
the 100 acres will occupy them two months in felling and stacking the
wood. During this period our planter may be considered to have had the
aid of two more hands, engaged in the preparation, planting out, and
care of the nursery of young plants. Two more hands must also be
occupied in the construction of tanks and sheds, except where there is
a stream of fresh water. For grubbing up the roots, if not very large
size, the assistance of about a dozen cattle would be required, a
labor which would be performed by means of the common grubbing
machine, an implement in the form of a claw. We will consider that all
hands are occupied another month in this manner, and in removing and
re-stacking the wood, and turning up the land. The planting out would
require but little time and labor. At the end of three months then,
one-half of the hands, besides those engaged in the nursery and tanks,
might be discharged. We must make an allowance for provision for the
fodder of the cattle. Six thousand nuts would be required.

Let us now see what are the planter's expenses; making ample allowance
on account of each item:--

                                                                 dollars.
  6,000 picked nuts at 10 dollars per 1,000                          60
  Hire and rations of 12 hands, at 16 dollars for 3 months          676
  Two hands at nursery, for same period                              96
  Purchase of 12 cattle at 20 dollars                               240
  Foddering cattle one month                                         32
  Hire of two extra hands, making tanks and sheds 3 months           96
  Hire of 6 hands for 9 months                                      864
  Tools (including plough)                                          100

                                                          Total   2,064

About £415 sterling for expenses for the first year.

Where fencing is required, we must add for making about three miles of
fence, say £30 sterling. Two carts would also have to be provided,
which will cost, say £20 more. In all we may compute the first year's
expenditure at £460 sterling.

Second year's expenditure: ploughing land, or hoeing it twice,
watering plants, manuring, repairing fences, and supplying plants,
say hire of eight men for six months, about £150 sterling. The same
for the third.

Fourth year's expenditure: hire of six hands for three months,
cleaning land, and manuring plants, about £60 sterling, and the like,
at the cultivator's option, for the fifth year.


  SUMMARY OF EXPENSES.
                                   £
  First year                      460
  Second year                     150
  Third year                      150
  Fourth year                      60
  Fifth year                       60

            Total expenditure     880
            Add for buildings      80

And we have a grand total of £960 sterling expended; for what purpose?
To secure a net income of _at least_ £1,200 sterling per annum for at
least 50 years!

In the first year's expenses many items might be cut down, but I leave
the calculation as one to be considered by a party with small capital,
intending to establish a coco-nut plantation. I have allowed nothing
for the cost of land, as it is impossible to compute that. In general
it would cost next to the nothing mentioned. I have, by careful
calculation, arrived at the conclusion that by combining the
cultivation of provisions with the gradual but steadily progressive
establishment of a coco-nut plantation, any man of energy and
perseverance may, with the aid of but four hands, clear, fence, and
plant, in a favorable locality, 50 acres of coco-nuts within the year,
yet have a balance in his pocket at its close. Such a person would,
ere doing anything beyond putting in his nursery plants, establish a
provision ground, of considerable extent, for the purpose of supplying
himself and his laborers with bread kind, and vegetables, and of
enabling him, by the disposal of the surplus produce in the market, to
raise a sufficient sum of money to furnish the wages and rations of
the men. I need not enter into a calculation to show how this could be
done, as every one must be aware of an easy method of following out so
simple a suggestion. Of course he would have to bear in mind that the
provision ground is of secondary importance, and limit his exertions
in that line accordingly; devoting to the coco-nut plantation the
strictest daily attention.

The cultivation of this tree deserves much more attention than has
hitherto been paid to it, particularly in the East, where it not only
forms part of the daily food of all classes of the community, but is
an exportable article to neighbouring regions, the oil which it yields
having of late years become in great demand in England, for the
manufacture of composite candles and soap, and there is no doubt of
its continually extended application to such purposes. Supposing,
nevertheless, the result of an increased cultivation of the coco-nut
should be such as to cause a fall in price, and sink the nett return
in England to 2s. per gallon; this being clear profit, would make this
kind of plantation a safe and sure investment for both capital and
labor in the Colonies.

A kind of sugar made from the sap is called "jaggery," and the sap
when fermented forms an intoxicating beverage known as toddy. The
fibrous outer covering, or husk of the nut, when macerated and
prepared, is termed "coir," and is spun into yarn and rope. It is
extensively shipped from Ceylon, in coils of rope, bundles of yarn,
and pieces of junk.

The coco-nut is usually planted as follows:--Selecting a suitable
place, you drop into the ground a fully ripe nut, and leave it. In a
few days a thin lance-like shoot forces itself through a minute hole
in the shell, pierces the husk, and soon unfolds three pale green
leaves in the air; while, originating in the same soft white sponge
which now completely fills the nut, a pair of fibrous roots pushing
away the stoppers which close two holes in an opposite direction,
penetrate the shell, and strike vertically into the ground. A day or
two more, and the shell and husk, which in the last and germinating
stage of the nut are so hard that a knife will scarcely make any
impression, spontaneously burst by some force within; and, henceforth,
the hardy young plant thrives apace, and needing no culture, pruning,
or attention of any sort, rapidly arrives at maturity. In four or five
years it bears; in twice as many more it begins to lift its head among
the groves, where, waxing strong, it flourishes for near a century.
Thus, as some voyager has said, the man who but drops one of these
nuts into the ground, may be said to confer a greater and more certain
benefit upon himself and posterity, than many a life's toil in less
genial climes. The fruitfulness of the tree is remarkable. As long as
it lives it bears, and without intermission. Two hundred nuts, besides
innumerable white blossoms of others, may be seen upon it at one time;
and though a whole year is required to bring any one of them to the
germinating point, no two, perhaps, are at one time in precisely the
same stage of growth.

Coco-nuts form a considerable article of export from many of the
British colonies: 375,770 were exported from Honduras in 1844, and
254,000 in 1845; 105,107 were shipped from Demerara, in 1845;
3,500,000 from Ceylon in 1847.

They are very abundant on the Maldive Islands, Siam, and on several
parts of the coast of Brazil. Humboldt states, that on the south
shores of the Gulf of Cariaco, nothing is to be seen but plantations
of coco-nut trees, some of them containing nine or ten thousand trees.

Ceylon is one of the localities where the greatest progress has been
made in this species of culture.

In 1832 several Europeans settled at Batticaloa, expressly for the
purpose of cultivating this palm to a large extent. They planted
cotton bushes between the young trees, which were found to ripen well,
and nurse and shade them.

There are now an immense number of coco-nut topes, or walks, on the
coasts of the island, and about 20,000 acres of land are under
cultivation with this tree.

The value of this product to Ceylon, may be estimated by the following
return of its exports in 1847, besides the local consumption:--

                                £
  Declared value of nuts      5,485
  Ditto of Coir              10,318
  Kernels, or Copperah        6,503
  Shells                        210
  Oil                        19,142
  Arrack                     11,657

  Total                     £53,315

The annually increasing consumption of the nuts holds out a great
inducement to the native proprietors to reclaim all their hitherto
unproductive land. The fruit commands a high price in the island,
(ranging from ¾d. to 3d. per nut), owing to the constant demand for it
as an article of food, by both Singhalese and Malabars; there is not
so much, therefore, now converted into copperah for oil making. In the
maritime provinces of the island, it has been estimated that the
quantity of nuts used in each family, say of five persons, amounts to
100 nuts per month, or 1,000 per annum. It needs only a reduction in
the cost of transit, to extend the consumption in the interior of the
island to an almost unlimited extent.

In 1842, Ceylon exported but 550 nuts, while in 1847 she shipped off
to other quarters three millions and a half of nuts, valued at £5,500.
The average value of the nuts exported may be set down at £7,000.

In Cochin China the cultivation of the coco-nut tree is much attended
to, and they export a large quantity of oil. At Malacca and Pinang it
shares attention with the more profitable spices. Since the palm has
been acclimatised in Bourbon, about 20,000 kilogrammes of oil have
been produced annually. About 8,000 piculs of oil are exported
annually from Java.

A correspondent, under date December, 1849, has furnished me with the
following particulars of coco-nut planting in Jaffna, the northern
district of Ceylon, in which the culture has only recently been
carried on; the facts and figures are interesting:--

    The Karandhai estate, the property of the late Mr. J. Byles, was
    sold last month for £2,400, part of it bearing. It consisted of 303
    acres, of which 228 are planted with coco nuts--about half the trees
    six years old.

    The Victoria estate, in extent 170 acres, planted and part in
    bearing, and about seventy acres of jungle, was also sold for
    £1,500. Mr. G. Dalrymple was the purchaser of the latter, and Mr.
    Davidson of the former. Both lots were cheap. The properties are
    among the best in the district, the latter, especially, is a
    beautiful estate.

    About two-thirds of the estates planted are looking well, and the
    remainder but indifferently, in fact, ought never to have been
    planted, and I believe will never give any return. About 7,000 acres
    are now under cultivation here, and clearing is still going on.
    Estates can now be put in for about one half what they cost
    formerly, viz., about £4 or £5 per acre, and can be kept in order,
    inclusive of all charges, for about 15s. to 20s. per acre for the
    first two years, and about half that afterwards. Estates, in some
    instances, have been put in for about £3 per acre.

    Elephants have almost disappeared; now and then a stray one comes.
    Figs are still a great nuisance, but the greatest anxiety among
    planters is regarding beetles. You will be sorry to hear that the
    first year the trees showed fruit or flower, one-tenth of them were
    destroyed by the beetle; the insects still go on destroying, and
    hardly a tree attacked ever recovers.

    This is a very serious evil, and upon which the fortunes of all
    those involved in coco-nut planting depend. The trees come into
    bearing but very slowly, and I consider no estate will give any
    return over its current expenses under twelve years. It takes twelve
    months from the formation of the flower, till the fruit ripens. On
    an estate, perhaps one of the oldest and best in this district, out
    of 120 acres, part seven and eight years old, about 12 per cent, are
    in flower or in bearing, and give a return of about twenty-four nuts
    per tree, on an average, yearly. On the next oldest, the return is
    not near so great. But few of the estates here will, I think, pay
    interest on the money laid out, and many will never pay anything
    over the expense of keeping them up, even after coming into bearing.
    I doubt if any estate in this district, however economically
    managed, will ever give a net return of more than £2, or perhaps of
    £2 10s. per acre, at least without there is a great increase in the
    consumption of oil in Europe. The consumption of this oil, in
    Europe, is under 5,000 tons. If the beetles do not destroy half the
    trees, the estates here when in bearing, if they yield anything,
    will give half that quantity; and it must be borne in mind that
    coco-nut oil is not a strong oil, like palm oil, and that soap
    boilers will never use it to any extent, for it will allow but
    little admixture of rosin, &c.; its use in Europe will be
    principally for candles and fancy soaps; but as by refining and
    compression they can now purify tallow, and make of it candles fully
    equal to those made from coco-nut oil, the consumption of the latter
    is not likely to increase. The consumption of candles is always
    limited on the continent of Europe, liquid oil being preferred, and
    in many instances gas is now being used where candles formerly were.

The return of land planted with coco-nut trees in Ceylon, in 1851, was
22,500 acres; but this refers only to regular estates recently opened
and cultivated chiefly by Europeans. Let us suppose that the natives
possess besides, twenty millions of trees; Butollac in his time
estimated the number at thirteen millions. At 100 trees to the acre,
twenty millions of trees give 100,000 acres, so that the total amount
of land planted with coco-nut trees would be 122,500 acres.

An hydraulic press, for the manufacture of coco-nut oil, 1,200 horse
power and weighing twenty-three tons, was cast at the Ceylon Iron
Works, in 1850, by Messrs. Nelson and Son.

In the island of Singapore there are now many extensive plantations in
a very flourishing condition, holding out favorable prospects to the
proprietors. Hitherto the island has been supplied almost wholly from
abroad with nuts and oil for its consumption, which will, before long,
be obtained exclusively from its own soil. In 1846 there were 10,000
coco-nut trees in bearing in Singapore.

I have omitted to notice, in the foregoing observations, a very
mistaken notion which prevails in many quarters, that it is best to
let the trees drop their fruit, and not to pick the nuts when ripe.
Nature directs differently. As soon as the husk of the nut is more
brown than green it should be picked. It then makes better oil and
better coir, than when left to shrivel up and fall from the tree.

Colonel Low, in his "Dissertation on Pinang," gives some interesting
details and statistics on coco-nut planting:--

    On a rough estimate--for an actual enumeration has not been lately
    taken--the total number of _bearing trees_ in Pinang may be stated
    at 50,000, and those in Province Wellesley at 20,000; but very large
    accessions to these numbers have of late years been made. The tree
    is partial to a sandy soil in the vicinity of the sea, and Province
    Wellesley offers, therefore, greater facilities, perhaps, for its
    cultivation than Pinang does, as its line of clear beach is longer,
    and has many narrow slips of light or sandy land lying betwixt the
    alluvial flats inland. There are several kinds of this tree known
    here; one has a yellowish color, observable both on the branches and
    unripe fruit; its branches do not droop much. A second has green
    spreading branches, more drooping than the former, the fruit being
    green colored until ripe; this is, perhaps, the most prolific; it
    also bears the soonest, if we except the dwarf coco-nut, which
    fruits at the second or third year, before the stem has got above
    one foot high. This last kind was brought from Malacca; it attains
    in time to the height of the common sort. Its fruit is small and
    round, and of course less valuable than the other sorts. There is
    also a coco-nut so saturated with green, that the oil expressed from
    its kernel partakes of that color.

    It is a mistaken supposition that the coco-nut tree will flourish
    without care being taken of it. The idea has been induced by the
    luxuriant state of trees in close proximity to houses and villages,
    and in small cove's where its roots are washed by the sea. In such
    circumstances, a tree, from being kept clear about the roots, from
    being shaded, and from occasional stimuli, advances rapidly to
    perfection; but in an extended plantation, a regular and not
    inexpensive system of culture must be followed to ensure success.

    The nuts being selected, when perfectly ripe, from middle-aged trees
    of the best sorts, are to be laid on the ground under shades, and
    after the roots and middle shoots, with two branches, have appeared,
    the sooner they are planted the better. Out of 100 nuts, only
    two-thirds, on an average, will be found to vegetate. The plants are
    then to be set out at intervals of thirty or forty feet--the latter
    if ground can be spared--and the depth will be regulated by the
    nature of the soil, and the nut must not be covered with earth. The
    plants require, in exposed situations, to be shaded for one and even
    two years, and no lalang grass must be permitted to encroach on
    their roots. A nursery must be always held in readiness to supply
    the numerous vacancies which will occur from deaths and accidents.
    The following may be considered the average cost of a plantation,
    until it comes into bearing:--

                      FIRST COST--100 ORLONGS OF LAND.
                                                        Spanish dollars.
  Purchase money of land, ready for planting                  1,000
  7,000 nuts at 1½ dollars, per 100                             105
  Houses of coolies, carts, buffaloes, &c., &c.                 100

                            Spanish dollars                   1,205

                       YEARLY COST OF SEVEN YEARS.

  First year, 10 laborers at 3 dollars per month, including
         carts,  &c.                                            360
  Wear and tear of buildings, carts, and implements              50
  Overseer, at 7 dollars per month                               84
  Quit rent, average                                             50
  Nursery and contingencies                                      50

                            Total per annum                     594
  Seven years at the rate will be                             4,158

                            Total, Spanish dollars            4,752

    To this sum interest will have to be added, making, perhaps, a sum
    total of 6,000 Spanish dollars, and this estimate will make each
    tree, up to its coming into bearing, cost one Spanish dollar at the
    lowest. The young tree requires manure, such as putrid fish and
    stimulating compounds, containing a portion of salt. On the
    Coromandel coast, the natives put a handful of salt below each nut
    on planting it.

    The cultivators of Kiddah adopt a very slovenly expedient for
    collecting the fruit. Instead of climbing the tree in the manner
    practised by the natives on the Coromandel coast, by help of a hoop
    passing round the tree and the body of the climber--and a ligature
    so connecting the feet as will enable him to clasp the tree with
    them--the Malays cut deep notches or steps in the trunk, in a
    zig-zag manner, sufficient to support the toes or the side of the
    foot, and thus ascend with the extra, aid only of their arms. This
    mode is also a dangerous one, as a false step, when near the top of
    a high tree, generally precipitates the climber to the ground. This
    notching cannot prove otherwise than injurious to the tree. But the
    besetting sin of the planter of coco-nuts, and other productive
    trees, is that of crowding. Coco-nut trees, whose roots occupy, when
    full grown, circles of forty to fifty feet in diameter, may often be
    found planted within eight or ten feet of each other; and in the
    native campongs all sorts of indigenous fruit trees are jumbled
    together, with so little space to spread in, that they mostly assume
    the aspect of forest trees, and yield but sparing crops.

    The common kinds of the coco-nut, under very favorable
    circumstances, begin to bear at six years of age; but little produce
    can be expected until the middle or end of the seventh year. The
    yearly produce, one tree with another, may be averaged at 80 nuts
    the tree; where the plantation is a flourishing one--assuming the
    number of trees, in one hundred orlongs, to be 5,000--the annual
    produce will be 400,000 nuts, the minimum local market value of
    which will be 4,000 Spanish dollars, and the maximum 8,000 dollars.
    From either of these sums 6 per cent. must be deducted for the cost
    of collecting, and carriage, &c. The quantity of oil which can be
    manufactured from the above number of nuts will be, as nearly as
    possible, 834 piculs of 133-1/3 lbs.

  The average price of this quantity, at 7 dollars per picul       5,838
  Deduct cost of manufacturing, averaged at one-fourth, and
       collecting, watching, &c                                    2,059

                    Profit, Spanish dollars                        3,779

    The Chinese, who are the principal manufacturers of the oil, readily
    give a picul of it in exchange for 710 ripe nuts, being about 563
    piculs of oil out of the total produce of the plantation of 100
    orlongs. The price of coco-nut oil has been so high in the London
    market as £35 per tun, or about an average of ten dollars per picul.
    It is said that English casks have not been found tight enough for
    the conveyance of this oil to Europe, but if the article is really
    in great demand, a method will no doubt be discovered to obviate
    this inconvenience.

    So long, however, as the cultivator can obtain a dollar and a half,
    or even one dollar for 100 nuts, he will not find it profitable to
    make oil, unless its price greatly rises.

    Soap is manufactured at Pondicherry from this oil, but it is not
    seemingly in repute; the attempt has not been made in Pinang with a
    view to a market.

    There is scarcely any coir rope manufactured at this island, so that
    the profit which might (were labor cheaper) arise from this
    application of the coco-nut fibre, is lost. The shell makes good
    charcoal; the leaves are scarcely put to any purpose, the nipah or
    attap being a superior material for thatching.

    The coco-nut tree is extremely apt to be struck by lightning, and in
    such cases it is generally destroyed. It is a dangerous tree,
    therefore, to have close to a house. If the trees are widely
    planted, coffee may be cultivated under their shade. It is generally
    believed that the extracting of toddy from this tree hastens its
    decline. The Nicobar and Lancavi Islands used partly to supply the
    Pinang market with this indispensable article; but their
    depopulation has greatly reduced the quantity.

    On the whole it may be said that there is no cultivation which
    insures the return of produce with so much certainty as that of the
    coco-nut tree; and as Rangoon, the Tenasserim coast, and Singapore
    will, probably, always remain good markets for the raw nut, there
    appears to be every chance of the value of the produce affording
    ample remuneration to the planter.

_Coco-nut beetle._--The chief natural enemy of this tree is a
destructive species of elephant-beetle (_Oryctes Rhinoceros_), which
begins by nibbling the leaves into the shape of a fan; it then
perforates the central pithy fibre, so that the leaf snaps off; and
lastly, it descends into the folds of the upper shoot, where it bores
itself a nest, and if not speedily extracted or killed, will soon
destroy the tree. At Singapore, on account of the depredations of this
beetle, the difficulties have been considerable.

In Pinang and Province Wellesley it has only been observed within the
last two years, and it is believed to have come from Keddah. A similar
kind of beetle is, however, found on the Coromandel coast. The natives
of Keddah say that this insect appears at intervals of two, three, or
more years.

Its larvæ, which are also very formidable insects or grubs, about
three inches long, with large reddish heads, are found in decaying
vegetable matter. It is when the tree has made considerable progress,
however, that the parent insect does most mischief. When they are from
one to two years old, throwing out their graceful branches in quick
succession with the greatest vigor, and promising in three or four
years more to yield their ruddy fruit, this destructive enemy begins
to exercise his boring propensities; and, making his horn act as an
auger, he soon penetrates the soft and yielding fibre of the young
tree, and if not discovered in time, destroys the leading shoot or
branch. The only remedy which has been adopted in Ceylon, is the
following:--Several intelligent boys are provided each with an iron
needle or probe, of about a foot long, with a sharp double barbed
point, like a fish-hook, and a ring handle; they go through the
plantation looking narrowly about the trees, and when they perceive
the hole in the trunk, which indicates that the enemy is at work, they
thrust in the barbed instrument and pull him out. Sometimes he may
only have just commenced, when his capture is more easily effected,
but even should he have penetrated to the very heart of the tree, the
deadly needle does not fail in its errand, but brings the culprit out,
impaled and writhing on its point. This is the only known way of
checking the ravages of this beetle, except destroying its larvæ. Some
cultivators, however, think pouring salt water or brine on the top of
the tree, so as to descend among the folds of the upper shoots, a good
plan to get rid of the larvæ.

Nearly two million coco-nuts are shipped annually from Bahia.

From Ceylon, 114,600 coco-nuts were shipped in 1851, and 70,185 in
1852.

Coco-nut oil; 98,159 gallons were shipped from Ceylon in 1852; 359,233
gallons in 1851.

The prices of Ceylon oil have ranged from £31 to £33 10s. per tun; of
Cochin oil, £34 to £35, within the last two years. The price per
leaguer in Colombo, without casks, has been £8 10s. to £9.

_Copperah_ is the name, given by the natives to the kernel of the ripe
nut after it has been exposed to the sun on mats, until it has become
rancid and dissolved. It has recently been shipped to England in this
state for the purpose of converting into oil. The exports of copperah
from Ceylon were, in 1842, 115 cwts.; in 1843, 2,194; in 1844, 2,397;
and in 1852, 39,174 cwts.

The returned value of the copperah or kernels exported from Ceylon, as
entered in the Custom House books, is--

  1840        2,508
  1841        1,460
  1842        3,022
  1843        5,795
  1844        6,194
  1845        3,282
  1846        5,517
  1847        6,503
  1848       12,639
  1849        7,819
  1850        4,166
  1851        9,678
  1852       13,325

632 cwts. of poonac (being the refuse or cake, after expressing the
oil) were exported from Ceylon in 1842. It is worth there about £10
the ton.

The oil from the nut is obtained for culinary purposes by boiling the
fresh pulp, and skimming it as it rises. That for exportation is
usually obtained by pressing the copperah in a simple press turned by
bullocks. Recently, however, steam power has been applied in Colombo,
with great advantage. About 2½ gallons of oil per 100 nuts, are
usually obtained. It is requisite that care should be taken not to
apply too great and sudden a pressure at once, but by degrees an
increasing force, so as not to choke the conducting channels of the
oil in the press.

In many of the colonies the oil is expressed by the slow and laborious
hand process of grating the pulp.

The quantity shipped from Ceylon was 2,250 tuns, in 1842; 3,985 in
1843; 2,331 in 1844; 1,797 in 1845. The quantity in gallons shipped
since, was 101,553 in 1846; 197,850 in 1847; 300,146 in 1848; 867,326
in 1849; 407,960 in 1850; 442,700 in 1851; and 749,028 in 1852.

The duty on importation is of and from British possessions, 7d. and
7/8ths. per cwt.; if the produce of foreign possessions, 1s. 3¾ d, per
cwt. In the close of 1852, the price of coco-nut oil in the London
market was, for Ceylon, £32, £33, to £33 10s. per ton; Cochin,
middling to fine, £34 to £35.

The following return shows the Custom House valuation of the oil
shipped from Ceylon for a series of years, and which is of course much
below its real value:--

  1839      £26,597
  1840       32,483
  1841       24,052
  1842       34,242
  1843       43,874
  1844       24,067
  1845       15,945
  1846        7,939
  1847       19,142
  1848       24,839
  1849       34,831
  1850       35,035
  1851       31,444
  1852       58,045

Among the coco-nut oil exported from Ceylon, in 1849, there were
47,427½ gallons, valued at £3,595, the whole of which, I believe, was
Cochin oil; the raw material of this kind not being, like the copperah
generally in Ceylon, subjected to the action of fire, the product is
finer, and fetches a better price in the London market.

Amongst the imports from British possessions in Asia, were 2,600
cwts., of copperah (dried coco-nut kernels, from which oil is
expressed), valued at £1,100; amongst the imports re-exported to Great
Britain, we find 870 cwts. of the same article, valued at £300. Of the
oil exported a quantity of 11,000 gallons was shipped for the United
States. About 600,000 piculs of coco-nut oil are annually exported
from Siam.

A large quantity of oil is made in Trinidad, chiefly on the east
coast, where, in one locality, there is an uninterrupted belt of
coco-nut palms fourteen miles in extent. They usually bear when five
years old.

The cultivation of the coco-nut in a proper soil presents a very
profitable speculation for small capitalists. Whether sold at the rate
of a dollar per hundred in their natural state, to captains of ships,
who freely purchase them, or manufactured into oil, they are a very
remunerative product. Each tree in the West Indies is calculated to
produce nuts to the value of one dollar yearly. There is one thing to
which we would draw the attention of chemists and other scientific
men.

For twenty-four or even forty-eight hours after its manufacture this
oil is as free from any unpleasant taste as olive oil, and can be used
in lieu of it for all culinary purposes, but after that time it
acquires such a rancid taste as to be wholly unpalateable. If any
means could be discovered of preventing this deterioration in quality,
and preserving it fresh and sweet, it could compete with olive oil,
and the price and consumption would be largely raised.

  COCO-NUT OIL IMPORTED INTO THE UNITED KINGDOM.

                 Imports.   Retained for home consumption.
                   cwts.                 cwts.
  1835            19,838                14,015
  1836            26,058                26,062
  1837            41,218                28,641
  1838              --                  38,669
  1839              --                  15,153
  1840              --                  37,269
  1841              --                  26,528
  1842              --                  26,225
  1843              --                  29,928
  1844              --                  42,480
  1848            85,453                54,783
  1849            64,451                14,622
  1850            98,040                46,494
  1851            55,995                 2,333
  1852           101,863                27,112

A London coco-nut oil soap was found, on analysis by Dr. Ure, to
consist of:--

  Soda                       4.5
  Coco-nut lard             22.0
  Water                     73.5

                           100.0

This remarkable soap was sufficiently solid; but it dissolved in hot
water with extreme facility. It is called marine soap, because it
washes linen with sea water.

Of the six principal vegetable oils, namely--palm, coco-nut castor,
olive, linseed, and rape, the first four are imported in the state of
oil only; the two last chiefly as seed. The proportion in which they
were imported is shown in the following tables; and if to these
quantities are added about a million and a half cwt. of tallow, and
nearly twenty thousand tuns of whale oil and spermaceti, they will
nearly represent the total quantity of oil imported into Great
Britain.

                              IMPORTS IN  1846.
                      Palm oil.     Olive oil.     Castor oil.
                        cwts.         tuns.           cwts.
  Western Africa       475,364            1            --
  United States         13,349          --             290
  Naples and Sicily         14        9,661            --
  East Indies             --            --           6,315
  Canary Islands         3,719          --             --
  Malta                   --          2,237            --
  Turkish Empire          --          1,712            --
  Tuscany                 --            832            --
  Spain                   --            753            --
  Brazil                   525          --             --
  Ionian Islands          --            506            --
  Morocco                 --            368            --
  Madeira                  353          --             --
  Sardinia                --            333             11
  Miscellaneous              7          471             65

       Total           493,331       16,864          9,681


                              IMPORTS  IN  1850
                          Linseed.         Rape seed.
                         quarters.         quarters.
  Russia                  482,813            3,235
  Sweden                      870              --
  Norway                      268              --
  Denmark                      37            3,092
  Russia                   87,273              645
  Hanse Towns               1,153            2,872
  Holland                   7,734              201
  Naples                    1,476              --
  Austrian Territories         40            2,580
  Greece                      --             1,637
  Wallachia and Moldavia      910            1,280
  Egypt                    17,517              --
  East Indian Empire       26,142           13,126
  Miscellaneous               262              922

      Total               626,495           29,495

OIL-CAKE.--It has been observed by Evelyn that one bushel of walnuts
will yield fifteen pounds of peeled kernels, and these will produce
half that weight of oil, which the sooner it is drawn is the more in
quantity, though the drier the nut the better its quality. The cake or
marc of the pressing is excellent for fattening hogs and for manure.

Oats contain, as a maximum, about seven per cent. of oil, and Indian
corn nine per cent. The cake of the gold of pleasure contains twelve
per cent. Indeed the most valuable oil-cakes are those of the
_Camelina sativa_, poppies and walnuts, which are nearly equal; next
to these are the cakes of hemp, cotton, and beech-mast. In France the
extraction and purification of oil from the cotton seed is a recent
branch of labor, the refuse of which is likely to prove useful in
agriculture; its value as a manure being nearly ten times greater than
that of common dung. Oil is obtained from maize or Indian corn in the
process of making whiskey. It rises in the mash tubs and is found in
the scum at the surface, being separated either by the fermentation or
the action of heat. It is then skimmed off, and put away in a cask to
deposit its impurities; after which it is drawn off in a pure state,
fit for immediate use. The oil is limpid, has a slight tinge of the
yellow color of the corn, and is inoffensive to the taste and smell.
It is not a drying oil, and therefore cannot be used for paint, but
burns freely in lamps and is useful for oiling machinery.

Among the various seeds used in the manufacture of oil-cake, flour of
linseed is the most important. Rape seed is also employed, but is
considered heating. In Lubeck, a marc, called dodder cake, is made
from the _Camelina sativa_. Inferior oil-cake is made from the poppy
in India. Cotton-seed cake has lately been recommended on account of
its cheapness, being usually thrown away as refuse by the cotton
manufacturers. It is extensively used as a cattle food, in an
unprepared state, in various parts of the tropical world, and to a
limited extent in this country.

The cost of seed, freight included, was 2d. per lb. from Charlestown
to Port Glasgow. Cotton oil-cake is now ordered at the same price as
linseed cake. The produce of oil-cake and oil from cotton seed, is two
gallons of oil to one cwt. of seed, leaving about 96 lbs of cake; 8
lbs. is the daily allowance for cattle in England.

Cotton seed oil, very pure, is manufactured to a considerable extent
at Marseilles, by De Gimezney, from Egyptian seed; and he received a
prize medal at the Great Exhibition.

Account of the export of linseed and rapeseed cakes from Stettin,
principally to England, in--

               cwts.
  1834        33,518
  1835        27,038
  1836        56,581
  1837        70,643
  1838       119,540
  1839       115,416
  1840       162,457
  1841       143,816
  1842       119,814

The quantity of oil-seed cakes imported into the United Kingdom was
in--

              tons.
  1849       59,462
  1850       65,055
  1851       55,076
  1852       53,616

Cargoes of oil-cake, to the value of £22,207, were exported from the
port of Shanghae, in China, in 1849.

2,467 tons of oil-cake were brought down to New Orleans from the
interior in 1848, and 1,032 tons in 1849.

Seven samples of American oil-cake gave the following results:--

  Oil        11.41
  Water       7.60
  Nitrogen    4.74
  Ash         6.35

From the above figures, the scientific farmer will see that the manure
formed by 100 lbs. of oil-cake is more than that derived from 300 lbs.
of Indian corn. 300 lbs. of corn contain about l¼ lbs. phosphoric
acid; 100 lbs. oil-cake contain about 2½ lbs.

VOLATILE OR ESSENTIAL OILS occur in the stems, leaves, flowers and
fruit of many odoriferous plants, and are procured by distillation
along with water. They are called "essences," and contain the
concentrated odor of the plant. They usually exist ready-formed, but
occasionally they are obtained by a kind of fermentation, as oil of
bitter almonds and oil of mustard. Some of them consist of carbon and
hydrogen only, as oil of turpentine, from _Juniperus communis;_ oil of
savin, from _Juniperus Sabina;_ oil of lemons and oranges, from the
rind of the fruit; and oil of nerole, from orange flowers. A second
set contain oxygen in addition, as oil of cinnamon, from _Cinnamonum
verum;_ otto or attar of roses, from various species of rose,
especially _Rosa centifolia;_ oil of cloves, from _Caryophyllus
aromaticus_.

Those principally obtained from tropical shrubs and plants are
citronella, oil of oranges and lemons, from the rind of the fruit oil
of cinnamon and cloves, croton oil, &c.

The oil of Sandal or Sanders wood _(Santalum album_), grown on the
Malabar coast, is much esteemed as a perfume. Keora oil, from
_Pandanus odoratissimus_, in Bengal. Oil of spikenard, so highly
prized, on account of its perfume, by the ancients, may be procured in
Sagur, Nepaul, and the mountains of the Himalaya.

956 lbs. of essential oils were imported into Hull in 1850. There were
exported from Ceylon in 1842, 902 cases; in 1843, 138; in 1844, 20; in
1845, 25 cases of essential oils, and in the last two years as
follows:--

                     1852.     1851.
                    cases.    cases.
  Cinnamon oil        17        23
  Citronella oil     110        87
  Essential oil       72        35

Of chemical, essential, and perfumed oils imported from France, the
quantity is about 35,000 lbs. annually, worth £10,000. The duty is 1s.
per lb. We also imported from France, in 1851, 9,596 cwt. of oil or
spirit of turpentine, worth £14,197, on which a duty of 5s. 3d. per
cwt. is levied.

From Western Australia some distilled oil of the Liptospermum was
shown at the Exhibition, which it is stated may be obtained in any
quantity, and a similar oil produced, by distillation, from the
_Eucalyptus piperita_, a powerful solvent of caoutchouc, evidently
very similar, if not altogether identical, with the oil of cajeput.
The characters of these two oils are much alike and without some care
it is difficult to distinguish them from one another by the odor; the
liptospermum oil has a slight tinge of yellow, its specific gravity is
0.9035; the eucalyptus oil is colorless, and has a density of 0.9145.
It is probable that these oils might be used with great advantage in
the manufacture of varnish, they readily dissolve copal, and when its
solution is spread over any surface the oil soon evaporates, and
leaves a hard, brilliant and uniform coating of the resin. These oils,
according to Prof. Solly, are specially worthy of attention.

Dr. Bennett, in his "Wanderings in New South Wales," states that a
large quantity of camphorated oil, which closely resembles the
cajeputi, is produced from the foliage of several species of
_Eucalyptus_. Some of the leaves, which are of a bluish green, contain
it in such abundance as to cover the hand with oil when one of the
leaves is gently rubbed against it.

From the odorous leaves of the _Arbor alba_ is extracted a portion of
the aromatic cajeput oil. This celebrated medicinal oil is principally
made in the island of Borneo, one of the Moluccas.

The leaf of the _Melaleuca minor_ yields, by distillation, the
volatile oil of cajeputi, well known as a powerful sudorific, and a
useful external application in chronic rheumatism. It is an evergreen
shrub, with white flowers like a myrtle, native of the East Indies,
principally flourishing on the sea coasts of the Moluccas and other
Indian islands. Two sacks full of the leaves yield scarcely three
drachms of the oil, which is limpid, pellucid, and of a green color.

Oil of cinnamon and oil of cassia, according to Mulder, have the same
composition. When fresh they are pale yellow, but become brown on
exposure to the air. On exposure they rapidly absorb cinnamic acid,
two resins and water.

More than 22,000 lbs. of essence of bergamot was imported in 1848. It
is obtained by distillation or pressure from the rind of the fragrant
citron.

_Andropogon calamus aromaticus_, of Royle, _A. nardoides_, of Nees v.
Esenb., according to some yields the grass oil of Namur.

The fruits of _Carum carui_, a hardy biennial British plant, popularly
known as caraway seeds, supply a volatile oil, which is carminitive
and aromatic. Oils of a similar kind are obtained from _Coriandrum
sativum_, from anise (_Pimpinella Anisum_), and cumin (_Cuminum
Cyminum_), a native of Egypt.

The production of cinnamon, clove, and cassia oils, have already been
noticed in speaking of those spices.

In Malabar, a greenish sweet-smelling oil is obtained, by
distillation, from the roots of _Unona Narum_, an evergreen climber,
which is used medicinally as a Stimulant.

OIL OF PEPPERMINT.--Mr. De Witt C. Van Slyck, of Alloway, Wayne
county, New York, furnished me with the following particulars on the
cultivation of peppermint, in December, 1849, which may appropriately
be introduced in this place:--

    "As an agricultural production, the culture of peppermint in the
    United States is limited to few localities; this county and the
    adjoining ones, Seneca and Ontario, comprise the largest bed. In the
    year 1846 about 40,000 lbs. of oil were produced. In Lewis county,
    in this state, it is grown, though to a less extent; the amount of
    oil produced there in 1846 was estimated at 4,500 lbs. In Michigan
    about 10,000 lbs. are annually produced; Ohio furnishes about 3,000
    lbs. and Indiana 700 lbs. per annum. The entire crop in the United
    States, in the year 1846, is estimated in round numbers at 58,000
    lbs.

    The above comprises all the localities of any importance in the
    United States, and the above estimates of the annual product of oil
    were made from correct data for the year 1846, since which time the
    cultivation of mint has rapidly decreased in consequence of a
    speculative movement by a New York company, who in the spring of
    1847 purchased nearly all the mint then growing in this State, and
    stipulated with the growers not to raise it for two years
    thereafter, which condition was generally observed on the part of
    the growers. The present year (1849), on account of the drought, has
    not realised the expectations of those engaged in its culture,
    although the amount of oil produced is much larger than the product
    of the two preceding years. In this mint district, 8,000 lbs. have
    been raised; Lewis county furnishes 1,000 lbs.; Michigan, 8.000
    lbs.; Ohio, 1,000 lbs., and Indiana 500 lbs. So that the entire crop
    of 1849 will not materially vary from 18,500 lbs.

    I have consulted several of the principal dealers in mint oil, whose
    opportunities have been ample to form a tolerably correct estimate
    of the amount of oil annually consumed, and their opinion fixes the
    total consumption, for the various purposes for which it is used in
    the United States and in Europe, at from 20,000 to 30,000 lbs.
    annually.

    The price of mint oil is extremely fluctuating. Like other unstaple
    commodities, the value of which depends upon their scarcity or
    abundance, it never has assumed a constant and standing value, but
    its price has generally been deranged by speculation and monopoly.
    It has happened that the amount of oil produced was for several
    years greater than the annual consumption, producing an accumulation
    in the market, and reducing the price to the very low rate of 75
    cents per pound; on the other hand, when the article was scarce, it
    readily sold for 5 dollars 25 cents per pound. The average price for
    fifteen vears has been about 2 dollars 50 cents, per pound. This
    year (1849) it readily sells for 1 dollar 50 cents., (6s. 6d.).

    Peppermint began to be cultivated in this vicinity as an
    agricultural product about the year 1816, but for several years the
    want of a proper knowledge of its culture, and the expense and
    difficulty of extracting the oil, prevented its extension beyond a
    few growers, who, however, realised fortunes out of the enterprise.
    Almost any kind of soil that will successfully rear wheat and maize
    is adapted to the growth of mint. Rich alluvions, however, seem to
    be most natural, as would be inferred from the fact that the wild
    herb is almost uniformly found growing upon the tertiary formations
    on the margins of streams. The rich bottom lands along our rivers
    and the boundless prairies of the West are eminently adapted for its
    successful culture. It is believed by those best acquainted with the
    subject, that its cultivation must be ultimately confined to the
    western prairies, where it will grow spontaneously, and where the
    absence of noxious weeds and grasses, incident to all older settled
    lands, renders the expense of cultivation comparatively light, and
    where the low price of land will be an important item in the amount
    of capital employed, the expense of marketing being slight in
    comparison to that of the more bulky products of agricultural
    industry.

    The method of cultivation is nearly uniform. The mode of propagation
    is by transplanting the roots, which may be done in autumn or
    spring, though generally the latter, and as the herb is perennial,
    it does not require replanting till the fourth year. To ensure a
    good crop and obviate the necessity of extra attendance the first
    season, the ground intended for planting should be fallowed the
    preceding summer, though this is not necessary if the land is
    ordinarily clean. The ground should be prepared as for maize, as
    soon as possible in the spring furrowed, and roots planted in drills
    twenty inches apart, and covered with loose earth, two inches deep,
    the planter walking upon the drill and treading it firmly. The
    proper time to procure roots is when the herb is a year old, when
    from six to eight square rods of ordinary mint will yield a
    sufficient quantity of roots to plant an acre, and the crop from
    which the roots are taken will not be deteriorated, but rather
    benefited by their extraction. As soon as the herb makes its
    appearance it requires a light dressing with a hoe, care being taken
    not to disturb the young shoots, many of which have scarcely made
    their appearance above the ground. In the course of a week or two
    the crop requires a more thorough dressing, and at this stage of
    growth the cultivator may be used with advantage, followed by the
    hoe, carefully eradicating weeds and grass from the drills, and
    giving the herb a light dressing of earth. Another dressing a week
    or two later is all the crop requires.

    The two following years no labor is bestowed upon the crop, though
    it is sometimes benefited by ploughing over the whole surface, very
    shallow, in the autumn of the second year, and harrowing lightly the
    following spring, which frequently renews the vigor of the plant and
    increases the product.

    The mint should be cut as soon as it is in full bloom, and the lower
    leaves become sere; the first crop will not be fit to cut as early
    as the two succeeding ones. It is then to be hayed and put in cock,
    and is then ready for distillation.

    I have consulted many mint growers, who have cultivated it for a
    series of years, in regard to the average yield per acre, and have
    arrived at the following estimate, which I think is low, provided
    the land is suitable, and is properly cultivated. I estimate the
    average yield per acre for the first year at 18 lbs.; the second
    year at 14 lbs.; and the third year at 8 lbs.--making the product
    for three years 40 lbs., which I think will not materially vary from
    the actual result, though growers aver they have raised from 30 to
    40 lbs. per acre the first season.

    Several years since, the only method of extracting the oil then
    known was by distilling the herb in a copper kettle, or boiler, and
    condensing in the usual manner; a slow and tedious process, by which
    about 12 or 15 pounds of oil could be separated in a day. But
    recently steam, that powerful agent, which has wrought such immense
    changes in our social and national economy, has been applied to this
    subject with its usual attendant success. The present method
    consists in the use of a common steam-boiler, of the capacity of
    from 100 to 150 gallons, from which the steam is conveyed by
    conductors into large wooden air-tight tubs, of 200 gallons
    capacity, containing the dried herb; from which it is conveyed,
    charged with the volatile principle of the plant, into a water-vat,
    containing the condenser. The water collected at the extremity of
    the condenser, although it does not readily commingle with the oil,
    is highly tinctured with it, and is used to feed the boiler. Two
    tubs are necessary, in order that when the "charge" is being worked
    off in one, the other can be refilled. The oil is then to be
    filtered, and is ready for market. The expense of a distillery is
    estimated at 150 dollars, which, with the labor of two men, and a
    cord of dry wood, will run 40 lbs. of oil per day. The usual price
    for distilling is 25 cents per pound.

    The cost of production is of course greatly modified by
    circumstances. If grown on rich bottom lands, or prairie, unusually
    free from weeds and grass, the labor required will be comparatively
    trifling. From information derived from the principal mint growers
    in this vicinity, I have prepared the following estimate of the cost
    of production of an acre of mint for three  years:--

                           FIRST  YEAR.
                                                        Dollars.
  Rent of an acre of land one year                        8.00
  One day plough and drag, one hand and team              2.00
  Half day furrowing, digging roots, one hand and horse   1.00
  Three days planting, at 75 cents                        2.25
  Two days dressing with hoe, at 75 cents                 1.50
  Two days with cultivator and hoe, 1.00                  2.00
  Two days with cultivator and hoe (third dressing)       1.50
  One and a-half days cutting new mint, at 75 cents       1.13
  Curing and drawing to distillery                        1.50
  Distilling 18 lbs. oil, at 25 cents                     4.50
  Can for oil                                               25

                                                         25.63

                         SECOND YEAR.
  Rent of an acre of land one year                        8.00
  Cutting one acre of old mint                              75
  Curing and hauling to distillery                        1.50
  Distilling 14 lbs. oil, at 25 cents                     3.50
  Can for oil                                               25

                                                         14.00

                          THIRD  YEAR.
  Rent of an acre of land one year                        8.00
  Cutting, curing, &c.                                    2.25
  Distilling 8 lbs. of oil, at 25 cents, and can          2.25

                                                         12.50

  Total expenses for three years                         52.13

  Forty pounds of oil, at dollars 1.37½ per pound        55.00
  Deduct expenses                                        52.13

           Net profit                                     2.87

    In the above estimate I have omitted the expense of roots, for the
    reason that the crop will yield as many as are required for
    planting. The price of roots is about 50 cents per square rod, and
    if they are in demand, the profit of the crop will be greatly
    enhanced by selling them at that, or even a lower price.

    It will be readily perceived that the culture of peppermint promises
    no great return of profit in sections of country where land is
    valuable, and where the expense of production is nearly double what
    it is in newly-settled districts. It is a fact that in Michigan, and
    other Western States, the actual expense of production is about
    one-half less than the above estimate, and the yield is a fourth
    greater; the greater distance from market, which is usually New York
    city, not being taken into account, the freight on oil being
    comparatively trifling. Another consideration in favor of prairie
    cultivation is, that the mint will endure for years by simply
    ploughing over the surface every second year, which seems to
    invigorate the herb, and obviates the necessity of replanting every
    second or third year, as must be done in older settled localities."

In India the perfumed oils are obtained in the following manner:--The
layers of the jasmine, or other flowers, four inches thick and two
inches square, are laid on the ground and covered with layers of
sesamum or any other oil yielding seed. These are laid about the same
thickness as the flowers, over which a second layer of flowers like
the fruit is placed. The seed is wetted with water, and the whole mass
covered with a sheet, held down at the end and sides by weights, and
allowed to remain for eighteen hours in this form. It is now fit for
the mill, unless the perfume is desired to be very strong, when the
faded flowers are removed and fresh ones put in their place. The seed
thus impregnated is ground in the usual way in the mill and the oil
expressed, having the scent of the flower. At Ghazipoor the jasmine
and bela are chiefly employed; the oil is kept in the dubbers, and
sold for about 4s. a seer.

The newest oils afford the finest perfume. In Europe a fixed oil,
usually that of the bean or morerja nut, is employed. Cotton is soaked
in this, and laid over layers of flowers, the oil being squeezed out
so soon as impregnated with perfume. Dr. Johnson thus describes the
culture and manufacture:--

    _Cultivation of Roses_.--Around the station of Ghazipoor, there are
    about 300 biggahs (or about 150 acres) of ground laid out in small
    detached fields as rose gardens, most carefully protected on all
    sides by high mud walls and prickly pear fences, to keep out the
    cattle. These lands, which belong to Zemindars, are planted with
    rose trees, and are annually let out at so much per biggah for the
    ground, and so much additional for the rose plants--generally five
    rupees per biggah, and twenty-five rupees for the rose trees, of
    which there are 1,000 in each biggah. The additional expense for
    cultivation would be about eight rupees eight annas; so that for
    thirty-eight rupees eight annas you have for the season one biggah
    of 1,000 rose trees.

    If the season is good, this biggah of 1,000 rose trees should yield
    one lac of roses. Purchases for roses are always made at so much per
    lac. The price of course varies according to the year, and will
    average from 40 to 70 rupees.

    _Manufacture of Rose-water_.--The rose trees come into flower at the
    beginning of March, and continue so through April. Early in the
    morning the flowers are plucked by numbers of men, women, and
    children, and are conveyed in large bags to the several contracting
    parties for distillation. The cultivators themselves very rarely
    manufacture.

    The native apparatus for distilling the rose-water is of the
    simplest construction; it consists of a large copper or iron boiler
    well tinned, capable of holding from eight to twelve gallons, having
    a large body with a rather narrow neck, and a mouth about eight
    inches in diameter; on the top of this is fixed an old dekchee, or
    cooking vessel, with a hole in the centre to receive the tube or
    worm.

    This tube is composed of two pieces of bamboo, fastened at an acute
    angle, and it is covered the whole length with a strong binding of
    corded string, over which is a luting of earth to prevent the vapour
    from escaping. The small end, about two feet long, is fixed into the
    hole in the centre of the head, where it is well luted with flower
    and water. The lower arm or end of the tube is carried down into a
    long-necked vessel or receiver, called a bhulka. This is placed in a
    handee of water, which, as it gets hot, is changed. The head of the
    still is luted on to the body, and the long arm of the tube in the
    bhulka is also well provided with a cushion of cloth, so as to keep
    in all vapour. The boiler is let into an earthen furnace, and the
    whole is ready for operation. There is such a variety of rose-water
    manufactured in the bazar, and so much that bears the name, which is
    nothing more than a mixture of sandal oil, that it is impossible to
    lay down the plan which is adopted. The best rose-water, however, in
    the bazar, may be computed as bearing the proportion of one thousand
    roses to a seer of water; this, perhaps, may be considered as the
    best procurable.

    From one thousand roses most generally a seer and a half of
    rose-water is distilled, and perhaps from this even the attar has
    been removed. The boiler of the still will hold from eight to twelve
    or sixteen thousand roses. On eight thousand roses from ten to
    eleven seers of water will be placed, and eight seers of rose-water
    will be distilled. This after distillation is placed in a carboy of
    glass, and is exposed to the sun for several days to become pucka
    (ripe); it is then stopped with cotton, and has a covering of moist
    clay put over it; this becoming hard, effectually prevents the scent
    from escaping. The price of this will be from twelve to sixteen
    rupees. This is the best that can be procured.

    _Attar of Roses_.--To procure the attar, the roses are put into the
    still, and the water passes over gradually, as in the case of the
    rose-water process; after the whole has come over, the rose-water is
    placed in a large metal basin, which is covered with wetted muslin,
    tied over to prevent insects or dust getting into it; this vessel is
    let into the ground about two feet, which has been previously wetted
    with water, and it is allowed to remain quiet during the whole
    night. The attar is always made at the beginning of the season, when
    the nights are cool; in the morning the little film of attar which
    is formed upon the surface of the rose-water during the night is
    removed by means of a feather, and it is then carefully placed in a
    small phial; and, day after day, as the collection is made, it is
    placed for a short period in the sun, and after a sufficient
    quantity has been procured, it is poured off clear, and of the color
    of amber, into small phials. Pure attar, when it has been removed
    only three or four days, has a pale greenish hue; by keeping it
    loses this, and in a few weeks' time it becomes of a pale yellow.
    The first few days distillation does not produce such fine attar as
    comes off afterwards, in consequence of the dust or little particles
    of dirt in the still and the tube being mixed with it. This is
    readily separated, from its sinking to the bottom of the attar,
    which melts at a temperature of 84 degrees. From one lac of roses it
    is generally calculated that 180 grains, or one tolah, of attar can
    be procured; more than this can be obtained if the roses are
    full-sized, and the nights cold to allow of the congelation. The
    attar purchased in the bazar is generally adulterated, mixed with
    sandal oil, or sweet oil; not even the richest native will give the
    price at which the purest attar alone can be obtained, and the
    purest attar that is made is sold only to Europeans. During the past
    year it has been selling from 80 to 90 rupees the tolah; the year
    before it might have been purchased for 50 rupees.

    _General Remarks_.--Native stills are let out at so much per day or
    week, and it frequently occurs that the residents prepare some
    rose-water for their own use as a present to their friends, to
    secure their being provided with that which is the best. The natives
    never remove the calices of the rose-flowers, but place the whole
    into the still as it comes from the garden.

    The best plan appears to be to have these removed, as by this means
    the rose-water may be preserved a longer time, and is not spoiled by
    the acid smell occasionally met with in the native rose-water. It is
    usual to calculate 100 bottles to one lac of roses. The rose-water
    should always be twice distilled; over ten thousand roses water may
    be put to allow of sixteen or twenty bottles coming out; the
    following day these twenty bottles are placed over eight thousand
    more roses, and about eighteen bottles of rose-water are distilled.
    This may be considered the best to be met with. The attar is so much
    lighter than the rose-water, that, previous to use, it is better to
    expose the rose-water to the sun for a few days, to allow of its
    being well mixed; and rose-water that has been kept six months is
    always better than that which has recently been made.

    At the commencement of the rose season, people from all parts come
    to make their purchases, and very large quantities are prepared and
    sold. There are about thirty-six places in the city of Ghazeepore
    where rose-water is distilled. These people generally put a large
    quantity of sandal oil into the receiver, the oil is afterwards
    carefully removed and sold as sandal attar, and the water put into
    carboys and disposed of as rose-water. At the time of sale a few
    drops of sandal oil are placed on the neck of the carboy to give it
    fresh scent, and to many of the natives it appears perfectly
    immaterial whether the scent arises solely from the sandal oil or
    from the roses. Large quantities of sandal oil are every year
    brought up from the south and expended in this way.

    6. The chief use the natives appear to make of the rose water, or
    the sandal attar as they term it, is at the period of their
    festivals and weddings. It is then distributed largely to the guests
    as they arrive, and sprinkled with profusion in the apartments. A
    large quantity of rose water is sold at Benares, and many of the
    native Rajahs send over to Ghazipoor for its purchase. Most of the
    rose water, as soon as distilled, is taken away, and after six
    months from the termination of the manufacture there are not more
    than four or five places where it is to be met with.

    I should consider that the value of the roses sold for the
    manufacture of rose water may be estimated at 15,000 to 20,000
    rupees a year; and from the usual price asked for the rose water,
    and for which it is sold, I should consider there is a profit of
    40,000 rupees. The natives are very fond of using the rose water as
    medicine, or as a vehicle for other mixtures, and they consume a
    good deal of the petals for the conserve of roses, or goolcond as
    they call it.

    The roses of Ghazipoor, on the river Ganges, are cultivated in
    enormous fields of hundreds of acres. The delightful odor from these
    fields can be scented at seven miles distance on the river. The
    valuable article of commerce known as attar of roses is made here in
    the following manner:--On 40 pounds of roses are poured 60 pounds of
    water, and they are then distilled over a slow fire, and 30 pounds
    of rose water obtained. This rose water is then poured over 40
    pounds of fresh roses, and from that is distilled at most 20 pounds
    of rose water; this is then exposed to the cold night air, and in
    the morning a small quantity of oil is found on the surface. From 80
    pounds of roses, about 200,000, at the utmost an ounce and a-half of
    oil is obtained; and even at Ghazipoor it costs 40 rupees (4_l._) an
    ounce.

    Five guineas have been often paid for one ounce of attar of roses.
    The most approved mode of ascertaining its quality is to drop it on
    a piece of paper; its strength is ascertained by the quickness with
    which it evaporates, and its worth by its leaving no stains on the
    paper. The best otto is manufactured at Constantinople.

A volatile oil, erroneously called oil of spikenard, is met with in
the shops, which is obtained from a plant which has been named by Dr.
Royle, the _Andropogon Calamus aromaticus._

The true spikenard of the ancients is supposed to have been obtained
from the _Nardostachys Jatamansi_, a plant of the Valerian family. Dr.
Stenhouse describes rather minutely ("Journal Pharm. Soc." vol. iv. p.
276) a species of East India grass oil, said to be the produce of
_Andropogon Ivaracusa_, which he believes to be what is usually called
the oil of Namur. It has a very fragrant aromatic odor, slightly
resembling that of otto of roses, but not nearly so rich. Its taste is
sharp and agreeable, approaching that of oil of lemons. It has a deep
yellow color, and contains a good deal of resinous matter.

LEMON GRASS (_Andropogon schoenanthus_).--This fragrant grass, which is
now cultivated very generally throughout the West Indies, in the
gardens of the planters, as an elegant and powerful diaphoratic, was
doubtless introduced from the East. The active principle of the leaves
seems to reside in the essential oil which they contain. Lemon grass
oil forms an important article of export from Ceylon, amounting in
value to nearly £7,000 annually.

The _Andropogon schoenanthus_, which may be seen covering all the
Kandian hills, is the best possible pasture for cattle--at least as
long as it is young. This species of grass is very hard, and grows to
the height of seven feet, and sometimes higher, and has a strong but
extremely pleasant acid taste. It derives its name from having, when
crushed, an odor like that of the lemon, so strong, that after a time
it becomes quite heavy and sickening, although grateful and refreshing
at first. It covers the hills in patches--those, at least, that are
not overgrown with jungle and underwood--and it is to be found nowhere
but in the Kandian district. Spontaneous ignition frequently takes
place, and the appearance of the burning grass is described as most
magnificent. A few days after, from the midst of this parched,
blackened, and apparently dead ground, lovely young green shoots begin
to arise--for the roots of this extraordinary grass have not even
been injured, far less destroyed, by the fire; and in a very short
time the whole brow of the mountain is again overspread with tufts of
beautiful green waving grass.--("Journal of Agriculture.")

Otto of khuskhus or scented grass, from another species, _A.
digitalis_, obtained at Ulwar in the States of Rajpootanah, was shown
at the Great Exhibition in 1851, and Newar oil (from _A. maritima_)
from Agra.

CITRONELLA OIL.--In the Southern province of Ceylon some half dozen
estates about Galle are cultivated with citronella grass. The exports
of this oil from Ceylon in the last three years have been as
follows:--1850, 86,048 oz., valued at £3,344; 1851, 114,959 oz.,
valued at £3,742; in 1852, 131,780 oz., valued at £2,806.

PATCHOULY.--Under this name are imported into this country the dried
foliaceous tops of a strongly odoriferous labiate plant, growing three
feet high in India and China, called in Bengalee and Hindu, _pucha
pat_. About 46 cases, of from 50 to 110 lbs. each, were imported from
China, by the way of New York, in 1844. The price asked was 6s. per
pound. Very little is known of the plant yielding it. Mr. George
Porter, late of the island of Pinang, stated that it grows wild there
and on the opposite shores of the Malay peninsula. Dr. Wallich says,
that it obviously belongs to the family Labiatæ. Viney, in the "French
Journal of Pharmacy," suggests that it is the _Plectranthus
graveolens_ of R. Brown. It forms a shrub of two or three feet in
height. It is the _Pogostemon patchouly_. The odor of the dried plant
is strong and peculiar, and to some persons not agreeable. The dried
tops imported into England are a foot or more in length. In India it
is used as an ingredient in tobacco for smoking, and for scenting the
hair of women. In Europe it is principally used for perfumery
purposes, it being a favorite with the French, who import it largely
from Bourbon. The Arabs use and export it more than any other nation.
Their annual pilgrimship takes up an immense quantity of the leaf.
They use it principally for stuffing mattrasses and pillows, and
assert that it is very efficacious in preventing contagion and
prolonging life. It requires no sort of preparation, being simply
gathered and dried in the sun; too much drying, however, is hurtful,
inasmuch as it renders the leaf liable to crumble to dust in packing
and stowing on board. The characteristic smell of Chinese or Indian
ink is owing to an admixture of this plant in its manufacture. M. de
Hugel found the plant growing wild near Canton. By distillation it
yields a volatile oil, on which the odor and remarkable properties
depend. This oil is in common use in India for imparting the peculiar
fragrance of the leaf to clothes among the superior classes of
natives. The origin of its use is this:--A few years ago, real Indian
shawls bore an extravagant price, and purchasers could always
distinguish them by their odor; in fact, they were perfumed with
Patchouly; the French manufacturers at length discovered this secret,
and used to import the plant to perfume articles of their make, and
thus palm off homespun shawls as real India! Some people put the dry
leaves in a muslin bag, and thus use it as we do lavender, scenting
drawers in which linen is kept; this is the best way to use it, as
this odor, like musk, is most agreeable when very
dilute.--("Gardeners' Chronicle.")

The root of some parasitical plant, under the name of kritz, is used
in Cashmere to wash the celebrated shawls, soap is used only for white
shawls.

From the flowers of the Bengal quince (_Ægle marmemolos_) a fragant
liquid is distilled in Ceylon known as marmala water, which is much
used as a perfume for sprinkling by the natives.

Jasmine oil is distilled from _Jasminum sambac_ and _grandiflora_.

SAPONACEOUS PLANTS.--Many plants furnish abroad useful substitutes for
common soap. The aril which surrounds the seed and the roots of
_Sapindus Saponaria_, an evergreen tree, I have seen used as soap in
South America and the West Indies under the name of soap berries. The
seed vessels are very acrid, they lather freely in water and will
cleanse more linen than thirty times their weight of soap, but in time
they corrode or burn the linen. Humboldt says that proceeding along
the river Carenicuar, in the Gulf of Cariaco, he saw the Indian women
washing their linen with the fruit of this tree, there called the
parapara. Some other species of _Sapindus_ and of _Gypsophila_ have
similar properties. The bruised leaves and roots of _Saponaria
officinalis_, a British species, form a lather which much resembles
that of soap, and is similarly efficacious in removing grease spots.
The bark of many species of Quillaia, as _Q. saponaria_, when beaten
between stones, makes a lather which can be used as a substitute for
soap, in washing woollens and silk clothes, and to clean colors in
dyeing, in Chili and Brazil, but it turns linen yellow. The fruit of
_Bromelia Pinguin_ is equally useful. A vegetable soap was prepared
some years ago in Jamaica from the leaves of the American aloe (_Agave
Americana_) which was found as detergent as Castile soap for washing
linen, and had the superior quality of mixing and forming a lather
with salt water as well as fresh. Dr. Robinson, the naturalist, thus
describes the process he adopted in 1767, and for which he was awarded
a grant by the House of Assembly:--"The lower leaves of the Curaca or
Coratoe (_Agave karatu_) were passed between heavy rollers to express
the juice, which, after being strained through a hair cloth, was
merely inspissated by the action of the sun, or a slow fire, and cast
into balls or casks. The only precaution necessary was to allow no
mixture of any unctuous materials, which destroyed the efficacy of the
soap. A vegetable soap, which has been found excellent for washing
silk, &c, may be thus obtained. To one part of the skin of the Ackee
add one and a half part of the _Agave karatu_, macerated in one part
of boiling water for twenty-four hours, and with the extract from this
decoction mix four per cent. of rosin. In Brazil, soap is made from
the ashes of the bassura or broom plant (_Sidu lanceolata_) which
abounds with alkali. There are also some soap barks and pods of
native plants used in China. Several other plants have been employed
in different countries as a substitute for soap. The bark of _Quillaia
saponaria_ renders water frothy and is used as a detergent by wool
dyers. _Saponaria vaccana_ is common in India. The pericarp of
_Sapindus emarginatus_ mixed with water froths like soap. Saponaceous
berries are found in Java.

The soap-worts to which the genus Sapindus belongs are tropical
plants. The fruit of many species of _Sapindus_ is used as a
substitute for soap, as _Sapindus acuminata_, _Laurifolius
emarginatus_ and _detergens_, all East Indian plants.




SECTION VI.

PLANTS YIELDING DRUGS, INCLUDING NARCOTICS AND OTHER COMMON MEDICINAL
SUBSTANCES.


The chief plants furnishing the drugs of commerce, and which enter
largely into tropical agriculture, are the narcotic plants, especially
tobacco, the poppy for opium, and the betel nut and leaf; as
masticatories--but there are very many others to which the attention
of the cultivator may profitably be directed. I have already trenched
so largely upon my space, that I cannot do that justice to the plants
coming under this section I could have wished. There are very many,
however, of which I must make incidental mention. Some few medicinal
plants have been already alluded to in former sections, particularly
in that on dye-stuffs, &c.

THE COCA PLANT grows about four or five feet high, with pale bright
green leaves, somewhat resembling in shape those of the orange tree.
The leaves are picked from the trees three or four times a year, and
carefully dried in the shade; they are then packed in small baskets.
The greatest quantity is grown about 30 leagues from Cicacica, among
the Yunnos on the frontiers of the Yunghos. Some is also cultivated
near to Huacaibamba.

The natives in several parts of Peru chew these leaves as Europeans do
tobacco, particularly in the mining districts, when at work in the
mines or travelling; and such is the sustenance that they derive from
them, that they frequently take no food for four or five days. I have
often (observes Mr. Stevenson) been assured by them, that whilst they
have a good supply of coca they feel neither hunger, thirst, nor
fatigue, and that without impairing their health they can remain eight
to ten days and nights without sleep. The leaves are almost insipid,
but when a small quantity of lime is mixed with them, they have a very
agreeable sweet taste. The natives generally carry with them a leather
pouch containing coca, and a small calabash holding lime or the ashes
of the molle to mix with them.

_Cocculus indicus_, or Indian berries.--This is the commercial name
for the berries or fruit of the _Menispermum Cocculus_ of Linnæus, _M.
heteroclitum_ of Roxburgh, _Animerta paniculata_ of Colebrooke, _A.
Cocculus_ of Wright and Arnot, and _Cocculus suberosus_ of Decandolle.
It is a strong climbing shrub or tree, native of Malabar, Ceylon, and
the Eastern Islands. The seeds or drupes contain a bitter poisonous
acid, and are used for the purpose of stupefying fish, and, in the
form of a black extract, for fraudulently increasing the intoxicating
power of malt liquors; one pound of the berries, it is said, will go
as far in brewing as a sack of malt. The berry is kidney-shaped, with
a white kernel. Whilst the imports in 1846 were but 246 bags, in 1850
they had increased to 2,359 bags of about 1 cwt. each. The price is
19s. to 24s. the cwt.

A crystalline, poisonous, narcotic principle called picrotoxin, has
been detected in these seeds, and occasionally employed externally in
some cutaneous diseases. _Cocculus crispus_ is used in intermittent
fevers and liver complaints.

The annual imports now average 250 tons, and nearly the whole is
consumed for illegal purposes by brewers. Though the practice is
nominally discountenanced by the Legislature under the penalty of £200
upon the brewer and £500 upon the seller, yet under the recent tariff
great encouragement is given to the introduction of these berries, the
duty having been reduced from 7s. 6d. to 5s. the cwt.

The capsules and seeds of _Xanthoxylum hostile_ are also employed for
the same purpose as cocculus indicus. The bark of _Walseria piscidia_,
a native of the Circar mountains, also intoxicates fish.

About 250 tons of _Nux vomica_, another species of dried flat seed
possessing intoxicating properties, are also imported annually for the
same purposes, and they fetch about 6s. to 8s. the cwt.

BETEL LEAF.--_Piper Betel_, a scandent species of the shrubby
evergreen tribe of plants belonging to the pepper family, furnishes
the celebrated betel leaf of the Southern Asiatics, in which they
enclose a few slices of the areca nut and a little shell lime; this
they chew to sweeten the breath, and to keep off the pangs of hunger,
and it acts also as a narcotic.

Such is the immense consumption of this masticatory, termed Pan, in
the East, that it forms nearly as extensive an article of commerce as
that of tobacco in the West. The tax on the leaf forms a considerable
portion of the local revenue of Pinang; in 1805, the tax yielded as
much as 5,400 dollars.

Rumphius describes six species of this vine, besides several wild and
cultivated varieties. It is very easily reared in the Indian islands,
but in the countries of the Deccan requires manuring, frequent
watering and great care, and in the northern parts of Hindostan it
becomes an exotic very difficult to rear. The vine affords leaves fit
for use in the second year, and continues to yield for more than
thirty, the quantity diminishing as the plants grow older.

ARECA PALM (_Acacia Catechu_).--This is a fine, slender, graceful
tree, rising from 20 to 30 feet high, which, being a native of the
East, is found abundant in many of the forests of India, from 16 to 30
degs. of latitude. The principal places of its growth are the Burmese
territories, a large province on the Malabar coast called the
_Concan_, and the forests skirting the northern parts of Bengal, under
the hills which divide it from Nepaul, the south and west coasts of
Ceylon, the south of China, &c., the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra and the
Eastern islands, it produces fruit at five years old, and continues
bearing till about its twenty-fifth year, when it withers and dies. It
thrives at a greater distance from the sea, and in more elevated
regions than the coco-nut palm. In Prince of Wales Island some
hundreds of thousands of these palms are cultivated.

The seeds or nuts form a chief ingredient in the celebrated eastern
masticatory called Pan and which seems to owe its stimulating
properties to the leaves of the _Piper Betel_. When prepared for use,
the nut is cut into slices and wrapped in the fresh leaves of the
betel pepper vine, together with a quantity of quicklime (_Chunam_) to
give it a flavor. The flavor is peculiar, between an herbaceous and an
aromatic taste.

All classes, male and female, chew it; they say it sweetens the
breath, strengthens the stomach, and preserves the teeth, to which it
gives a reddish hue; there is probably less objection to its use than
tobacco or opium, and its taste is more pleasant; but, if taken to
excess, it will produce stupor like other narcotics, and even
intoxication. The nuts grow in large bunches at the top, and when ripe
are red and have a beautiful appearance; they resemble the nutmeg in
shape and color, but are larger and harder. When gathered they are
laid in heaps until the shell be somewhat rotted, and then dried in
the sun, after which the process of shelling commences. The trees vary
in their yield from 300 to 1,000 nuts, averaging about 14 lbs.; which
the cultivators sell at about half a dollar (2s.) a picul of 133 lbs.
As these palms are planted usually at the distance of 7½ feet, it
follows that the produce of an acre is about 10,841 lbs. The tree
bears but once in a year generally, but there are green nuts enough to
eat all the year long. Betel nut is a staple article of import into
China; 25,000 piculs annually is the amount returned, but there is an
immense quantity imported in Chinese junks from Hainan, of which there
is no account kept. In the single port of Canton alone, 15,565 piculs
were imported in 1844, and about 400 to Ningpo. 3,005 piculs of betel
nuts, valued at 8,700 dollars, were imported into Canton in 1850, and
as much as 4,000 tons of areca nuts are shipped annually from Ceylon.

The astringent extract obtained from the seeds of the Areca-palm
constitutes two (or perhaps more) kinds of the catechu of the shops.
According to Dr. Heyne ("Tracts Hist. and Statist. on India"), it is
largely procured in Mysore, about Sirah, in the following manner:--

    The nuts are taken as they come from the tree and boiled for some
    hours in an iron vessel. They are then taken out, and the remaining
    water is inspissated by continual boiling. This process furnishes
    Kassu, or most astringent terra japonica, which is black and mixed
    with paddy criu, husks, and other impurities. After the nuts are
    dried, they are put into a fresh quantity of water, boiled again;
    and this water being inspissated, like the former, yields the best
    or dearest kind of catechu, called Coony. It is yellowish brown, has
    an earthy fracture, and is free from the admixture of foreign
    bodies.

Most of the betel nuts imported into China come from Java, Singapore,
and Pinang. Betel nut is not so generally used in the South of China
as among the Southern Islands, and in the north of China it is a
luxury, as the pepper does not grow freely there. Formerly there was a
considerable trade in betel nuts with the Coromandel coast, from
whence the natives brought back manufactured goods and other
necessaries in return, but this has ceased for some time. The common
price was 20,000 for a dollar. These nuts are seldom imported into
England, though they might be of use as a dye in some manufactures.

The natives of the East chew the fruit of _Elate sylvestris_, (which
is something like a wild plum), in the same manner as the areca nut,
with the leaf of the betel pepper and quick lime.

The inner wood furnishes a kind of _Catechu_ or _Cutch_, which
contains much tannin and is a powerful astringent. It is obtained by
the simple process of boiling the heart of the wood for a few hours,
when it assumes the appearance and consistency of tar. It hardens by
cooling, and when formed into small squares and dried in the sun is
fit for the market.

The produce of Bombay is of uniform texture and of a dark red color.
That of Concan and other parts of India is of chocolate color, and
marked inside with red streaks.

The analysis of Sir H. Davy gave the following result:--

                                    Bombay.         Concan.
  Tannin                             54.5            48.5
  Extractive                         34.0            36.5
  Mucilage                            6.5             8.0
  Insoluble matters, sand, lime, &c.  5.0             7.0

                                    100.            100.

Catechu is in extensive use in India for tanning purposes, and of late
years it has entirely superseded madder in the calico works of Europe
for dyeing a golden coffee-brown, one pound of catechu being found
equivalent to six pounds of madder.

Value of the areca nuts exported from Ceylon to the British Colonies
and foreign States in the years named:--

                  £.
  1839         22,956
  1840         23,096
  1841         22,428
  1842         29,222
  1843         27,028
  1844         20,978
  1845         31,836
  1846         34,209
  1847         35,723
  1848         42,482
  1849         31,746
  1850         42,907
  1851         54,846
  1852         52,230


THE POPPY.

OPIUM is the concrete inspissated juice of the white poppy, _Papaver
somniferum_ and its varieties, obtained by scratching the capsules and
collecting the exuding juice. The plant has been long known, and is
perhaps one of the earliest described. It is a native of Western Asia
and probably also of the South of Europe, but it has been distributed
over various countries.

In 1826 the imports of opium into the United Kingdom were 79,829 lbs.,
of which 28,329 lbs. were consumed in this country. The imports and
consumption in subsequent years are shown by the following figures:--

                Imports.         Consumption.
                  lbs.               lbs.
  1827          113,140             17,322
  1830          209,076             22,668
  1833          106,846             35,407
  1836          130,794             38,943
  1839          196,247             41,682
  1842           72,373             47,432
  1845          259,644             38,229
  1848          200,019             61,055
  1819          105,724             44,177
  1850          126,318             42,324
  1851          118,024             50,682
  1852          205,780             62,521

Few who have not looked into the statistics of this trade, are aware
of the enormous consumption of opium all over the world, but chiefly
in China and India.

In 1845, 18,792 chests of opium were sent from Calcutta to China, and
nearly the same number of the Malwa opium from Bombay and Damaun. The
total production of India exported to China, in 1844, was 21,526
chests from Bengal, and 18,321 from Bombay, in all 39,847 chests. The
number of persons in China given to the consumption of opium was
estimated, in 1837, at three millions, and the average quantity smoked
by each individual is about 17½ grains a day. The consumption of
Indian opium (independent of Turkey opium) in China has gradually
increased from 3,210 chests in 1817, to 9,969 chests in 1827, and
about 40,000 chests in 1837, valued at 25,000,000 dollars. Now it has
reached 50,000 to 60,000 chests. Notwithstanding severe penalties,
imprisonment, temporary banishment, and even death, the number of
those who smoke opium has multiplied exceedingly, and the contraband
trade in the drug is carried on to so large an extent, that it is to
be feared the practice will become general throughout the empire.

According to Mr. E. Thornton's statistics, the production of opium in
Bengal has increased cent. per cent. in the last ten years:--

                    Chests.
  1840-41           17,858
  1841-42           18,827
  1842-43           18,362
  1843-44           15,104
  1844-45           18,350
  1845-46           21,437
  1846-47           21,648
  1847-48           30,515
  1848-49           36,000

The chest is about 140 lbs., so that the production in 1849 was
5,040,000 lbs.

According to the statements annexed to the statistical papers relating
to India, the income from the opium monopoly is obtained by two
principal means, namely, by a system of allowing the cultivation of
the poppy by the natives of British India on account of Government,
and by the impost of a heavy duty on opium grown and manufactured in
foreign states, but brought in transit to a British port for
exportation. The former system obtains in Bengal, the latter in
Bombay. According to the statements published, Bengal opium yields a
profit of 7s. 6d. per lb., whilst the duty derived in the Bombay
presidency is only equal to a surplus of 5s. 8d. per lb. By these
means the total revenue realised by the opium monopoly, in Bengal and
Bombay, in the year 1849-50 yielded £3,309,637.

Lest objection should be taken to this large annual revenue derived
from the cultivation of a drug, the unnatural consumption of which
would be suppressed under any other European government, the Court of
Directors is very anxious to show the benefit which the country
derives from this monopoly; they say "that as the price of opium is
almost wholly paid by foreign consumers, and the largest return is
obtained with the smallest outlay, the best interests of India would,
appear to be consulted." Nobody at all acquainted with the financial
resources and the capabilities of any country, would hazard such an
assertion. By paying cultivators for the restricted growth of the
poppy a price hardly yielding more than the average rate of wages to
the common laborer, I do not see in what way the best interests of
India are consulted, nor is it clear that the population derives any
benefit by being prohibited altogether from manufacturing a drug,
which may be brought from another country _in transitu_ on the payment
of a heavy duty; unless indeed the Court of Directors are of opinion
that in the event of the abolition of the monopoly, the people of the
country would have to make up for the loss of the revenue by
submitting to some other mode of direct or indirect taxation. There is
an inconsistency in the statements of the Court of Directors, which is
absolutely amusing. "The free cultivation of the poppy," say the
Directors, "would doubtless lead to the larger outlay of capital, and
to greater economy in production; but the poppy requires the richest
description of land, and its extended cultivation must therefore
displace other products." How very considerate on the part of the
Directors, but how strongly at variance with facts, since all the fear
of displacing other products, and all this appropriation of the
richest description of land for other purposes has not prevented the
Indian Government, within less than ten years, from more than doubling
the cultivation of the poppy and the manufacture of opium. The
Directors tell us that the heavy transit duty charged at Bombay is to
discourage production, but they do not say whether that discouragement
applies, as one would imagine, to those foreign districts which have
to pay the transit duty for their production. If so, the assertion is
again at variance with facts, because in a subsequent statement they
say, "It is stated that neither the price of opium, nor the extent of
cultivation in Malwa, has been affected by the great enhancement of
the pass duty, which has taken place since 1845."

The following will show that the Company loses no opportunity of
applying the screw:--

    The subjugation of Scinde afforded opportunity for the levy of a
    higher rate. Down to the period of that event, a large portion of
    the opium of Malwa had been conveyed through Scinde to Kurrachee,
    and thence onward to the Portuguese ports of Diu and Demaun. That
    route is now closed, and it was reasonably expected that an advance
    might be made in the charge of passes without the risk of loss to
    the revenue from a diminished demand for them. The rate was
    accordingly increased in October, 1843, from 125 to 200 rupees per
    chest. Upon the principle that it was desirable to fix the price at
    the highest amount that could be levied, without forcing the trade
    into other channels, a further increase was made in 1845. when it
    was determined that the charge should be 300 rupees per chest. Under
    the like views it was, in 1847, raised to 400 rupees per chest.

The company was perfectly correct, for though the quantity of opium
did not increase, the revenue did; and whilst in 1840-41 16,773 chests
yielded an income of only 22,046,452 rupees--16,500 chests brought in
1849-50 actually 72,094,835 rupees into the coffers of the Government
of Bombay. But the people of India earned not a pice by it, and those
richest descriptions of land, which it was so desirable to reserve for
other produce than the poppy, remained barren.

The white variety of the poppy is that which is exclusively brought
under cultivation for the production of the drug in India and Egypt.
For the successful culture of opium a mild climate, plentiful
irrigation, a rich soil, and diligent husbandry are indispensable. One
acre of well cultivated ground will yield from 70 lbs. to 100 lbs. of
"chick," or inspissated juice, the price of which varies from 6s. to
12s. a pound, so that an acre will yield from £20 to £60 worth of
opium at one crop. Three pounds of chick will produce one pound of
opium, from a third to a fifth of the weight being lost in
evaporation. A chief chemical feature, which distinguishes Bengal
opium from that of Turkey and Egypt, is the large proportion which the
narcotine in the former bears to the morphia, and this proportion is
constant in all seasons. It is a matter of importance to ascertain
whether the treatment which the juice receives after its collection
can influence in any way the amount of alkaloids, or of the other
principles in opium. In Turkey it is the custom to beat up the juice
with saliva, in Malwa it is immersed as collected in linseed oil,
whilst in Bengal it is brought to the required consistence by mere
exposure to the air in the shade, though, at the same time, all the
watery particles of the juice that will separate are drained off, and
used in making _Lewah_, or inferior opium.

The lands selected for poppy cultivation are generally situated in the
vicinity of villages, where the facilities for manuring and irrigation
are greatest. In such situations and when the soil is rich, it is
frequently the practice with the cultivators to take a crop of Indian
corn, maize, or vegetables off the ground during the rainy season, and
after the removal of this in September, to dress and manure the ground
for the subsequent poppy sowings. In other situations, however, and
when the soil is not rich, the poppy crop is the only one taken off
the ground during the year, and from the commencement of the rains in
June or July, until October, the ground is dressed and cleaned by
successive ploughings and weedings, and manured to the extent which
the means of the cultivator will permit. In the final preparation of
the land in October and November, the soil, after being well loosened
and turned up by the plough, is crushed and broken down by the passage
of a heavy log of wood over its surface, and it is in this state ready
for sowing.

The amount of produce from various lands differs considerably. Under
very favorable circumstances of soil and season, as much as twelve or
even thirteen seers (26 lbs.) of standard opium may be, obtained from
each biggah of 27,225 square feet. "Under less favorable conditions
the turn-out may not exceed three or four seers, but the usual amount
of produce varies from six to eight seers per biggah.

The chemical examination of different soils in connection with their
opium-producing powers, presents a field for profitable and
interesting inquiry; nor is the least important part of the
investigation that which has reference to variations in the
proportions of the alkaloids (especially the morphia and narcotine),
which occur in opium produced in various localities. That atmospheric
causes exert a certain influence in determining these variations is
probable; that they influence the amount of produce, and cause
alterations in the physical appearance of the drug, are facts well
known to every cultivator: thus the effect of dew is to facilitate the
flow of the juice from the wounded capsule, rendering it abundant in
quantity, but causing it at the same time to be dark and liquid. An
easterly wind (which in India is usually concomitant with a damp state
of atmosphere), retards the flow of juice, and renders it dark and
liquid. A moderate westerly wind, with dew at night, form the
atmospheric conditions most favorable for collection, both as regards
the quantity and quality of the exudation. If, however, the westerly
wind (which is an extremely dry wind) blow violently, the exudation
from the capsules is sparing. Whilst the effect of meteorological
phenomena in producing the above results are well marked, their action
in altering the relative proportions of the chemical constituents of
the juice of the poppy plant is more obscure, and it is highly
probable that the chemical composition of the soil plays a most
important part in this respect. Dr. O'Shaughnessy is certainly the
most accomplished chemist who had ever, in India, turned his attention
to the subject, and he has published the results of his analyses of
specimens of opium from the different divisions of the Behar Agency,
which are worthy of much attention. In the opium from eight divisions
of the agency, he found the quantity of morphia to range from 1¾
grains to 3½ grains per cent., and the amount of the narcotine to vary
from ¾ grain to 3½ grains per cent., the consistence of the various
specimens being between 75 and 79 per cent. In the opium from the
Hazareebaugh district (the consistence of the drug being 77), he found
4½ per cent, of morphia, and 4 per cent, narcotine; whilst from a
specimen of Patna-garden opium he extracted no less than 10¾ per cent.
of morphia, and 6 per cent. of narcotine, the consistence of the drug
being 87. With respect to the last specimen, Dr. O'Shaughnessy
mentions that the poppies which produced it were irrigated three times
during the season, and that no manure was employed upon the soil. It
is much to be regretted that these interesting results were not
coupled with an analysis of the soils from which the specimens were
produced, for to chemical variations in it must be attributed the
widely different results recorded above.

Opium as a medicine has been used from the earliest ages; but when it
was first resorted to as a luxury, it is impossible to state, though
it is not at all improbable that this was coeval with its employment
in medicine, for how often do we find that, from having been first
administered as a sedative for pain, it has been continued until it
has taken the place of the evil. Such must have happened from the
earliest ages, as it happens daily in the present; but as a national
vice it was not known until the spread of Islamism, when, by the
tenets of the Prophet, wine and fermented liquors being prohibited, it
came in their stead along with the bang or hasch-schash (made from
hemp), coffee, and tobacco. From the Arabs the inhabitants of the
Eastern Archipelago most probably imbibed their predilection for
opium, although their particular manner of using it has evidently been
derived from the Chinese. China, where at present it is so extensively
used, cannot be said to have indulged long in the vice. Previous to
1767 the number of chests imported did not exceed 200 yearly; now the
average is 50,000 to 60,000. In 1773 the East India Company made their
first venture in opium, and in 1796 it was declared a crime to smoke
opium.

In different countries we find opium consumed in different ways. In
England it is either used in a solid state, made into pills, or a
tincture in the shape of laudanum. Insidiously it is given to children
under a variety of quack forms, such as "Godfrey's cordial," &c. In
India the pure opium is either dissolved in water and so used, or
rolled into pills. It is there a common practice to give it to
children when very young, by mothers, who require to work and cannot
at the same time nurse their offspring. In China it is either smoked
or swallowed in the shape of _Tye_. In Bally it is first adulterated
with China paper, and then rolled up with the fibres of a particular
kind of plantain. It is then inserted into a hole made at the end of a
small bamboo, and smoked. In Java and Sumatra it is often mixed with
sugar and the ripe fruit of the plantain. In Turkey it is usually
taken in pills, and those who do so, avoid drinking any water after
swallowing them, as this is said to produce violent colics; but to
make it more palatable, it is sometimes mixed with syrups or thickened
juices; in this form, however, it is less intoxicating, and resembles
mead. It is then taken with a spoon, or is dried in small cakes, with
the words "Mash Allah," or "Word of God," imprinted on them. When the
dose of two or three drachms a day no longer produces the beatific
intoxication, so eagerly sought by the opiophagi, they mix the opium
with corrosive sublimate, increasing the quantity of the latter till
it reaches ten grains a day. It then acts as a stimulant. In addition
to its being used in the shape of pills, it is frequently mixed with
hellebore and hemp, and forms a mixture known by the name of majoon,
whose properties are different from that of opium, and may account in
a great measure for the want of similitude in the effect of the drug
on the Turk and the Chinese.

In Singapore and China the refuse of the chandu, the prepared extract
of opium, is all used by the lower classes. This extract, when
consumed, leaves a refuse, consisting of charcoal, empyreumatic oil,
some of the salts of opium, and a part of the chandu not consumed. Now
one ounce of chandu gives nearly half an ounce of this refuse, called
Tye, or Tinco. This is smoked and swallowed by the poorer classes, who
only pay half the price of chandu for it. When smoked it yields a
further refuse called samshing, and this is even used by the still
poorer, although it contains a very small quantity of the narcotic
principle. Samshing, however, is never smoked, as it cannot furnish
any smoke, but is swallowed, and that not unfrequently mixed with
arrack.

    _Preparation_.--In Asia Minor, men, women, and children, a few days
    after the flower falls from the poppies, proceed to the fields, and
    with a shell scratch the capsules, wait twenty-four hours, and
    collect the tears, which amount to two or three grains in weight
    from each capsule. These being collected and mixed with the
    scrapings of the shells, worked up with saliva and surrounded by
    dried leaves, it is then sold, but, generally speaking, not without
    being still more adulterated with cow's dung, sand, gravel, the
    petals of flowers, &c. Different kinds of opium are known in the
    markets of Europe and Asia.

    The first in point of quality is the _Smyrna_, known in commerce as
    the _Turkey_ or _Levant_. It occurs in irregular, rounded, flattened
    masses, seldom exceeding two pounds in weight, and surrounded by
    leaves of a kind of sorrel; the quantity of morphia said to be
    derived from average specimens is eight per cent.

    Second, _Constantinople Opium_, two kinds of which are found in the
    market, one in very voluminous irregular cakes, which are flattened
    like the Smyrna; this is a good quality. The other kind is in small,
    flattened, regular cakes, from two to two and a half inches in
    diameter, and covered with the leaves of the poppy; the quantity of
    morphia is very uncertain in this description of opium, sometimes
    mounting as high as 15 per cent., and sometimes descending so low as
    six, showing the great variety in the quality of the drug.

    Third, _Egyptian Opium_, occurs in round flattened cakes, about 3
    inches in diameter, and covered externally with the vestiges of
    some leaf. It is distinguished from the others by its reddish color,
    resembling "Socotrine Aloes." The quantity of morphia in this is
    inferior to the preceding. It has one quality which, when
    adulterated, ought to be known, that is a musty smell. By keeping it
    does not blacken like the other kinds.

    Fourth, _English Opium_, is in flat cakes or balls enveloped in
    leaves. It resembles fine Egyptian opium more than any other kind.
    Its color is that of hepatic aloes, and in the quantity of morphia
    it is inferior to the preceding, but in the strength of the mass it
    is said by one of its most extensive cultivators to be superior.

    Fifth, _French_, and sixth _German Opium_, require no particular
    remarks. By a recent notice I find the French are cultivating the
    poppy in Algeria, from which they get opium giving a small per
    centage of morphia.

    Seventh, _Trebizond_ or _Persian Opium_, is sometimes met with of a
    very inferior quality in the form of cylindrical sticks, which by
    pressure have become angular.

    Eighth, _Indian Opium_, divided into four kinds, Cutch, Malwa, Patna
    and Benares. Of these Cutch is but little known or cultivated. It
    occurs in small cakes covered with leaves, and its color is much
    inferior to Smyrna. Malwa opium is to be met with of two kinds. The
    inferior is in flattened cakes, without any external covering, dull,
    opaque, blackish brown externally, internally somewhat darker, and
    soft. Its color is somewhat like the Smyrna, but less powerful, and
    with a slight smoky smell. Superior Malwa is in square cakes, about
    three inches in length and one inch thick. It has the appearance of
    a well prepared, shining, dry, pharmaceutical extract; its color is
    blackish brown, its odor less powerful than Smyrna; it is not
    covered by petals as the following kinds are, but smeared with oil;
    it is then rubbed with pounded petals.

    The Behar, Patna, and Benares Opium, being strictly in the hands of
    Government, no adulteration can take place, without a most extensive
    system of fraud; but it will not be uninteresting to trace the
    progress of the opium from the hands of the natives, to the
    condition in which it is delivered to the public by the Government.

    From the commencement of the hot season to the middle of the rains
    the Government is ready to receive opium, which is brought by the
    natives every morning, in batches, varying in quantities from twenty
    seers to a maund. The examining officer into each jar thrusts his
    examining rod, which consists of a slit bamboo, and, by experience,
    he can so judge of the qualities of the specimens before him, which
    are sorted into lots of No. 1 to No. 4 quality. Opium of the first
    quality is of a fine chesnut color, aromatic smell, and dense
    consistence. It is moderately ductile, and, when the mass is torn,
    breaks with a deeply notched fracture, with sharp needle-like
    fibres, translucent and ruby red at the edges. It is readily broken
    down under water, and the solution at first filters of a sherry
    color, which darkens as the process proceeds. One hundred grains of
    this yield an extract to cold distilled water of from 35 to 45, and
    at the temperature of 212 degs., leaves from 20 to 28 per cent.,
    having a consistency of 70 to 72, the consistence of the factory.

    The second quality is inferior to the first, and the third quality
    is possessed of the following properties, black paste, of a very
    heavy smell, drops from the examining rod, gives off from 40 to 50
    per cent, of moisture, and contains a large quantity of "Pasewa;"
    while the fourth or last number embraces all the kinds which are too
    bad to be used in the composition of the balls, comprising specimens
    of all varieties of color and consistence. This number is mixed with
    water, and only used as a paste to cement the covering of the balls.

    The three first qualities are emptied from their jars into large
    tanks, in which they are kept until the supply of the season has
    been obtained. The opium is then removed and exposed to the air on
    shallow wooden frames, until it becomes of the consistency of from
    69 to 70, when it is given to the cake maker, who guesses to a
    drachm the exact weight, and envelops the opium in its covering of
    petals, cemented by a covering of quality number 4. The balls are
    then weighed and stored, to undergo a thorough ventilation and
    drying. Formerly the covering of the balls was composed of the
    leaves of tobacco; but the late Mr. Flemming introduced the
    practice of using the petals of the poppy, which was such an
    improvement that the Court of Directors presented him with 50,000
    rupees. The balls, forty in number, are packed in a mango wood case,
    which consists of two stories with twenty pigeon holes in each,
    lined with lath and surrounded by the dried leaves of the poppy.
    Sometimes these balls are so soft as to burst their skins, and much
    of the liquid opium running out, is lost. In 1823, many of the
    chests of Patna lost five catties from this cause, and to this day
    we have the same thing continuing to occur. Patna chests are covered
    with bullock hides, Benares with gunnies.

Dr. Impey, staff surgeon at Poona, who resided in Malwa from 1843 to
1846, published at Bombay, in 1848, a valuable treatise on the
cultivation, preparation, and adulteration of Malwa opium. It was some
time before he obtained the permission of the East India Company to
publish the result of the experience he had acquired in Malwa, and as
Government inspector of opium at Bombay. It is the most practical
treatise I have yet met with, although a very elaborate, useful paper,
by Mr. Little, surgeon, of Singapore, appears in the 2nd vol. of the
"Journal of the Indian Archipelago," from which I have quoted the
preceding remarks.

Mr. Little furnishes a complete history of the drug, and the physical
and mental effects resulting from its habitual use. There are also
some able remarks in Dr. O'Shaughnessy's Bengal Dispensatory:--

    For the successful cultivation of opium, a mild climate, plentiful
    irrigation, a rich soil, and diligent husbandry, are indispensable.
    In reference to the first of these, Malwa is placed most favorably.
    The country is in general from 1,300 to 2,000 feet above the level
    of the sea: the mean temperature is moderate, and range of the
    thermometer small. Opium is always cultivated in ground near a tank
    or running stream, so as to be insured at all times of an abundant
    supply of water. The rich black loam, supposed to be produced by the
    decomposition of trap, and known by the name of cotton soil, is that
    prepared for opium. Though fertile and rich enough to produce thirty
    successive crops of wheat without fallowing, it is not sufficiently
    rich for the growth of the poppy until largely supplied with manure.
    There is, in fact, no crop known to the agriculturist, unless sugar
    cane, that requires so much care and labor as the poppy. The ground
    is first four times ploughed on four successive days, then carefully
    harrowed; when manure, at the rate of from eight to ten cart loads
    an acre, is applied to it; this is scarcely half what is allowed a
    turnip crop at home. The crop is after this watered once every eight
    or ten days, the total number of waterings never exceeding nine in
    all. One beegah takes two days to soak thoroughly in the cold
    weather, and four as the hot season approaches. Water applied after
    the petals drop from the flower, causes the whole to wither and
    decay. When the plants are six inches high, they are weeded and
    thinned, leaving about a foot and a-half betwixt each plant; in
    three months they reach maturity, and are then about four feet in
    height if well cultivated. The full-grown seed-pod measures three
    and a-half inches vertically, and two and a-half in horizontal
    diameter. Early in February and March the bleeding process
    commences. Three small lancet-shaped pieces of iron are bound
    together with cotton, about one-twelfth of an inch of the blade
    alone protruding, so that no discretion as to the depth of the wound
    to be inflicted shall be left to the operator; and this is drawn
    sharply up from the top of the stalk at the base, to the summit of
    the pod. The sets of people are so arranged that each plant is bled
    all over once every three or four days, the bleedings being three or
    four times repeated on each plant. This operation always begins to
    be performed about three or four o'clock in the afternoon, the
    hottest part of the day. The juice appears almost immediately on the
    wound being inflicted, in the shape of a thick gummy milk, which is
    thickly covered with a brownish pellicle. The exudation is greatest
    over night, when the incisions are washed and kept open by the dew.
    The opium thus derived is scraped off next morning, with a blunt
    iron tool resembling a cleaver in miniature. Here the work of
    adulteration begins--the scraper being passed heavily over the
    seed-pod, so as to carry with it a considerable portion of the
    beard, or pubescence, which contaminates the drug and increases its
    apparent quantity. The work of scraping begins at dawn, and must be
    continued till ten o'clock; during this time a workman will collect
    seven or eight ounces of what is called "chick." The drug is next
    thrown into an earthen vessel, and covered over or drowned in
    linseed oil, at the rate of two parts of oil to one of chick, so as
    to prevent evaporation. This is the second process of
    adulteration--the ryot desiring to sell the drug as much drenched
    with oil as possible, the retailers at the same time refusing to
    purchase that which is thinner than half dried glue. One acre of
    well cultivated ground will yield from 70 to 100 pounds of chick.
    The price of chick varies from three to six rupees a pound, so that
    an acre will yield from 200 to 600 rupees worth of opium at one
    crop. Three pounds of chick will produce about two pounds of opium,
    from a third to a fifth of the weight being lost in evaporation. It
    now passes into the hands of the Bunniah, who prepares it and brings
    it to market. From twenty-five to fifty pounds having been
    collected, is tied up in parcels in double bags of sheeting cloth,
    which are suspended from the ceilings so as to avoid air and light,
    while the spare linseed oil is allowed to drop through. This
    operation is completed in a week or ten days, but the bags are
    allowed to remain for a month or six weeks, during which period the
    last of the oil that can be separated comes away; the rest probably
    absorbs oxygen and becomes thicker, as in paint. This process
    occupies from April to June or July, when the rain begins. The bags
    are next taken down and their contents carefully emptied into large
    vats from ten to fifteen feet in diameter, and six or eight inches
    thick. Here it is mixed together and worked up with the hands five
    or six hours, until it has acquired an uniform color and consistence
    throughout, become tough and capable of being formed into masses.
    This process is peculiar to Malwa. It is now made up into balls of
    from eight to ten ounces each, these being thrown, as formed, into a
    basket full of the chaff of the seeds pod. It is next spread out on
    ground previously covered with leaves and stalks of the poppy; here
    it remains for a week or so, when it is turned over and left further
    to consolidate, until hard enough to bear packing. It is ready for
    weighing in October or November, and is then sent to market. It is
    next packed in chests of 150 cakes, the total cost of the drug at
    the place of production being about fourteen rupees per chest,
    including all expenses. About 20,000 chests are annually sent from
    Malwa, at a prime cost charge of two lacs and 80,000 rupees. It may
    easily be supposed that manipulations so numerous, complex, and
    tedious, as those described, give the most ample opportunities for
    the adulteration to which the nature of the drug tempts the
    fraudulent dealer.

    In order to enable the cultivator to carry on his agricultural
    operations, he receives from time to time certain advances, the
    amount of which reaches in the aggregate to about one-half of the
    value of the estimated out-turn of produce. If the land has been
    under cultivation in previous seasons, its average produce is known;
    if it be new land, and considered by the Sub-Deputy Agent as
    eligible, then the cultivator, in addition to the usual advances,
    receives an advance of so much per biggah to enable him to bestow a
    certain amount of extra care in tilling and dressing the soil. The
    first advance is made on the completion of the agreement or
    bundobust, and this takes place in September and October. The second
    advance is made on the completion of the sowings in November, and
    the final or Chook payment is made immediately after the delivery
    and weighing of the produce. Nothing therefore can be fairer to the
    cultivator than this system of advances; he is subject to no sort of
    exaction, in the shape of interest or commission on the money which
    he receives, and it puts within his power the certain means of
    making a fair profit by the exercise of common care and honesty. It
    is an established rule in the Agency that the cultivator's accounts
    of one season shall be definitively settled before the commencement
    of the next, and that no outstanding balances shall remain over.
    When a cultivator has from fraud neglected to bring produce to cover
    his advances, the balances due by him are at once recovered, if
    necessary by legal means; whereas, if he can satisfactorily show
    that he has become a defaulter from calamity and uncontrollable
    circumstances, and that the liquidation of his debt is placed
    entirely beyond his power, his case is then made the subject of
    report to the Government by the Agent, with the request that the
    debt may be written off to profit and loss. These provisions are
    most wise, for outstanding balances may be made the means of
    oppression, and to their operation may be traced a considerable
    amount of litigation and agrarian crime in the indigo districts of
    lower Bengal. It is clear that when such balances become so large
    that the cultivator cannot discharge them, he is no longer a free
    agent, but is perfectly subservient to the will of his creditor, for
    whom he must cultivate whether he desire it or not. Such burdens may
    even be handed down from father to son. The fairness of the Agency
    system, and the justice with which the cultivators are treated, are
    best evidenced by the readiness with which they come forward to
    cultivate, and also by the comparative rarity of agrarian crime,
    arising out of matters connected with the poppy cultivation.

Opium is grown to some extent in Egypt; 39,875 lbs. were produced in
1831, and sold at two dollars a pound.

At the end of October, after the withdrawal of the Nile waters the
seed, mixed with a portion of pulverised earth, is sown in a strong
soil, in furrows; after fifteen days the plant springs up, and in two
months has the thickness of a Turkish pipe, and a height of four feet;
the stalk is covered with long, oval leaves, and the fruit, which is
greenish, resembles a small orange. Every morning before sunrise, in
its progress to maturity, small incisions are made in the sides of the
fruit, from which a white liquor distils almost immediately, which is
collected in a vessel; it soon becomes black and thickish, and is
rolled into balls, which are covered with the washed leaves of the
plant; in this state it is sold. The seeds are crushed for lamp oil,
and the plant is used for fuel.

A plant known in Jamaica under the name of bull hoof yields a narcotic
which has been administered successfully in the shape of tincture and
a syrup, instead of opium. This is the _Muracuja ocellata_, or
_Passiflora muracuja_, of Swartz, an elegant climber, bearing bright
scarlet blossoms. There is another species, _M. orbiculata_, found in
Hayti and other islands, which may be expected to partake more or less
of the properties of the former. The flowers are the parts most
commonly employed.


THE TOBACCO PLANT.

Several species of _Nicotium_ furnish tobacco; that chiefly used in
Europe is procured from _N. Tabacum_ and its numerous varieties, a
plant naturally inhabiting the hotter parts of North and South
America. The popular narcotic furnished by tobacco is probably in more
extensive use than any other, and its only rivals are opium and the
betel-nut and leaf of the East. The herb for smoking was brought to
England from Tobago, in the West Indies, or from Tobasco, in Mexico
(whence the name), by Sir Ralph Lane, in 1586. Seeds were shortly
after introduced from the same quarter.

"Tobacco, as used by man," says Du Tour, "gives pleasure to the savage
and the philosopher, to the inhabitant of the burning desert and the
frozen zone; in short, its use, either in powder, to chew, or to
smoke, is universal; and for no other reason than a sort of convulsive
motion (sneezing) produced by the first, and a degree of intoxication
by the two last modes of use."

Tobacco is an annual plant, attaining a height of six feet, having
dingy red, funnel-shaped flowers, and viscid leaves. The leaves are
the officinal part, and their active properties depend on a peculiar,
oily-like alkaloid, called Nicotin. The flavor and strength of tobacco
depend on climate, cultivation, and the mode of manufacture. That most
esteemed by the smoker is Havanna tobacco, but the Virginian is the
strongest. The small Havanna cigars are prepared from the leaves of
_Nicotium repanda_, Syrian and Turkish tobacco from _N. rustica_, and
fine Shiraz tobacco from _N. persica_. With the exception of the
Macuba tobacco, which is cultivated in Martinique in a peculiar soil,
the tobacco of Cuba is considered the finest in the world. That grown
in the island of Trinidad is, however, fully equal to it in quality,
but all raised in the colony is generally consumed there, and is
little known in the English market. This ought not to be the case, for
no article would pay better.

The Maryland is a very light tobacco, in thin, yellow leaves; that of
Virginia is in large brown leaves, unctuous or somewhat gluey on the
surface, having a smell very like the figs of Malaga; that of Havanna
is in brownish light leaves, of an agreeable and rather spicy
smell,--it forms, as I have already stated, the best cigars. The
Carolina tobacco is less unctuous than the Virginian, but in the
United States it ranks next to the Maryland. The shag tobacco is dried
to the proper point upon sheets of copper, and is cut up by
knife-edged chopping stamps. There are said to be four kinds of
tobacco reared in Virginia, viz., the sweet-scented, which is
considered the best; the _big and little_, which follows next; then
the Frederick; and, lastly, the _one and all_, the largest kind, and
producing most in point of quantity.

According to Loudon ("Encyclo. of Plants"), there are fourteen species
of this genus, besides a few varieties. Lindley, however, enumerates
31, but many of these are mere showy species, adapted to flower
gardens. I shall therefore follow chiefly London's classification--

    1. _N. Tabacum_, a native of several parts of America, but
    principally known as Virginian tobacco, having a stem rising from
    four to six feet or more in height, bearing pink flowers. Of this
    there are three chief varieties known in America by the popular
    names of Orinoco, Broad-leaved and Narrow-leaved. Lindley enumerates
    eight varieties of _N. Tabacum_.

    2. _N. macrophylla_, or large-leaved tobacco, an ornamental annual,
    also with pink flowers, native of America, which rises to the height
    of six feet.

    3. _N. fruticosa_, or shrubby tobacco, an ornamental evergreen
    shrub, native of China, with pink blossoms, which grows to about
    three feet.

    4. _N. undulata_, or _suaveolens_, sweet-scented or New Holland
    tobacco, a green house perennial, native of New South Wales, with
    white flowers, which is only two feet high.

    5. _N. rustica_.--The common green or English tobacco, an annual
    plant, native of America, producing white flowers, which seldom
    grows higher than three feet.

    6. _N. paniculata_, or panicled tobacco, an annual plant bearing
    greenish yellow flowers, native of Peru, rises to the height of
    three feet.

    7. _N. glutinosa_, or clammy-leaved tobacco, also an annual plant,
    native of Peru, growing to the height of four feet, with bright
    scarlet flowers.

    8. _N. plumbaginifolia_, or curled-leaved tobacco, an ornamental
    deciduous annual, native of America, with white blossoms, rising to
    the height of two feet.

    9. _N. pusilla_, or primrose-leaved tobacco, an ornamental deciduous
    biennial, with white flowers, native of Vera Cruz, rising to three
    feet.

    10. _N. quadrivalvis_, four-valved, or Missouri tobacco, an
    ornamental annual, native of North America, with white flowers,
    seldom growing higher than two feet.

    11. _N. nana_, or rocky mount tobacco, a curious greenhouse annual,
    native of North America, with white blossoms, rising only three
    inches high.

    12. _N. Langsdorffii_, or Langsdorff's tobacco, an ornamental
    annual, with greenish yellow flowers, native of Chili, reaching five
    feet high.

    13. _N. cerinthoides_, or honey-wort tobacco, an ornamental annual,
    with greenish yellow flowers, native country unknown.

    14. _N. repanda_, or Havanna tobacco, an annual with white flowers,
    native of Cuba, rising two feet high.

    There are a few species, natives of the Province of Buenos Ayres,
    which may be particularised. _N. bonariensis_, having white flowers;
    _N. glauca_, yellowish green flowers; _N. longiflora_, white
    flowers; and _N. viscosa_, pink flowers.

The important mineral substances presented in Havanna tobacco,
examined by Hertung, are in 100 parts of ashes,

  Salts of potash     34.15
  Salts of lime       51.38
  Magnesia             4.09
  Phosphates           9.04

These substances were for the most part insoluble in earth, and must
have been dissolved during the growth of the crop.

                         ANALYSIS  OF FIVE SAMPLES OF TOBACCO.
                      No. 1.     No. 2.     No. 3.     No. 4.     No. 5.
   Grown on argillaceous soil               Grown in calcareous soil.
  Potash              29.08      30.67       9.68       9.36      10.37
  Soda                 2.26        --         --         --         .36
  Lime                27.67      24.79      49.28      49.44      39.58
  Magnesia             7.22       8.57      14.58      15.59      15.04
  Chloride of sodium    .91       5.95       4.61       3.20       6.39
  Chloride of potassium --         --        4.44       3.27       2.99
  Phosphate of iron    8.78       6.03       5.19       6.72       7.56
  Sulphate of lime     6.43       5.60       6.68       6.14       9.42
  Silica              17.65      18.39       5.54       6.28       8.34

                     100.00     100.00     100.00     100.00     100.00

From the above it will be seen that on the argillaceous soil the
tobacco contained a large quantity of alkalies and silica, while on
the other hand, the lime, magnesia and chlorides were high in
proportion, in the tobacco grown on calcareous soil.

There is no doubt that the manure which contains the largest
proportion of alkaline carbonate, magnesia, lime and gypsum, is that
best adapted for tobacco.

I give an analysis taken from Prof. Johnston's "Lectures," (2nd
edition) of the ash of the tobacco leaf and the composition of a
special manure for tobacco:--

  Potash                 12.14
  Soda                    0.07
  Lime                   45.90
  Magnesia               13.09
  Chloride of sodium      3.49
  Chloride of potassium   3.98
  Phosphate of iron       5.48
  Phosphate of lime       1.49
  Sulphate of lime        6.35
  Silica                  8.01

                        100.00

All the ingredients which are necessary to replace 100 lbs. of the ash
of tobacco leaves are present in the following mixture:--

  Bone dust, sulphuric acid  23 lbs.
  Carbonate of potash (dry)  31  "
  Carbonate of soda (dry)     5  "
  Carbonate of Magnesia      25  "
  Carbonate of lime (chalk)  60  "

                            144  "

The following is the result of an analysis of the fresh leaves of
tobacco, by Posselt and Reimann ("Mag. Pharm." xxiv. xxv.):--

  Nicotine                                     0.06
  Nicotianine                                  0.01
  Extractive matter, slightly bitter           2.37
  Gum, with a little malate of lime            1.74
  Green resin                                  0.26
  Vegetable albumen                            0.26
  Substance analogous to gluten                1.04
  Malic acid                                   0.51
  Malate of ammonia                            0.12
  Sulphate of potash                           0.04
  Chloride of potassium                        0.06
  Potash combined with malic and nitric acids  0.90
  Phosphate of lime                            0.16
  Lime in union with malic acid                0.24
  Silica                                       0.08
  Woody fibre                                  4.96
  Water (traces of starch)                    87.21

                                             100.10

Dr. Covell, in "Silliman's American Journal," vol. vii., shows its
components to have been but imperfectly represented in the above
German analysis. He found in tobacco by chemical examination--1, gum;
2, a viscid slime, equally soluble in water and alcohol, and
precipitable from both by subacetate of lead; 3, tannin; 4, gallic
acid; 5, chlorophyle (leaf green); 6, a green pulverulent matter,
which dissolves in boiling water, but falls down again when the water
cools; 7, a yellow oil, possessing the smell, taste and poisonous
qualities of tobacco; 8, a large quantity of a pale yellow resin; 9,
nicotine; 10, a white substance, analogous to morphia, soluble in hot,
but hardly in cold alcohol; 11, a beautiful orange red dye stuff,
soluble only in acids; it deflagrates in the fire, and seems to
possess neutral properties; 12, nicotianine. According to Buchner, the
seeds of tobacco yield a pale yellow extract to alcohol, which
contains a compound of nicotine and sugar.

M.M. Henry and Boutron Charlard found in 100 parts of

  Cuba tobacco     8.64 of nicotine.
  Maryland         5.28
  Virginia        10.00
  Ile et Vilaine  11.20
  Lot et Garonne   8.20

quantities from 12 to 19 times more than were obtained by Posselt and
Reimann.--"Ure's Dictionary of Arts and Manufactures."

The following are the results of a series of experiments made by
Messrs. Cooper and Brande, for the purpose of ascertaining the
quantity of soluble matter in eight samples of tobacco, of detecting
the presence and quantity of sugar contained in them, and the nature
and relative proportions of their inorganic constituents. An important
paper on the state in which _Nicotine_ exists in tobacco, and on the
relative proportion of it furnished by different varieties of the
plant, has been furnished by Schloessing ("Ann. Ch. et Ph." 3ieme Ser.
XIX. 230).

  __________________________________________________________________
                    |P s |P & |P t o |P s a|P s a|P m t|P o i|P m o|
                    |e o |e c |e r f |e o s|e o c|e a h|e b n|e a b|
                    |r l |r . |r e   |r l h|r l i|r t e|r t f|r t t|
                    |  u |    |  a a |  u .|  u d|  t  |  a u|  t a|
                    |c b |c i |c t m |c b  |c b  |c e a|c i s|c e i|
                    |e l |e n |e m o |e l  |e l i|e r s|e e i|e r n|
                    |n e |n s |n e n |n e  |n e n|n , h|n n o|n   e|
                    |t   |t o |t n i |t    |t    |t   .|t e n|t d d|
                    |. i |. l |. t a |. i  |. i t|. a  |. d .|. e  |
                    |  n |  u |    . |  n  |  n h|  s  |     |  d a|
     Tobacco dried  |o   |o b |o w   |o    |o   e|o    |o f  |o u l|
      at 212 degs.  |f w |f l |f i   |f w  |f h  |f s  |f r  |f c c|
                    |  a |  e |  t   |  a  |  y a|  i  |  o  |  e o|
                    |e t |w   |a h   |m t  |m d s|i l  |a m  |s d h|
                    |x e |o i |s     |a e  |a r h|n i  |l    |a   o|
                    |t r |o n |h c   |t r  |t o .|s c  |c f  |c f l|
                    |r . |d   |  a   |t    |t c  |o a  |o e  |c r .|
                    |a   |y w |a r   |e i  |e h  |l ,  |h r  |h o  |
                    |c   |  a |f b   |r n  |r l  |u    |o m  |a m  |
                    |t   |f t |t n   |     |  o  |b &  |l e  |r    |
                    |,   |i e |e a   |  t  |  r  |l c  |  n  |i t  |
                    |    |b r |r t   |  h  |  i  |e .  |  t  |n h  |
                    |&   |r . |  e   |  e  |  c  |     |  e  |e e  |
                    |c   |e   |      |     |     |  i  |  d  |     |
                    |.   |    |      |     |     |  n  |     |     |
                    |    |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |
                    |    |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |
  ------------------|----|----|------|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
  1. Light Missouri}|49  |54.9|20.97 |2.17 |11.73| 5.9 | --  | --  |
     leaf and stalk}|    |    |white |     |     |     |     |     |
                    |    |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |
  2. Light Missouri}|50  |47.7|19.7  |1.77 |12.83| 5.1 |0.75 |1.50 |
     leaf only     }|    |    |white |     |     |     |     |     |
                    |    |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |
  3. Dark Missouri }|50  |52.4|16.47 |4.2  |10.14| 2.13| --  | --  |
     leaf and stalk}|    |    |white |     |     |     |     |     |
                    |    |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |
  4. Dark Missouri} |51  |50.6|13.8  |2.17 | 8.73| 2.9 |0.35 |0.71 |
     leaf only    } |    |    |white |     |     |     |     |     |
                    |    |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |
  5. Light Virginia}|51.5|53.1|16.4  |2.53 | 8.54| 5.33| --  | --  |
     leaf and stalk}|    |    |gray- |     |     |     |     |     |
                    |    |    |white |     |     |     |     |     |
                    |    |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |
  6. Light Virginia}|54  |46.1|11.97 |2.0  | 6.86| 3.11|1.045|2.09 |
     leaf only     }|    |    |green-|     |     |     |     |     |
                    |    |    |gray  |     |     |     |     |     |
                    |    |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |
  7. Dark Virginia }|48.5|51.8|14.7  |4.8  |8.40 | 1.5 | --  | --  |
     leaf and stalk}|    |    |gray  |     |     |     |     |     |
                    |    |    |      |     |     |     |     |     |
  8. Dark Virginia} |52  |49.8|12.53 |2.63 |8.20 | 1.7 |1.46 |2.93 |
     leaf only    } |    |    |gray  |     |     |     |     |     |


    1. The samples were dried and the woody fibre and extract were also
    dried at 212 degs. The watery infusions of all contained ammoniacal
    salts. The salts from the ash, which were soluble in water,
    consisted of sulphates, carbonates, phosphates, and chlorides; the
    bases being potassa and lime. The solution by hydrochloric acid
    contained lime, alumina, phosphate of lime, and oxide of iron.

    3. Contained oxide of manganese in small quantity; sulphates in
    watery solution of ash abundant. Hydrochloric solution contained an
    abundance of lime.

    4. A trace of manganese; a trace only of phosphoric acid in watery
    solution.

    5. Contained abundance of oxide of manganese.

    6. Abundance of oxide of manganese.

    7. A mere trace of oxide of manganese, and a trace of oxide of iron;
    only a trace of alumina.

    8. A trace of oxide of manganese; quantity of oxide of iron very
    great; only a trace of alumina.

In rich loams, where the solution of the minerals of the soil is
rapid, and where 10 to 20 per cent, of vegetable matter is
incorporated in the earth, tobacco may be obtained for many years, but
it is always an exhausting crop. It has been stated that 170 Lbs. of
mineral matter are removed in less than three months from one acre of
land, by a crop of tobacco. This is very much more than wheat or other
grains abstract from the soil in eight or nine months.

Tobacco is now very extensively cultivated in France and other
European countries, in the Levant, the East and West Indies; and a
little is grown at the Cape and in the Australian Settlements.

A good deal of tobacco is raised in Mexico, but only for home
consumption, as its export is prohibited. It forms an article of
culture in Brazil and some of the South American republics, and is
grown to a small extent along the Western shores of Africa. It is from
North America, however, that we derive the bulk of our supplies of
this great article of commerce, which, with cotton, forms the chief
agricultural wealth of the United States.

In 1821, the tobacco exported from the Brazils amounted to 29,192,000
Lbs., but its cultivation was greatly injured by the siege of the
capital in 1822-23. Fresh seed was subsequently obtained from Cuba,
and in 1835 the exports were 6,051,040 Lbs.

131 cases of Princeza snuff were shipped from Bahia to Lisbon, in
1835; about 60,000 Lbs. per annum of this snuff being now manufactured
at Bahia, with the aid of two steam-engines. The exports of tobacco
from Bahia increased from 2,048,000 Lbs. in 1833, to 6,051,040 Lbs. in
1835. The average shipments are about 21,000 bales and rolls.

The army of smokers in Great Britain and Ireland consume yearly about
six millions of pounds worth of tobacco. The duty alone paid upon
snuff and tobacco for the people of Great Britain, averages
four-and-a-half millions sterling a year! The quantity
consumed--smoked, snuffed, or chewed--during the same period, is about
28 millions of pounds weight, or about four pounds weight per annum
for every male adult. Ireland annually pays not less than £800,000 of
duty on tobacco and snuff, and only about £30,000 on coffee. For every
pound of coffee that the Irish people use, they smoke away about _four
pounds of tobacco_.

North America produces annually upwards of 200 million pounds. The
combustion of the mass of vegetable material used in this kingdom
would yield about 340 million pounds of carbonic acid gas; so that the
yearly produce of carbonic acid gas from tobacco smoking alone cannot
be less than 1,000,000,000 lbs.--a large contribution to the annual
demand for this gas made upon the atmosphere for the vegetation of the
world. Henceforth let no one twit the smoker with idleness and
unimportance. Every pipe is an agricultural furnace,--every smoker a
manufacturer of vegetation,--the consumer of a weed that he may rear
more largely his own provisions.

In the year 1842, 605,000,000 of cigars were made in the German
Commercial Union.

In 1839, the revenue on tobacco in this country was about £3,600,000.
Of this it has been estimated eleven-twelfths are drawn from the
working classes, and one-twelfth from the richer classes. The
following is a calculation of the consumption of tobacco per head of
the population, estimated from the number of pounds on which duty was
paid:--

                                   Consumption per head.
             Rate of duty.                ozs.
  1801   {1s. 7 3-10d. England }          17
         {1s. 0 7-10d. Ireland.}
  1811    2s. 2 13-20d.                   19½
  1821    4s. 0d.                         11 45
  1831    3s. 0d.                         12 35
  1841    3s. 1 8-10d.                    12 4-5
  1851    3s. 1 4-5d.                     21

Thus it will be seen the consumption is materially affected by the
rate of duty.

A memorial presented to the First Lord of the Treasury a few years
ago, by the American Chamber of Commerce, and signed by Mr. Thomas
Todd, the chairman, furnishes some valuable information, and I am
therefore tempted to give it entire:--

    The American Chamber of Commerce of Liverpool desire respectfully to
    bring under the consideration of her Majesty's Government the
    impolicy of the present high rate of duty on foreign tobacco, and
    the benefit to commerce, as well as to the revenue, which would
    arise from such a reduction as would remove the temptation now held
    out to the smuggler.

    The cost of tobacco, including freight and all charges, is from 3d.
    to 4d. per lb., and the duty is 3s. per lb., being 900 per cent, on
    the value. A duty so enormously disproportioned to the cost offers
    an irresistible premium to the illicit trader; for the expense of
    smuggling tobacco by the cargo, including the first cost, does not
    exceed 9½d. per lb., and it has been ascertained that the smuggler
    receives 6d. per lb. less than the duty, or 2s. 6d. per lb., which
    yields him a clear profit of 1s. 8½d. per lb., to the injury not
    only of the revenue, but of the fair trader.

    The effect of this heavy duty in diminishing the consumption of
    duty-paid tobacco is further exemplified by the fact that, while all
    other articles of general consumption have progressively increased
    with the increase of the population, tobacco alone forms an
    exception, as will appear from the  following:--

      COMPARATIVE SCALE OF POPULATION AND CONSUMPTION OF TEA, COFFEE,
  AND TOBACCO, IN GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND, COMPILED FROM PARLIAMENTARY
                                 PAPERS.

          Population        Tea             Coffee           Tobacco
  1801    16,338,102
  Duty,                65 a 95 per ct   19d. per lb.      19d. per lb.
                                        & 12½ per ct.  & 12½ per ct.
                 Lbs., 23,163,999          871,846        16,895,752
  1811    18,547,720
  Duty                 96 per cent.     8d. per lb.       26½d. per lb.
                 Lbs., 24,461,308        6,895,619        21,376,370
  1821    21,193,458
  Duty,                96 a 100 per ct. 12d. per lb.      4s. per lb.
                 Lbs., 26,043,257        7,593,001         1,823,365
  1831    24,271,763
  Duty                 96a 100 per ct.  6d. per lb.       3s. per lb.
                 Lbs., 30,648,348       22,740,627        19,418,941
  1841    26,855,928
  Duty,                26¼d. per lb. 6d. per lb.       3s. per lb.
                 Lbs., 36,396,073       28,420,980        22,094,772

The consumption of tobacco in the island of Great Britain, excluding
Ireland, and the duty thereon, were in

            Consumption.        Duty.
  1801     10,514,998 lbs.     1s. 7d.
  1811     14,923,243  "       2s. 2½d.
  1821     12,983,198  "       4s. 0d.
  1831     15,350,018  "       3s. 0d.
  1841     16,083,593  "       3s. 0d.
  1851     28,062,841  "       3s. 0d.

    In the last two periods five per cent is added to all the duties.

    Thus, while the consumption of tea and coffee has increased even
    beyond the ratio of the population, the consumption of tobacco has
    decreased.

    This table also exemplifies the greater productiveness of a low duty
    compared with a high one; for instance, coffee in 1801, at 1s. 7d.
    per lb., yielded £77,654; in 1821, at 1s. per lb., £379,650; and, in
    1841, at 6d. per lb., £710,524; tobacco in 1821, at 4s. per lb.,
    yielded £3,164,673, and 1841, at 3s. per lb., £3,314,215. But the
    difference in duty in the latter case was not sufficient to curtail
    the profits of the smuggler to any material extent.

    Cigars afford a remarkable example of the amount of duty being
    increased by diminishing the rate. In 1828, when the duty was 18s.
    per lb., duty was paid on 8,600 lbs. only, yielding £7,740. In 1830,
    when the duty was reduced to 9s. per lb., duty was paid on 66,000
    lbs., yielding £29,700; and such has been the increase of
    consumption, that, in 1841, duty was paid on 213,613 lbs., yielding
    £100,899.

    We would further illustrate the position by the following facts:

    In 1798, Ireland, with a population of 4,000,000, consumed 8,000,000
    lbs. of tobacco, and now, with more than double the population, she
    consumes about 3,000,000 lbs. of tobacco less than at the former
    period. The reason is obvious: in 1789 the duty was 8d. per lb; now
    it is 3s. In 1798, England and Scotland, with a population of
    10,000,000, consumed 10,000,000 lbs. of tobacco, being one half of
    the relative consumption of Ireland at the same period; the duty in
    England and Scotland being then 1s. 7d. per lb., and in Ireland only
    8d.

    But the quantity of tobacco on which duty is paid does not even
    approximately show the quantity consumed. If the duty now paid on
    tobacco in the United Kingdom retained the same relative proportion
    to the population that it held in Ireland in 1798, the duty in 1841
    would have been actually levied upon 53,711,856 lbs., instead of
    22,094,772 lbs.; and such we believe to be about the actual amount
    of consumption, the great bulk of the supply being furnished by the
    illicit trader.

    In Prussia, it appears that the consumption of tobacco is at the
    rate of three pounds per head; while, in England, if we were to
    judge from the amount on which duty is paid, it is considerably less
    than one pound per head.

    Assuming the actual consumption at only 45,000,000 lbs., or two
    pounds per head, we believe that a reduction of duty to 1s. per
    pound would so effectually destroy the illicit trader, that the
    revenue would gain by the change, not only by bringing upwards of
    30,000,000 lbs. under duty, which at present escape, but by the
    great increase of the consumption consequent upon the encouragement
    given to the fair trader.

    We would not, however, treat the question merely as a matter of
    revenue. We would strongly represent the injustice which this
    exorbitant duty inflicts upon those who pursue a legitimate trade,
    by enabling the smuggler to lessen the extent of their transactions
    by more than half what they would otherwise be; and we would further
    earnestly urge upon your consideration the demoralising tendency of
    such a systematic and extended violation of the law, not only upon
    those engaged in the illicit trade, also upon those parties who are
    found to connive at the practice from a sense of the gross injustice
    and impolicy of a duty so disproportioned to the value of an article
    of such extensive consumption.

    We would refer to the opinion of a committee of the House of Commons
    on the growth of tobacco in Ireland, in 1840, as follows:--'That it
    further appears, from the evidence, that smuggling of foreign
    tobacco is at present carried on to a great extent, and that all the
    measures now adopted, at great expense to the country, are and will
    be ineffectual to repress it so long as the temptation of evading a
    duty equal to twelve times the value of the article on which it is
    imposed, remains."

    We beg, therefore, respectfully to express our opinion, that if the
    duty on tobacco were reduced to one shilling per pound, it would be
    alike beneficial to the interests of legitimate commerce; to the
    consumers, who consist almost entirely of the poorer classes; to the
    revenue, by increasing the productiveness of the duty, and by
    greatly diminishing the expenditure so ineffectually incurred to
    suppress the illicit trade; and to the general morals of society by
    removing a powerful inducement to infringe the laws.

The imports of all kinds of tobacco for the last five years have been
as follows:--

                |   1848.  |   1849.  |   1850.  |   1851.  |   1852.
                |   lbs.   |   lbs.   |   lbs.   |   lbs.   |   lbs.
  Unmanufactured|34,090,360|41,546,848|35,166,358|31,061,953|33,205,635
  Manufactured  |          |          |          |          |
    and snuff   | 1,512,714| 1,905,306| 1,557,618| 2,331,886| 2,930,299
                |----------|----------|----------|----------|----------
                |35,603,074|43,452,154|36,723,876|33,393,839|36,135,934

  Gross duty received:--

                |   1848.  |   1849.  |   1850.  |   1851.  |   1852.
                |     £    |     £    |     £    |     £    |     £
  On raw tobacco| 4,267,579| 4,328,217| 4,337,258| 4,386,910| 4,466,533
  Cigars, snuff,|          |          |          |          |
    &c.         |    97,655|    96,814|    92,873|    98,858|    94,298
                |----------|----------|----------|----------|----------
                | 4,365,234| 4,425,031| 4,430,131| 4,485,768| 4,569,831

The amount of tobacco consumed is so limited that the trade will not
admit of an excessive growth. In the two most thickly populated
countries in Europe--France and England--not more than a certain
quantity finds its way there. In France the trade is monopolised by
Government, which gives out contracts to deliver a stipulated quantity
at certain prices; in England the duty imposed is so enormous that
only a limited quantity of certain descriptions can be imported
without risk of loss. In Germany and Holland, where the trade is more
extensively carried on than elsewhere, the duty imposed is almost
nominal, and all classes of their citizens are enabled to use the weed
at prices very little higher than its first prime cost. The tobacco
trade constitutes so large a staple of American produce that it is
singular greater efforts are not made upon the part of that Government
to cause a reciprocal duty to be imposed, that more favor may be shown
by European Governments to this particular article. England, from the
duty imposed upon it alone, derives a revenue of £4,500,000, being
about £160 to the hogshead, or from ten to sixteen times its original
cost. France makes the trade a monopoly, from which she derives an
income of £3,000,000 sterling.

   STATEMENT OF IMPORTS, SALES, AND STOCKS OF TOBACCO AND
           STEMS, IN BREMEN, FROM 1840 TO 1850.
  ----+---------------------------+-----------------------+
      |          MARYLAND         |       VIRGINIAN       |
  ----+------+------+------+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
      |      |      |      | S    |     |     |     | S   |
      | S    |      |      | t    | S   |     |     | t   |
      | t    |      |      | o  D | t   |     |     | o D |
      | o  J |  I   |      | c  e | o J |  I  |     | c e |
      | c  a |  m   |      | k  c | c a |  m  |     | k c |
      | k  n |  p   |  S   |    e | k n |  p  |  S  |   e |
    Y |    u |  o   |  a   | l  m |   u |  o  |  a  | l m |
    e | 1  a |  r   |  l   | a  b | 1 a |  r  |  l  | a b |
    a | s  r |  t   |  e   | s  e | s r |  t  |  e  | s e |
    r | t  y |  s   |  s   | t  r | t y |  s  |  s  | t r |
  ----+------+------+------+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
  1840| 4,890|14,570|18,399| 1,061|  245| 3492| 3422|  285|
  1841| 1,061|19,629|18,321| 2,369|  285| 3466| 3025|  726|
  1842| 2,369|20,821|19,067| 4,123|  726| 6729| 5898| 1557|
  1843| 4,123|18,483|15,004| 7,602| 1557| 5541| 4242| 2856|
  1844| 7,602|16,978|18,338| 6,242| 2856| 5092| 4282| 3666|
  1845| 6,242|24,251|24,571| 5,922| 3666| 1588| 3099| 2155|
  1846| 5,922|26,785|23,788| 8,919| 2155| 2386| 2456| 2085|
  1847| 8,919|21,743|20,681| 9,981| 2085|  911| 2079|  917|
  1848| 9,981|12,084| 9,935|12,130|  917|  847| 1054|  710|
  1849|12,130|19,285|22,112| 9,303|  710| 1173| 1734|  149|
  ----+------+------+------+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+

  ----+---------------------------+-----------------------+
      |          KENTUCKY         |         STEMS         |
  ----+------+------+------+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
      |      |      |      | S    |     |     |     | S   |
      | S    |      |      | t    | S   |     |     | t   |
      | t    |      |      | o  D | t   |     |     | o D |
      | o  J |  I   |      | c  e | o J |  I  |     | c e |
      | c  a |  m   |      | k  c | c a |  m  |     | k c |
      | k  n |  p   |  S   |    e | k n |  p  |  S  |   e |
    Y |    u |  o   |  a   | l  m |   u |  o  |  a  | l m |
    e | 1  a |  r   |  l   | a  b | 1 a |  r  |  l  | a b |
    a | s  r |  t   |  e   | s  e | s r |  t  |  e  | s e |
    r | t  y |  s   |  s   | t  r | t y |  s  |  s  | t r |
  ----+------+------+------+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+
  1840|   181| 3,803| 3,699|   285| 2853| 3362| 4564| 1651|
  1841|   285| 5,206| 4,941|   550| 1651| 7085| 7054| 1682|
  1842|   550| 9,407| 8,939|  1018| 1682| 4151| 5386|  447|
  1843|  1018| 7,485| 6,441|  2062|  447| 3969| 3447|  969|
  1844|  2062| 9,736| 9,569|  2229|  969| 4753| 5513|  209|
  1845|  2269|11,439|10,328|  3340|  209| 5273| 4152| 1330|
  1846|  3340| 5,028| 6,099|  2269| 1330| 6092| 4716| 2706|
  1847|  2269| 3,816| 5,013|  1072| 2706| 6788| 8038| 1456|
  1848|  1072| 4,448| 4,980|   540| 1456| 4912| 4473| 1895|
  1849|   540| 4,620| 4,746|   414| 1895| 5188| 5083| 1000|
  ----+------+------+------+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+

_Culture and Statistics in the United States_.--Tobacco has been the
great staple of the States of Virginia and Maryland from their first
settlement. About the year 1642 it became a royal monopoly, and
afterwards, in order to encourage its growth in the colonies, and
thereby increase the revenue of the Crown, Parliament prohibited the
planting of it in England. The average quantity shipped from the North
American colonies to the parent country, for ten years preceding the
year 1709, was about twenty-nine millions of pounds. For some years
prior to the American revolution, about 85,000 hhds. were exported,
then valued at little more than four millions of dollars, and
constituting nearly one-third the value of all the exports of the
British North American colonies. From 1820 to 1830 tobacco constituted
about one-ninth in value of all the domestic exports of the United
States. It finds a market principally in Great Britain, France,
Holland, and the north of Europe.[55] The crop of tobacco produced in
the four principal States, was in--

                     1838.             1839.
                     hhds.             hhds.
  Virginia          26,000            45,000
  Kentucky          27,000            35,000
  Maryland          16,000            16,000
  Ohio               3,000             4,000

                    72,000           100,000

The whole crop of 1840 was 219,163,319 lbs., which, at the estimate
of 1,200 lbs. to the hhd., would be equal to 182,636 hhds., and at the
average price of that year, 81 dollars 5 cents. per hhd., would make
the value of the crop of the United States 14,802,647 dollars 80
cents. The average annual export for the ten years ending with 1840,
was 96,775 hhds. The actual exportation of 1840 was 119,484 hhds. The
principal exports are formed of the produce of Virginia, Kentucky,
Tennessee, Maryland, and North Carolina. The exports are chiefly to
the following countries--about 30,000 hhds. annually to England,
15,000 hhds. to France, 20,000 hhds. to Holland, 25,000 hhds. Germany,
and about 22,000 hhds. to other countries. The whole crop for 1845 was
put down at 187,422,000 lbs. In 1839, it was ascertained that one and
a half million persons were engaged in the cultivation and manufacture
of tobacco in the United States, one million of whom were so occupied
in the States of Virginia, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri. In the
city of New York the consumption of cigars is computed at 10,000
dollars a day, a sum greater than that which the inhabitants pay for
their daily bread; and in the whole country the annual consumption of
tobacco is estimated at 120 million pounds, being 7 lbs. for every
man, woman, and child, at an annual cost to the consumers of 20
million dollars (more than four million pounds sterling).

It is estimated that the manufacture of tobacco in the United States
is increasing at the rate of 2,000 hhds. per annum.

                                                     hhds.
  The quantity manufactured in 1851, was stated at  55,000
  Exportations for the year estimated at           120,000

                                                   175,000

The production for 1852 is supposed to be as follows:--

                                                     hhds.
  Virginia                                          27,000
  Maryland                                          33,000
  Western States, including frosted                 65,000

  Total production                                 125,000
  Deficiency in the year's crop                     50,000

The quantity produced in the United States, in 1847, was 220,164,000
lbs., worth, at 5 cents per lb., nearly 11 million dollars (more than
two million sterling). The principal producing States were--Kentucky,
65 million lbs.; Virginia, 50 millions; Tennessee, 35 millions; North
Carolina, 14 millions; Ohio, 9 millions; Indiana, 4 millions;
Illinois, Connecticut, and a few others in smaller proportions.

The production in 1848 was 218,909,000 lbs., which, valued at four
cents per lb., would be worth nine million dollars. From persons
largely interested in the tobacco trade, and well informed in relation
thereto, I have gathered the following general statements:--

    The crops of tobacco to come to market in the year 1851, were
    estimated as  follows--

                                             hhds.
  Virginia                                  30,000
  Kentucky, Tennessee, and Missouri, about  50,000
  Maryland, about                           22,000
  Ohio, about                               14,000

    From the above estimate it will be seen that the quantity produced
    in 1850 is less than two-thirds of the usual production in the
    States named. The entire crop of Virginia will be required for home
    consumption. About 15,000 hhds. Kentucky, and 5,000 hhds. Maryland
    will also be wanted for home use. Owing to the increase of
    population by immigration and otherwise, the domestic consumption,
    which was a few years ago so small as not to be considered worthy of
    notice, has now increased to a very important item, and affords a
    steady home market for a large portion of the production.

    The quantity of Maryland tobacco left for export to Bremen and
    Holland, in 1851, will only be about 17,000 hhds., which is not more
    than half the amount usually shipped to these countries every year.

    Of the Kentucky tobacco contracted for last year by France and
    Spain, through their agents in this country, less than one third has
    yet been purchased, and those governments will this year require the
    deficiency to be made up, in addition to their annual average
    supply, which, with the quantity required for England, will take the
    entire crop, leaving nothing for the rest of Europe, Africa, South
    America, the West Indies, &c. The tobacco markets throughout the
    world are in a much more healthy condition than has ever been known,
    and it is thought prices will rule very high the coming season. In
    Maryland, while the production has been not more than half an
    average crop, the price is nearly three times as high as usual; so
    that the planter will receive more for his diminished crops than in
    ordinary seasons of plenty.

         QUANTITY OF TOBACCO EXPORTED ANNUALLY FROM 1821 TO 1850.

  Exports for Year ending     hhds.|Stocks in Europe, year ending  hhds.

  September 30th, 1821       66,850|  December 31st, 1821           --
      "      "    1822       83,169|     "      "    1822           --
      "      "    1823       99,000|     "      "    1823           --
      "      "    1824       77,889|     "      "    1824           --
      "      "    1825       75,986|     "      "    1825           --
      "      "    1826       64,099|     "      "    1826           --
      "      "    1827      100,020|     "      "    1827           --
      "      "    1828       96,279|     "      "    1828        69,485
      "      "    1829       77,136|     "      "    1829        63,670
      "      "    1830       83,810|     "      "    1830        50,672
      "      "    1831       86,718|     "      "    1831        54,690
      "      "    1832      106,800|     "      "    1832        61,868
      "      "    1833       83,153|     "      "    1833        50,543
      "      "    1834       87,979|     "      "    1834        53,413
      "      "    1835       94,353|     "      "    1835        57,458
      "      "    1836      109,042|     "      "    1836        68,918
      "      "    1837      100,232|     "      "    1837        38,703
      "      "    1838      100,593|     "      "    1838        31,067
      "      "    1839       78,995|     "      "    1839        38,715
      "      "    1840      119,484|     "      "    1840        37,623
      "      "    1841      147,828|     "      "    1841        50,880
      "      "    1842      158,710|     "      "    1842        62,496
  June 30 (9 ms.) 1843       94,454|     "      "    1843        91,196
      "  (12 ms.) 1844      163,042|     "      "    1844        88,973
      "      "    1845      147,168|     "      "    1845        91,213
      "      "    1846      147,998|     "      "    1846       100,774
      "      "    1847      135,762|     "      "    1847        88,858
      "      "    1848      130,665|     "      "    1848        80,391
      "      "    1849      101,521|     "      "    1849        70,527
      "      '    1850      145,729|     "      "    1850        66,777

    It is a curious fact that, notwithstanding the variety of climate
    and soil in the northern State;, every State and territory in the
    Union produces some tobacco. In many of the States its cultivation
    is, of course, a secondary object, and perhaps in several it is
    attended to as a mere matter of curiosity; but in most of the
    States, probably a sufficient quantity has been grown, to show that
    with attention to this object, it might, in case of necessity, be
    resorted to as a profitable crop. The States in which the great bulk
    of the crop is grown lie between the latitudes of about 34 and 40
    degrees.

    There is a considerable increase of consumption of American tobacco
    in Europe, as well as in the United States, which should encourage
    the planters of Virginia and North Carolina to cultivate this
    article more abundantly than they have done for several years past;
    and, since the home manufacture has increased so much, and the
    Virginia tobacco is preferred in many parts of the European markets,
    they may safely count on getting good prices for many years to come.

    It is not in the power of Virginia to make any three years together
    more than 56,000 hhds., even with good seasons, and 30,000 hhds.
    annually of this will be wanted by our manufacturers.

    The planters, then, should enrich their lands, and aim to make full
    crops.

    The increased consumption in Europe is three per cent., and in the
    United States four per cent. per annum.

    The crop of the United States from 1840 to 1850 inclusive--say 11
    years--averaged about 160,000 hhds.; this embraces the large crops
    of 1842-43-44.

    The consumption of Europe from 1829 to 1838 was 96,826 hhds.--it is
    now 130,000.

An account of the quantities of unmanufactured tobacco, manufactured
called negro-head, and cigars, imported into the United Kingdom in
1850:--

    Countries from whence imported.        Unmanufactured   Manufactured
  United States of America                   30,173,444      1,191,001
  Venezuela, New Granada and Ecuador            895,523            527
  Brazil                                         12,138         56,802
  Peru                                            8,649              6
  Cuba                                          589,627        153,819
  British West Indies, including Demerara
    and Honduras                                 26,169          3,242
  British Territories in the East Indies         14,500         25,332
  Philippine Islands                             12,233         51,210
  Hongkong and China                              2,706          2,340
  Turkey, Syria, and Egypt                      140,361          2,882
  Malta                                          13,028          7,818
  Italy, Sardinian Territories                  431,939             17
  Gibraltar                                           7          3,063
  Spain                                         307,641          1,100
  France                                         29,950          1,521
  Channel Islands                                   149          1,342
  Belgium                                        29,922          6,579
  Holland                                     2,418,732          9,078
  Hanseatic Towns                                50,610         36,680
  Other parts                                     8,930          1,980

  Total unmanufactured                       35,166,358      1,556,321
  Ditto manfactured                           1,556,321
                 Snuff                            1,197

  Total                                      36,723,876

From the tobacco circulars of Messrs. Clagett, Son, and Co., leading
brokers of London, dated Feb., 1st, 1850, I take the following
extracts:--

    The exhaustion of the stock has resulted from the concurrence of a
    gradually decreasing supply and increasing consumption, which may
    be very clearly perceived by a reference, first to the official
    returns from New Orleans of the yearly receipts of the western crops
    in each of the last seven years; and secondly, to the consumption of
    American tobacco in Great Britain and Ireland in the years 1847,
    1848, and 1849, as compared with that of 1840, 1841, and 1842. We
    have no means of exhibiting with similar accuracy the relative
    consumption of Continental Europe in the latter as compared with the
    former part of these last ten years, but it is quite reasonable to
    assume that the increase, where there has been little or no duty,
    must have gone on more rapidly than it has done here, under the
    restraining force of a duty of 800 to 900 per cent.

    The deliveries from London and Liverpool, independently of those
    from Scotland, Bristol, and Newcastle, for the use of Great Britain
    and Ireland, have been as follows:--In 1840, 15,037 hhds.; 1841,
    15,019 hhds.; 1842, 15,468 hhds.; 1847, 18,091 hhds.; 1848, 18,595
    hhds.; 1849, 18,738 hhds.

    The highest estimates we have seen of the whole of the crops of the
    United Slates in 1849, do not exceed 140,000 hhds., of which it is
    not doubted that fully 45,000 hhds. will be required for consumption
    there, and we estimate the supply required for the consumption of
    Europe, South America, the West Indies, and Africa, at certainly not
    less than 125,000 hhds.; if these estimates be realised in fact, it
    will follow that the stocks at the close of this year must be 30,000
    hhds. less than at the close of 1849.

    We estimate the present consumption of American tobacco in Great
    Britain and Ireland as follows:--

    The deliveries in London and Liverpool in 1849, were 18,738 hhds.;
    do. do. Bristol 1,400 hhds.; do. do. Scotland we assume at 2,800
    hhds. Total 22,939.

    Of Stripts, the deliveries in Liverpool last year were 8,544 hhds.,
    of which about 300 were for exportation; the deliveries, therefore,
    were--For the use of Great Britain and Ireland, 8,250 hhds. In
    London we have no account of the deliveries of stripts, as
    distinguished from leaf, for the whole of last year; it is doubtless
    less than that in Liverpool, and we assume it at 7,000 hhds.; in
    Bristol it was about 900 hhds.; in Scotland we assume it at 2,400
    hhds. Total 18,550 hhds.

    Now, assuming 1,500 hhds. of the deliveries in Scotland and Bristol
    to be included in the coastwise returns in London and Liverpool,
    then the consumption of Great Britain and Ireland would appear to be
    about 21,500 hhds. of American tobacco, and 17,000 for these to be
    stripts. The progressive increase which we have shown in the returns
    of 1849, as compared with those of 1840, must still go on.

    Without troubling you with any detail of the stocks in each of the
    several markets, it may be sufficient to show that the summary of
    the whole in all the markets of Europe, other than Great Britain,
    consisted on the 31st December, 1849, of about 22,000 hhds.; of
    which about 18,000 were Maryland and 2,000 stalks; and it is
    important to notice especially the fact, that the stocks of the
    manufacturers and dealers in Germany, Holland and Belgium are
    unusually small. We have taken very considerable care to inform
    ourselves on this point, and are fully satisfied that the usual
    stocks in second or dealers' hands do not exist. The whole demand of
    the year must, therefore, be supplied from those stocks in
    importers' hands, from England or from the United States.

    The following were the prices current in London in the spring of
    1853:--Virginia Leaf, common, per pound, 3¼d. to 3¾d.; middling, 5d.
    to 6d.; good and fine 6½d. to 7½d. Stripts, 5½d. to 10d. Kentucky
    Leaf: common 3d., to 3½d.; middling, 3¾d. to 4½d.; good and fine,
    5d. to 6d. Stripts, 5d. to 7d. Maryland, 3½d. to 9d. Negrohead and
    Cavendish: common and heated, 4d. to 6d.; middling to good, 6d. to
    8d. and 9d.; fine, 10d., 12d., 16d.; Barret's none. Columbian, 7d.
    to 1s. 8d.; Brazil, 3d. to 6d.; flat, 5d. to 1s. 1d.; Manilla, 7d.
    to 2s. 6d.; Havana, 10d. to 5s.; Yara, 11d. to 3s.; Cuba, 9d. to 1s.
    1d.; ingars, 3s. to 16s.; cheroots, Manilla, 7s. 6d., nominal;
    German and Amersfoort 4d. to 1s. 3d.; stalks, duty paid, 2s. 6d. to
    3s. 4d.; smalls, 2s. 9d to 2s.

    The shipments to Europe were 76,516 hhds. against 40,652 hhds. the
    previous year, and 43,576 hhds. in 1850. The rapidity of sales, the
    diminished stocks even now held in first hands, were taken as an
    infallible index of the progressive rate of consumption; and of a
    truth the quantity of hogsheads received in the principal markets of
    Belgium, Holland, Germany, and the North, and as speedily relieved
    from the control of the importers, was enough to control even those
    who were alive to the existing necessities of Europe, and to give a
    color to the rumour of almost inexhaustible consumption.

    This extraordinary demand for tobacco on the continent has been
    occasioned by three distinct causes; the first of which was the
    pressing wants which, for the last two years, were well known to
    have existed, and the constant willingness of consumers to act at
    the very moderate rates which prevailed some time last spring. The
    second was the compulsory purchases by the Austrian Government,
    amounting, it is estimated, to 20,000 hhds., by reason that the
    discontented Hungarians, for political considerations, abandoned
    altogether the cultivation of tobacco, and which deficiency was
    obliged to be replaced by American growths. The third cause also had
    a political origin: the anticipation of the extension of the
    Zollverein or German Customs League to the Kingdoms of Hanover and
    Oldenburg, whereby the duties on tobacco in those countries would be
    greatly increased, was a natural incentive to the dealers and
    manufacturers there to lay in heavy stocks, to reap the benefit
    thereon; and these last two causes, therefore, may be viewed in the
    light of fortuitous circumstances, which have fostered a speculation
    originally founded on the cheapness of money alone.

    It has been shown, and the statistics of the past year fully confirm
    the statement, that a plethora of money and prosperity among the
    middle classes of society, while it induces to the consumption of
    tobacco in general, rather curtails than otherwise the demand for
    American growths. A poor man addicted to smoking takes his pipe not
    from choice, but necessity; as he grows independent, the humble pipe
    is abandoned and the more costly cigar assumed. We have frequently
    heard this matter noticed, more especially after the disasters which
    followed the railway speculations of 1846, when the demand for
    English cigars sensibly declined; and we have now a further
    verification of the assertion in the opposite sense, the sales of
    cigar materials in Bremen having been extended more than 40 per
    cent, in three years, viz., from 94,750 bales and cases in 1850 to
    135,650 during last season.

    From New Orleans we learn that the arrivals from the interior since
    the 1st September had amounted to 18,043 hhds. against 5,165 hhds.
    last season, and the stock on hand was 24,128 hhds. against 7,927
    hhds. only.

    The shipments from Virginia during the past year exceeded 13,700
    hhds. In 1851 they were under 4,000 casks.

    From Baltimore 54,272 hhds. have been exported. The official figures
    for the previous year gave 35,967 as the total.

    The aggregate stock of tobacco on the 1st of January last, in the
    principal ports of America, was taken at 52,982 hhds. against 45,292
    the year before and the growth of the Western States, Virginia, and
    Maryland during 1852, to come forward for our supply the present
    season, is estimated at 185,000 hhds., notwithstanding all the
    unfavorable influences and curtailing causes which were said to have
    prevailed.

The method adopted of cultivating tobacco in Virginia is thus
described:

    Several rich, moist, but not too wet spots of ground are chosen out
    in the fall, each containing about a quarter of an acre or more,
    according to the magnitude of the crop, and the number of plants it
    may require.

    These spots, which are generally in the woods, are cleared, and
    covered with brush or timber, for five or six feet thick and
    upwards; this is suffered to remain upon it until the time when the
    tobacco seed must be sowed, which is within twelve days after
    Christmas. The evening is commonly chosen to set these places on
    fire, and when everything thereon is consumed to ashes, the ground
    is dug up, mixed with the ashes, and broken very fine. The tobacco
    seed, which is exceedingly small, being mixed with ashes also, is
    then sown and just raked in lightly; the whole is immediately
    covered with brushwood for shelter to keep it warm, and a slight
    fence thrown around it. In this condition it remains until the
    frosts are all gone, when the brush is taken off, and the young
    plants are exposed to the nutritive and genial warmth of the sun,
    which quickly invigorates them in an astonishing degree, and soon
    renders them strong and large enough to be removed for planting,
    especially if they be not sown too thick. Every tobacco planter,
    assiduous to secure a sufficient quantity of plants, generally has
    several of these plant beds in different situations, so that if one
    should fail, another may succeed; and an experienced planter
    commonly takes care to have ten times as many plants, as he can make
    use of.

    In these beds, along with the tobacco, they generally sow kale,
    colewort, and cabbage seed, &c., at the same time.

    There are seven different kinds of tobacco, particularly adapted to
    the different qualities of the soil on which they are cultivated,
    and each varying from the other. They are named Hudson, Frederick,
    Thick-joint, Shoe-string, Thickset, Sweet-scented, and Oronoko. But
    although these are the principal, yet there are a great many
    different species besides, with names peculiar to the situations,
    settlements and neighbourhoods wherein they are produced; which it
    would be too tedious here to specify and particularise. The soil for
    tobacco must be rich and strong; the ground is prepared in the
    following manner:--after being well broke up and by repeated
    working, either with the plough or hand hoes, rendered soft, light,
    and mellow, the whole field is made into hills, each to take up the
    space of three feet, and flattened at the top.

    In the first rains, which are here called seasons, after the vernal
    equinox, the tobacco plants are carefully drawn while the ground is
    soft; carried to the field where they are to be planted, and one
    dropped upon every hill, which is done by the negro children. The
    most skilful slaves then begin planting them, by making a hole with
    their finger in each hill, inserting the plant with the taproot
    carefully placed straight down, and pressing the earth on each side
    of it. This is continued as long as the ground is wet enough to
    enable the plants sufficiently grown to draw and set; and it
    requires several different seasons, or periods of rain, to enable
    them to complete planting their crop, which operation is frequently
    not finished until July.

    After the plants have taken root, and begin to grow, the ground is
    carefully weeded and worked, either with hand hoes or the plough,
    according as it will admit. After the plants have considerably
    increased in bulk, and begin to shoot up, the tops are pinched off,
    and only ten, twelve, or sixteen leaves left, according to the
    quality of the tobacco and the soil. The worms, also, are carefully
    picked off and destroyed, of which there are two species that prey
    upon tobacco. One is the ground worm, which cuts it off just beneath
    the surface of the earth; this must be carefully looked for and
    trodden to death; it is of a dark brown color, and short. The other
    is a horn worm, some inches in length, as thick as your little
    finger, of a vivid green color, with a number of pointed
    excrescences or feelers from his head like horns. These devour the
    leaf, and are always upon the plant. As it would be endless labor to
    keep their hands constantly in search of them, it would be almost
    impossible to prevent their eating up more than half the crop had it
    not been discovered that turkeys are particularly dexterous at
    finding them, eat them up voraciously, and prefer them to every
    other food. For this purpose every planter keeps a flock of turkeys,
    which he has driven into the tobacco grounds every day by a little
    negro that can do nothing else; these keep his tobacco more clear
    from horn worms than all the hands he has got could do were they
    employed solely for that end. When the tops are nipped off, a few
    plants are left untouched for seed. On the plants that have been
    topped, young shoots are apt to spring out, which are termed
    suckers, and are carefully and constantly broken off lest they
    should draw too much of the nourishment and substance from the
    leaves of the plant. This operation is also performed from time to
    time, and is called "suckering tobacco." For some time before it is
    ripe, or ready for cutting, the ground is perfectly covered with
    leaves, which have increased to a prodigious size, and then the
    plants are generally about three feet high. When it is ripe, a
    clammy moisture or exudation comes forth upon the leaves, which
    appear, as it were, ready to become spotted, and they are then of a
    great weight and substance. The tobacco is cut when the sun is
    powerful, but not in the morning and evening. The plant, if large,
    is split down the middle, and cut off two or three inches below the
    extremity of the split; it is then turned directly bottom upwards,
    for the sun to kill it more speedily, to enable the laborers to
    carry it out of the field, else the leaves would break off in
    transporting it to the scaffold. The plants are cut only as they
    become ripe, for a field never ripens altogether. There is generally
    a second cutting likewise, for the stalk vegetates and shoots forth
    again, and in good land, with favorable seasons, there is a third
    cutting also procured, notwithstanding acts of the Legislature to
    prevent cutting tobacco even a second time.

    When the tobacco plants are cut and brought to the scaffolds, which
    are generally erected all around the tobacco houses, they are placed
    with the split across a small oak stick, an inch and better in
    diameter and four feet and a half long, so close as each plant just
    to touch the other without bruising or pressing. These sticks are
    then placed on the scaffolds, with the tobacco thus suspended in the
    middle, to dry or cure, and are called tobacco sticks. As the plants
    advance in curing, the sticks are removed from the scaffolds out of
    doors into the tobacco house, on to other scaffolds erected therein
    in successive regular gradations from the bottom to the top of the
    roof, being placed higher as the tobacco approaches to a perfect
    cure, until the house is all filled and the tobacco quite cured, and
    this cure is frequently promoted by making fires on the floor below.
    When the tobacco house is quite full, and there is still more
    tobacco to bring in, all that is within the house is struck, and
    taken down, and carefully placed in bulks, or regular rows, one upon
    another, and the whole covered with trash tobacco, or straw, to
    preserve it in a proper condition, that is moist, which prevents its
    wasting and crumbling to pieces. But, to enable them to strike the
    cured tobacco, they must wait for what is there called a season,
    that is rainy or moist weather, when the plants will better bear
    handling, for in dry weather the leaves would all crumble to pieces
    in the attempt. By this means a tobacco house may be filled two,
    three, or four times in the year. Every night the negroes are sent
    to the tobacco house to strip, that is to pull off the leaves from
    the stalk, and tie them up in hands or bundles. This is also their
    daily occupation in rainy weather. In stripping, they are careful to
    throw away all the ground leaves and faulty tobacco, binding up none
    but what is merchantable. The hands or bundles thus tied up are also
    laid in what are called a bulk, and covered with the refuse tobacco
    or straw to preserve their moisture. After this, the tobacco is
    carefully packed in hogsheads, and pressed down with a large beam
    laid over it, on the ends of which prodigious weights are suspended,
    the other end being inserted with a mortice in a tree, close to
    which the hogshead is placed. This vast pressure is continued for
    some days, and then the cask is filled up again with tobacco until
    it will contain no more, after which it is headed up and carried to
    the pubic warehouses for inspection. At these warehouses two skilful
    planters constantly attend, and receive a salary from the public for
    that purpose. They are sworn to inspect with honesty, care, and
    impartiality, all the tobacco that comes to the warehouse, and none
    is allowed to be shipped that is not regularly inspected. The head
    of the cask is taken off, and the tobacco is opened by means of
    large, long iron wedges, and great labour, in such places as the
    inspectors direct. After this strict attentive examination, if they
    find it good and merchantable, it is replaced in the cask, weighed
    at the public scales, the weight of the tobacco and of the cask also
    cut in the wood on the cask, stowed away in the public warehouses,
    and a note given to the proprietor, which he disposes of to the
    merchant, and he neither sees nor has any trouble with his tobacco
    more. The weight of each hogshead must be 950 lbs. nett, exclusive
    of the cask--for less a note will not be given. Under the name of a
    crop hogshead, however, the general weight is from 1,000 to 1,200 or
    1,300 lbs. nett, but if the tobacco is found to be totally bad, and
    refused as unmerchantable, the whole is publicly burnt in a place
    set apart for that purpose. However, if it be judged that there is
    some merchantable tobacco in the hogshead, the owner must unpack the
    whole publicly on the spot, for he is not permitted to take any of
    it away again, and must select and separate the good from the bad;
    the last is immediately committed to the flames, and for the first
    he receives a transfer note, specifying the weight, quality, &c.
    This great and very laudable care was taken by the public to
    prevent frauds, which, however, was not always effectual, for, even
    with all these precautions, many acts of iniquity and imposition
    were committed.

So little is this crop cultivated in the States north of Maryland,
that scarcely any notice has been taken of it in the agricultural or
other public journals.

In Connecticut, in some few towns of Hartford county, considerable
attention has been directed to it for a number of years past. A ton
and a-half the acre is said to be no uncommon yield. The tobacco is
planted very thick, two feet and a half each way. The seed came
originally from Virginia. It is cured in houses, without having been
yellowed in the sun, and without the use of fire. It is said that the
best Havana cigars (as they are termed) are often manufactured from
mixed Cuba and American tobacco, and sold under that name in
Connecticut.

In the Connecticut Valley is produced about 500 tons of tobacco
annually, the average quantity, 1,500 lbs. per acre, value from seven
to ten cents per pound.

_Culture_.--Seed bed made rich and sown as cabbage early in April as
possible.

Land well ploughed and manured and harrowed as for corn, laid out in
rows three feet apart, and slight hills in the row about two and
a-half feet apart; begin to plant about 10th of June, the ground to be
kept clean with hoe and cultivator, and examine the plants and keep
clear of worms.

"When in blossom and before seed is formed, the plants must be topped
about thirty-two inches from the ground, having from sixteen to twenty
leaves on each stalk, after this the suckers are broken off, and the
plants kept clean till cut. When ripe the leaves are spotted, thick,
and will crack when pressed between the fingers and thumb. It is cut
at any time of the day, after the dew is off, left in the row till
wilted, then turned, and if there is a hot sun, it is often turned to
prevent burning; after wilting it is put into small heaps of six or
eight plants, then carried to the tobacco house for hanging, usually
on poles twelve feet long; hung with twine about forty plants to a
pole, twenty on each side, crossing the pole with a hitch knot to the
stump end of the plants; when perfectly cured, which is known by the
stems of the leaves being completely dry, it is then taken in a damp
time, when the leaves will not crumble, from the poles and placed in
large piles, by letting the tops of the plants lap each other, leaving
the butts out; it remains in these heaps from three to ten days before
it is stripped, depending on the state of weather, but it must not be
allowed to heat. When stripped it is made into small hands, the small
and broken leaves to be kept by themselves; it is then packed in boxes
of about 400 lbs. and marked "Seed Leaf Tobacco."

One acre of tobacco will require as much labor as two of corn that
produce 60 bags to the acre, and requires about the same quantity of
manure. If the tobacco can be cured without fire heat the quality
will be improved, and if dried in the open air, should have shades of
boards to keep off rain and excess of sun. The chief market for
Connecticut tobacco is Bremen.

In a number of the "Charleston Southern Planter," a remedy is
described for preventing the destruction of plants by the fly. The
writer says: "I had a bushel or two of dry ashes put into a large tub,
and added train oil enough (say one gallon of oil to the bushel of
ashes) to damp and flavor the ashes completely: this was well stirred
and mixed with the hand, and sown broadcast over certain patches, and
proved thoroughly effectual for several years, while parts left
without the remedy were destroyed."

The best ground for raising the plant, according to Capt. Carver
("Treatise on Culture of Tobacco," &c.), is a warm rich soil, not
subject to be overrun with weeds. The soil in which it grows in
Virginia is inclining to sandy, consequently warm and light; the
nearer, therefore, the nature of the land approaches to that, the
greater probability there is of its flourishing. The situation most
preferable for a plantation is the southern declivity of a hill, or a
spot sheltered from the blighting north winds. But at the same time
the plants must enjoy a free current of air; for if that be obstructed
they will not prosper.

The different sorts of seed not being distinguishable from each other,
nor the goodness to be ascertained by its appearance, great caution
should be used in obtaining the seed through some responsible
mercantile house, or individual of character.

Each capsule contains about a thousand seeds, and the whole produce of
a single plant has been estimated at 350,000. The seeds are usually
ripe in the month of September, and when perfectly dry may be rubbed
out and preserved in bags till the following season.

There is a large quantity of tobacco raised in the southern part of
Indiana annually, equal in quality to the tobacco raised in Kentucky.
In some counties the article is extensively cultivated, and generally
pays the producer a handsome profit on the labor bestowed on it. The
cultivation of it is becoming more extensive every year. Nearly all
this crop is taken to Louisville for sale, very little being shipped
south on account of the producer.

Heretofore, owing to the heaviness of tobacco and bad roads, the
producer has encountered great difficulties in getting his crop to
market. The hauling of a few hogsheads fifty or sixty miles, or even
forty, is no light job, even over good roads. Hence, tobacco has not
been as extensively cultivated as it would have been under different
circumstances. But, with the facilities afforded by the railroads in
carrying their crops to market, I doubt not the farmers of the
interior will more generally engage in the cultivation of tobacco, and
those who have been in the habit of raising small crops will extend
their operations.

In Maryland the seed is sown in beds of fine mould, and the plants
arising therefrom are transplanted in the beginning of May. They are
set at the distance of three or four feet apart, and are hilled, and
kept continually free from weeds. When as many leaves have shot out as
the soil will nourish to advantage, the top of the plant is broken
off, which of course prevents its growing higher. It is carefully kept
clear from worms, and the suckers which put out between the leaves are
taken off at proper times, till the plant arrives at perfection, which
is in August. When the leaves turn of a brownish color, and begin to
be spotted, the plants are cut down and hung up to dry, after having
sweated in heaps one night. When the leaves can be handled without
crumbling, which is always in moist weather, they are stripped from
the stalks, tied up in bundles, and packed for exportation in
hogsheads. No suckers nor ground leaves are allowed to be
merchantable. An industrious person may manage 6,000 plants of
tobacco, which will yield 1,000 lbs. of dried leaves, and also four
acres of Indian corn.

Miller, an American author, thus describes the mode of culture:--

    When a regular plantation of tobacco is intended, the beds being
    prepared and well turned up with the hoe, the seed, on account of
    its smallness and to prevent the ravages of ants, is mixed with
    ashes and sown upon them, a little before the rainy season. The beds
    are raked, or trampled with the foot, to make the seed take the
    sooner. The plants appear in two or three weeks. As soon as they
    have acquired four leaves, the strongest are carefully drawn up and
    planted in the field by a line, at a distance of about three feet
    from each other. If no rain fall, they should be watered two or
    three times. Every morning and evening the plants must he looked
    over in order to destroy a worm which sometimes invades the bud.
    When they are about four or five inches high, they are to be cleaned
    from weeds and moulded up. As soon as they have eight or nine
    leaves, and are ready to put forth a stalk, the top is nipped off in
    order to make the leaves longer and thicker. After this the buds
    which sprout at the joints of the leaves are also plucked off, and
    not a day is suffered to pass without examining the leaves to
    destroy the large caterpillar, which is often most destructive to
    them. When they are fit for cutting, which is known by the
    brittleness of the leaves, they are cut off with a knife close to
    the ground, and, after lying some time, are carried to the
    drying-shed or house, where the plants are hung up by pairs upon
    lines, leaving a space between, that they may not touch one another.
    When perfectly dry, the leaves are stripped from the stalks and made
    into small bundles, tied with one of the leaves. These bundles are
    laid in heaps and covered with blankets; care is taken not to
    overheat them, for which reason the heaps are laid open to the air
    from time to time, and spread abroad. This operation is repeated
    till no more heat is perceived in the heaps, and the tobacco is then
    ready for packing and shipping.

I have been favored by Mr. J. M. Hernandez, a Cuba planter, with some
valuable instructions for the cultivation of Cuba tobacco, which I
subjoin. These remarks apply principally to America, but most of the
advice and information will be found generally applicable to other
localities:--

    The first thing to be considered in this, as in every other culture,
    is the soil, which for this kind of tobacco (_N. repanda_) ought to
    be a rich, sandy, loam, neither too high nor too low--that is,
    ground capable of retaining moisture, the more level the better,
    and, if possible, well protected by margins. The next should be the
    selection of a spot of ground to make the necessary beds. It would
    be preferable to make those on land newly cleared, or, at all
    events, when the land has not been seeded with grass; for grass
    seeds springing up together with the tobacco would injure it
    materially, as the grass cannot be removed without disturbing the
    tobacco plants. In preparing the ground for the nurseries, break it
    up properly, grub up all the small stumps, dig out the roots, and
    carefully remove them with the hand. This being done, make the beds
    from three to four inches high, of a reasonable length, and from
    three to three and a-half feet broad, so as to enable the hand, at
    arm's length, to weed out the tender young plants with the fingers
    from both sides of the bed, and keep them perfectly clean.

    The months of December and January are the most proper for sowing
    the seed in Florida. Some persons speak of planting it as early as
    the month of November, I am, however, of opinion, that about the
    latter part of December is the best time to sow tobacco seed; any
    sooner would expose the plants to suffer from the inclemency of the
    most severe part of the winter season. Before the seed is sown take
    some dry trash and burn it off upon the nursery beds, to destroy
    insects and grass seeds; then take one ounce of tobacco seed and mix
    it with about a quart of dry ashes, so as to separate the seed as
    much; as possible, and sow it broadcast. After the seed has been
    thus sown, the surface of the bed ought to be raked over slightly,
    and trodden upon by the foot, carrying the weight of the body with
    it, that the ground may at once adhere closely to the seed, and then
    water it. Should the nursery-beds apparently become dry from
    blighting winds or other causes, watering will be absolutely
    necessary, for the ground ought to be kept in a moist state from the
    time the seed is planted until the young plants are large enough to
    be set out.

    The nurseries being made, proceed to prepare the land where the
    tobacco is to be set out. If the land is newly cleared--and new land
    is probably more favorable to the production of this plant than it
    is to that of any other, both as respects quality and
    quantity--remove as many of the stumps and roots as possible, and
    dig up the ground in such a manner as to render the surface
    perfectly loose; then level the ground, and in this state leave it
    until the nursery plants have acquired about one-half the growth
    necessary to admit of their being set out; then break up the ground
    a second time in the same manner as at first, as in this way all the
    small fibres of roots and their rooted parts will be more or less
    separated, and thus obviate much of that degree of sponginess so
    common to new land, and which is in a great measure the cause of new
    land seldom producing well the first year, as the soil does not lay
    close enough to the roots of the plants growing in it, so that a
    shower of rain produces no other effect than that of removing the
    earth still more from them.

    The ground having been prepared and properly levelled off, and the
    plants, sufficiently grown to be taken up--say of the size of good
    cabbage plants--take advantage of the first wet or cloudy weather to
    commence setting them out. This should be done with great care, and
    the plants put single at equal distances, that is, about three feet
    north and south, and two and a-half, or two and three-fourths feet
    east and west. They are placed thus close to each other to prevent
    the leaves growing too large. The direction of the rows, however,
    should alter according to the situation of the land; where it has
    any inclination, the widest space should run across it, as the bed
    will have to be made so as to prevent the soil from being washed
    from the roots by rain when bedded; but where the land is rather
    level, the three feet rows should be north and south, so as to give
    to the plants a more full effect on them by passing across the beds,
    than by crossing them in an oblique direction. To set the plants out
    regularly, take a task line of 105 feet in length, with a pointed
    stick three feet long attached to each end of it, then insert a
    small piece of rag or something else through the line at the
    distance of two feet and three-fourths from each other; place it
    north and south (or as the land may require), at full length, and
    then set a plant at every division, carefully keeping the bud of the
    plant above the surface of the ground. Then remove the line three
    feet from the first row, and so on, until the planting is completed.
    Care ought to be taken to prevent the stretching of the line from
    misplacing the plants. In this way the plants can be easily set out,
    and a proper direction given to them both ways. In taking the plants
    up from the nursery, the ground should be first loosened with a flat
    piece of wood or iron, about an inch broad; then carefully holding
    the leaves close towards each other between the fingers, draw them
    up, and place them in a basket or some other convenient thing to
    receive them for planting. After taking up those that can be planted
    during the day, water the nursery that the earth may again adhere to
    the remaining ones. The evening is the best time for setting out the
    plants, but where a large field has to be cultivated it will be well
    to plant both morning and evening. The plants set out in the
    morning, unless in rainy or cloudy weather, should be covered
    immediately, and the same should be done with those planted the
    evening previous, should the day open with a clear sunshine,--the
    palmetto leaf answers the purpose very well. There should be water
    convenient to the plants, so as to have them watered morning and
    evening, but more particularly in the evening, until they have taken
    root. They should also be closely examined when watered, so as to
    replace such plants as happen to die, that the ground may be
    properly occupied, and that all the plants may open as nearly
    together as possible.

    From the time the plants are set out, the earth around them should
    be occasionally stirred, both with the hand and hoe. At first hoe
    flat, but as soon as the leaves assume a growing disposition, begin
    gradually to draw a slight heel towards the plant. The plants must
    be closely examined, even while in the nursery, to destroy the
    numerous worms that feed upon them--some, by cutting the stalk and
    gnawing the leaves when first set out; these resemble the grub-worm,
    and are to be found near the injured plant, under ground; others,
    which come from the eggs deposited on the plant by the butterfly,
    and feed on the leaf, grow to a very large size, and look very ugly,
    and are commonly called the tobacco-worm. There is also a small worm
    which attacks the bud of the plant, and which is sure destruction to
    its further growth; and some again, though less destructive, are to
    be seen within the two coats of the leaf, feeding as it were on its
    juices alone. The worming should be strictly attended to every
    morning and evening, until the plants are pretty well grown, when
    every other day will be sufficient. The most proper persons for
    worming are either boys or girls from ten to fourteen years of age.
    They should be made to come to the tobacco ground early in the
    morning, and be led by inducements, such as giving a trifling reward
    to those who will bring the most worms, to clear it thoroughly.
    Grown persons would find it rather too tedious to stoop to examine
    the under part of every leaf, and seek the worm under ground: nor
    would they be so much alive to the value of a spoonful of sugar, or
    other light reward. Beside, where the former would make the search a
    matter of profit and pleasure, it would to the latter prove only a
    tedious and irksome occupation. Here I will observe, that it is for
    similar reasons that the culture of the Cuba tobacco plant more
    properly belongs to a white population, for there are few plants
    requiring more attention and tender treatment than it does. Indeed
    it will present a sorry appearance, unless the eye of its legitimate
    proprietor is constantly watching over it.

    When the plants have acquired from twelve to fourteen good leaves,
    and are about knee high, it may be well to begin to top them, by
    nipping off the bud with the aid of the finger and thumb nail
    (washing the hands after this in water is necessary, as the acid
    juices of the plants, otherwise, soon produce a soreness on the
    fingers), taking care not to destroy the small leaves immediately
    near the bud: for if the land is good and the season favorable,
    those very small top leaves will in a short time be nearly as large,
    and ripen quite as soon as the lower ones, whereby two or more
    leaves may be saved; thus obtaining from 16 to 18 leaves, in the
    place of 12 or 14, which is the general average. As the topping of
    the tobacco plant is all essential in order to promote the growth,
    and to equalise the ripening of the leaves, I would observe that
    this operation should at all events commence the instant that the
    bud of the plant shows a disposition to go to seed, and be
    immediately followed by removing the suckers, which it will now put
    out at every leaf. Indeed, the suckers should be removed from the
    plant as often as they appear. The tobacco plant ought never to be
    cut before it comes to full maturity, which is known by the leaves
    becoming mottled, coarse, and of a thick texture, and gummy to the
    touch, at which time the end of the leaf, by being doubled, will
    break short, which it will not do to the same extent when green. It
    ought not to be out in wet weather, when the leaves lose their
    natural gummy substance, so necessary to be preserved. About this
    period, the cultivator is apt to be rendered anxious by the fear of
    allowing the plants to remain in the field longer than necessary;
    until experience removes those apprehensions, he should be on his
    guard, however, not to destroy the quality of his tobacco, by
    cutting it too soon. When the cutting is to commence, there should
    be procured a quantity of forked stakes, set upright, with a pole or
    rider setting on each fork ready to support the tobacco, and to keep
    it from the ground. The plant is then cut obliquely, even with the
    surface of the ground, and the person thus employed should strike
    the lower end of the stalk, two or three times with the blunt side
    of his knife, so as to cause as much of the sand or soil to fall
    from it as possible, then tying two stalks together, they are gently
    placed across the riders or poles prepared to receive them. In this
    state they are allowed to remain in the sun or open air until the
    leaves have somewhat withered, whereby they will not be liable to
    the injury which they would otherwise receive, if they came suddenly
    in contact with other bodies when fresh cut. Then place as many
    plants on each pole or rider as may be conveniently carried, and
    take them in the drying house, where the tobacco is strung off upon
    the frames prepared for it, leaving a small space between the two
    plants, that air may circulate freely among them, and promote their
    drying. As the drying advances, the stalks are brought closer to
    each other, so as to make room for those which yet remain to be
    housed.

    In drying the tobacco, all damp air should be excluded, nor ought
    the drying of it to be precipitated by the admission of high drying
    winds. The process is to be promoted in the most moderate manner,
    except in the rainy season, when the sooner the drying is effected
    the better; for it is a plant easily affected by the changes of the
    weather, after the drying commences. It is then liable to mildew in
    damp weather, which is when the leaf changes from its original color
    to a pale yellow cast, and from this, by parts, to an even brown.
    When the middle stem is perfectly dry, it can be taken down, and the
    leaves stripped from the stalk and put in bulk to sweat, that is, to
    make tobacco of them; for before this process, when a concentration
    of its better qualities takes place, the leaves are always liable to
    be affected by the weather, and cannot well be considered as being
    anything else than common dry leaves, partaking of the nature of
    tobacco, but not actually tobacco. The leaves are to be stripped
    from the stalks in damp or cloudy weather, when they are more easily
    handled, and the separation of the different qualities rendered also
    more easy. The good leaves are at this time kept by themselves as
    wrappers, or caps, and the most defective ones for fillings, or
    _tripa_. When the tobacco is put in _bulk_, the stem of the leaves
    should all be kept in one direction, to facilitate the tying of them
    in hanks: afterwards make the bulk two of three feet high, and of a
    proportionate circumference. To guard against the leaves becoming
    over-heated, and to equalise the fermentation or sweating, after the
    first twenty-four hours, place the outside leaves in the centre, and
    those of the centre to the outside of the _bulk_. By doing this once
    or twice, and taking care to cover the _bulk_ either with sheets or
    blankets, so as to exclude all air from it, and leaving it in this
    state for about forty days, it acquires an odor strong enough to
    produce sneezing, and the other qualities of cured tobacco. The
    process of curing may then be considered as completed. Then take
    some of the most injured leaves, but of the best quality, and in
    proportion to the quantity of tobacco made, and place them in clean
    water, there let them remain until they rot, which they will do in
    about eight days; then break open your _bulks_, spread the tobacco
    with their stems in one direction, and damp them with this water in
    a gentle manner, that it may not soak through the leaf, for in this
    case the leaf would rot. Sponge is used in Cuba for this operation.
    Then tie them in hanks of from, twenty-five to thirty leaves; this
    being done, spread the hanks in the tobacco house for about twelve
    hours, to air them, that the dampness may be removed, and afterwards
    pack them in casks or barrels, and head them tight, until you wish
    to manufacture them.

    The object of damping the tobacco with this water, is to give it
    elasticity, to promote its burning free, to increase its fragrance;
    to give it an aromatic smell, and to keep it always soft. This is
    the great secret of curing tobacco for cigars properly, and for
    which we are indebted to the people of Cuba, who certainly
    understand the mode of curing this kind of tobacco better than other
    people. It is to them a source of great wealth, and may be made
    equally so to others. We have here three cuttings from the original
    plants; the last cutting will be of rather a weak quality, but
    which, nevertheless, will be agreeable to those who confine their
    smoking to weak tobacco.

    In ratooning the plant, only one sprout ought to be allowed to grow,
    and this from those most deeply rooted; all other sprouts ought to
    be destroyed.

    The houses necessary for the curing of tobacco ought to be roomy,
    with a passage way running through the centre, from one extremity of
    the building to the other, and pierced on both sides with a
    sufficient number of doors and windows to make them perfectly airy.

    In addition to what I have said respecting the mode of cultivating
    and treating the tobacco plant, I have further to state, that when
    once the plant is allowed to be checked in its growth, it never
    again recovers it. That in promoting the drying of the leaf, fire
    should not be resorted to, because the smoke would impart to it a
    flavor that would injure that of the tobacco itself.

    In order to obtain vigorous plants, the seed ought to be procured
    from the original stalk, and not from the ratoons, by allowing some
    of them to go to seed for that express purpose. In Cuba, the seed is
    most generally saved from the ratoon plants, but we should consider
    that that climate and soil are probably more favorable to the
    production of the plant than America, and consequently we ought to
    confide in the best seed, which is had from the original stalk.

    All plants have their peculiar empire: nevertheless, we should not
    be deterred from planting Cuba tobacco here; for even if we should
    be compelled to import the seed every third year, which would be as
    often as necessary, it would still prove a profitable culture.
    Taking 600 lbs., which is the average product per acre, it would
    yield, if well cured, at 50 cents, per lb., 300 dollars in the leaf.

    The following exhibits the profit to be derived from it when
    manufactured into cigars:--

                                                                 Dls.    Dls.
  Six hundred pounds, allowing eight pounds to the 1.000, would
  produce 75,000 cigars, which at ten dollars per thousand               750.00
  Cost of the leaf                                               300.00
  Worth of manufacture, at two dollars fifty cents per thousand  187.50  487.50

  Difference in favor of manufacturer                                    262.50

    This amount being the profits of the manufacturer alone, the profit
    to him who could combine both pursuits would be more than doubled.

    As to the quantity of land which can be cultivated to the hand,
    there is some difference in the practice of planters; however, I
    think that I am within the usual calculation in saying, that an acre
    and a half would not exceed the quantity that an able hand can
    easily cultivate and manage properly.

"With reference to the cultivation of Spanish tobacco from the seed,
the following remarks are also made by a gentleman residing in
Maryland:--

    My experience for some years in the cultivation and manufacture of
    Spanish tobacco into cigars, convinces me that the first-rate
    variety of Spanish tobacco--that is, the most odorous and fine--will
    bear reproduction in our climate twice, without much deterioration;
    by that time it becomes acidulated and worthless as Spanish tobacco.
    For seven years I have imported annually first seed from Cuba, but
    have occasionally made experiments with reproduced seed, and I have
    arrived at the conclusion above stated. I have obtained, annually, a
    cigar maker from Baltimore, who has made for me on my farm, and from
    Spanish tobacco. These produced about the average of 70,000 cigars,
    per year; they have been sold in Baltimore and Philadelphia for five
    dollars the half box, that is ten dollars the thousand. The tobacco
    has been uniformly admired, but in former years they have been very
    badly made; for the last two years, (writing in 1843,) my crops were
    destroyed by the unfavorable weather. This growth and manufacture do
    not interfere with my cultivation of other crops; in fact they are
    wholly unconnected with the other operations of the farmer." He
    mentions having obtained a premium from an agricultural society, for
    having produced on one and a half acres, growth and manufacture
    included, of Spanish tobacco 504 dollars net profit.

The following letter from Mr. Clarke, to the Hon. H. L. Ellsworth,
Washington, speaks favorably of a new variety of tobacco:--

    Willow Grove, Orange County, Virginia,

    Feb. 13, 1844.

    Dear Sir,--Agreeably to my promise I enclose you the Californian
    tobacco seed. It grew from the small parcel given to me by Mr. Wm.
    Smith, in your office in March last. On getting home, although late,
    I prepared a bed, and sowed the small parcel, the first week in
    April, and not having seed enough to finish the bed, sowed the
    balance of the bed in Oronoko tobacco seed, and to my astonishment
    the Californian plants were soon ready to set out, as soon as the
    other kinds of tobacco sown in the month of January; and the Oronoko
    seed, that was sown with the Californian, did not arrive to
    sufficient size until it was too late to set out. The Californian
    tobacco, if it continues to ripen and grow for the time to come, as
    it did for me on the first trial, must come into general use--first,
    because the plants are much earlier in the spring (say ten days at
    least), than any kind we have; secondly, when transplanted, the
    growth is remarkably quick, matures and ripens at least from ten to
    fifteen days earlier than any kind of tobacco we have in use amongst
    us. It is a large broad, silky leaf, of fine texture, and of a
    beautiful color, and some plants grow as large as seven feet across,
    from point to point; upon the whole, I consider it a valuable
    acquisition to the planting community.

Tobacco is one of the chief staples of Cuba. There are many qualities,
but it is usually classed into two kinds. That which is raised on the
western end of the island and is unequalled for smoking, is called
"Vuelta abajo." That which is raised east of Havana, is called "Vuelta
arriba," and is far inferior to the former.

The best Havana tobacco farms are confined to a very narrow area on
the south west part of Cuba. This district, twenty-seven leagues long
and only seven broad, is bounded on the north by mountains, on the
south and west by the ocean, whilst eastward, though there is no
natural limit, the tobacco sensibly degenerates in quality. A light
sandy soil and rather low situation suit the best.

The "Vuelta abajo" is usually divided into five classes.

  Calidad or Libra.
  Ynjuriado Principal or Firsts.
  Segundas or Seconds.
  Terceiras or Thirds.
  Cuartas or Fourths.

Calidad is the best tobacco, selected for its good color, flavor,
elasticity and entireness of the leaves. The bales contain sixty hands
of four gabillas, or fingers of twenty-five leaves each, and are
marked L.60. Ynjuriado Principal has less flavor, and is usually of a
lighter color. The leaves should be whole and somewhat elastic. The
bales contain eighty hands of four gabillas, or thirty leaves each,
and are marked B. 80. Segundas is the most inferior class of wrapper.
There are many good leaves in it, but the hands are usually made up of
those which are stained, have a bad color, or have been slightly
touched by the worm. The bales contain eighty hands of four gabillas
of thirty-six to forty leaves each, and are marked Y. 2a. 80.

Terceiras is the best tilling, and much wrapper can usually be
selected from it when new. The bales contain eighty hands of four
gabillas of more than forty leaves each, and are marked 3a. 80.

Cuartas is the most inferior class, fit only for filling. The bales
contain eighty hands of four gabillas of no determined number of
leaves, and are marked 4a. 80.

The Vuelta arriba tobacco is prepared in a similar manner, but neither
its color or flavor is good, and it does not burn well.

The crop is gathered in the spring, and usually begins to appear at
market in July. Good tobacco should be aromatic, of a rich brown
color, without stains, and the leaf thin and elastic. It should burn
well and the taste should be neither bitter nor biting. The best is
grown on the margins of rivers which are periodically overflowed, and
is called "De rio." It is distinguished from other tobacco by a fine
sand, which is found in the creases of the leaves.

The tobacco plantations in Cuba increased in number from 5,534 in
1827, to 9,102 in 1846. The production of tobacco has nearly doubled
in the province, of which St. Jago is the port, in the last ten years.

The following figures show the exports from the Havana:--

                    Leaf tobacco.                Cigars.
  1840           1,031,136 lbs.           147,818 thousand.
  1841           1,460,302   "            161,928       "
  1842           1,053,161   "            135,127       "
  1843           2,125,805   "            153,227       "
  1844           1,197,136   "            147,825       "
  1845           1,621,889   "            120,352       "
  1846           4,066,262   "            158,841       "
  1847           1,936,829   "          1,982,267       "
  1848           1,350,815   "            150,729       "
  1849           1,158,265   "            111,572       "

The class of tobacco shipped at the port of Havana, is not the same as
that gathered in the districts from which the manufacturers of cigars
there receive their supplies--it would cost too dear. However, it is
not a rare occurrence to find among a number of bales a few of a
quality about equal to that employed there, and this happens in years
when the crop has been very abundant, as in 1846 and 1848. The various
classes are paid in proportion to the capa, or outside leaves, which
are found in an assortment; the three first classes are employed as
covers, and often, if the tobacco is new, they may be found in the
fourth and even in the fifth. In parcels well assorted, one-fourth is
composed of capa--say, first, second, and third, and the rest is
composed of tripa, or interior of the cigar. In the first-named, there
generally comes more of the _capa_ than is necessary to use; the
remaining bales, which contain the inferior class, are fit only for
fillings.

The following is an analysis of the ashes of Havana tobacco:--

  Salts of potash             24.30
  Salts of lime and magnesia  67.40
  Silica                       8.30

                             100.00


  Hayti exported in 1836    1,222,716 lbs.
  Porto Rico, in 1839          43,203 cwt.

The French have been so successful in cultivating tobacco, in their
possessions in Northern Africa, that they hope soon to be independent
of the foreign grown article. The mode of preparing it, however, is
not very well understood by the colonists. In 1851, the number of
planters in Algeria was only 137, whereas in 1852, it was 1,073. The
number of hectares under culture with the tobacco plant was 446 in
1851, and 1,095 in 1852. The total of the present year's crop is
estimated at 1,780,000 kilogrammes, of which 700,000 kilogrammes have
been grown by the natives, and the rest by Europeans.

In the province of Algiers alone, the quantity of tobacco sold will
amount to 550,000 kilogrammes, which is nearly three times as much as
in 1851, and an equal progression has taken place in the provinces of
Oran, and Constantina.

The cultivation of tobacco in Algeria has proved most successful; in
1851, only 264,912 kilogrammes were produced; in 1852, the quantity
had risen to 735,199 kilogrammes. There are two crops in the year, the
first being the best, but even this is capable of almost indefinite
augmentation.


CULTURE OF TOBACCO IN THE EAST.

Having touched upon the practice of culture in the western world, we
will now bend our steps towards the east, and it may be curious to
notice the method pursued in cultivating and curing the celebrated
Shiraz tobacco of Persia (_Nicotiana Persica_), which is so much
esteemed for the delicacy of its flavor, and its aromatic quality. It
is thus described by an intelligent traveller. The culture of the
plant, it will be seen, is nearly the same; it is only the preparation
of the tobacco that forms the difference:--

    In December the seed is sown in a dark soil, which, has been
    slightly manured (red clayey soils will not do). To protect the
    seed, and to keep it warm, the ground is covered with light, thorny
    bushes, which are removed when the plants are three or four inches
    high; and during this period, the plants are watered every four or
    five days, only however in the event of sufficient rain to keep the
    soil well moistened not falling. The ground must be kept wet until
    the plants are six to eight inches high, when they are transplanted
    into a well moistened soil, which has been made into trenches for
    them; the plants being put on the top of the ridges ten or twelve
    inches apart, while the trenched plots are made, so as to retain the
    water given. The day they are transplanted, water must be given to
    them, and also every five or six days subsequently, unless rain
    enough falls to render this unnecessary. When the plants have become
    from thirty to forty inches high, the leaves will be from three to
    fifteen inches long. At this period, or when the flowers are
    forming, all the flower capsules are pinched or twisted off. After
    this operation and watering being continued, the leaves increase in
    size and thickness until the month of August or September, when
    each plant is cut off close to the root, and again stuck firmly into
    the ground. At this season of the year, heavy dews fall during the
    night; when exposed to these the color of the leaves change from
    green to the desired yellow. During this stage, of course no water
    is given to the soil. When the leaves are sufficiently yellow, the
    plants are taken from the earth early in the morning, and while they
    are yet wet from the dew, are heaped on each other in a high shed,
    the walls of which are made with light thorny bushes, where they are
    freely exposed to the wind. While there, and generally in four or
    five days, those leaves which are still green become of the desired
    pale yellow color. The stalks and centre stem of each leaf are now
    removed, and thrown away, the leaves are heaped together in the
    drying house for three or four days more, when they are in a fit
    state for packing. For this operation the leaves are carefully
    spread on each other and formed into sorts of cakes, the
    circumference from four to five feet, and three to four inches
    thick, great care being taken not to break or injure the leaves.

    Bags made of strong cloth, but thin and very open at the sides, are
    filled with these cakes, and pressed very strongly down on each
    other; the leaves would be broken if this were not attended to. When
    the bags are filled, they are placed separately in a drying house,
    and turned daily. If the leaves were so dry that there would be a
    risk of their breaking during the operation of packing, a very
    slight sprinkling of water is given them to enable them to withstand
    it without injury. The leaf is valued for being thick, tough, and of
    a uniform light yellow color, and of an agreeable aromatic smell.

In India, the Surat, Bilsah, and Sandoway (Arracan) varieties of
tobacco are the most celebrated. The two first are found to be good
for cultivation in the district about Calcutta, but the Cabool is
still more to be preferred. Tobacco requires in the East, for its
growth, a soil as fertile and as well manured as for the production of
the poppy or opium. It is, therefore, often planted in the spaces
enriched by animal and vegetable exuviæ, among the huts of the
natives. I have tried seed in different soils, says Capt. C.
Cowles,--namely a light garden mould with a large portion of old house
rubbish, dug to a good depth, which had a top dressing of the
sweepings of the farm-yard and cow-houses; a rather heavy loam, highly
manured with burnt and decayed vegetables, and old cow dung; the third
was a patch of ground, which was originally an unwholesome swamp, from
being eighteen inches to two feet, lower than the surrounding land;
the soil appeared to be a hard sterile clay, and covered with long
coarse grass and rushes. As there was a tank near it, I cut away one
side of it, and threw the soil over the ground, bringing it rather
above the level. Such was its appearance, (a hard compost marly clay,)
that I expected no other good from it than that of raising the land so
as to throw the water off; contrary, however, to my expectations, it
produced a much finer crop of tobacco than either of the other soils,
and with somewhat less manure. The agricultural process is limited to
some practical laws founded on experience, and these are subject to
two principal agents; viz., the soil and climate. With respect to the
former, it is the practice amongst the growers in tobacco countries,
such as Cuba, the States of Virginia, North and South Carolina, and
the Philippine Islands, to select a high and dry piece of land, of a
siliceous nature, and combined with iron, if possible; and with
respect to the latter, there are seasons of the year too well known
to the planters to need any explanation. The only difference (if there
is any) depends on the geographical situation of the place, with
respect to its temperature, or in the backwardness or advancement of
seasons, and even on the duration of the same--in which circumstances
the planter takes advantage of the one for the other.

The influence of a burning climate may be modified by choosing the
coolest month of the year, whereas the soil cannot be altered without
incurring great expense. I have seen tobacco lose its natural quality
and degenerate by transplanting from one soil to another, although of
the same temperature, and _vice versa_.

Mr. Piddington has analysed several Indian soils, distinguished for
the production of superior tobacco. These are the table soils from
Arracan, (Sandoway,) a soil from Singour, in Burdwan, near
Chandernagore, the tobacco of which, though of the same species as
that of the surrounding country, sells at the price of the Arracan
sort; and the soil of the best Bengal tobacco, which is grown at, and
about Hingalee, in the Kishnagur district.

The best tobacco soils of Cuba and Manila, are for the most part red
soils. Now, the red and reddish soils contain most of their iron in
the state of peroxide, or the reddish brown oxide of iron; while the
lighter grey soils contain it only in the state of protoxide, or the
black oxide of iron. Mr. Piddington believes the quality of the
tobacco to depend mainly on the state and quantity of the iron of the
soil, while it is indifferent about the lime, which is so essential to
cotton. None of the tobacco soils contain any lime. Their analysis
show them to contain:--


                              Arracan soil.   Singour soil.  Hingalee soil.
  Oxide or iron, (peroxide)      15,65           10,60           6,00
  Water and saline matter         1,10              75           1,50
  Vegetable matter and fibre      3,75            1,10             75
  Silex                          76,90           80,65          87,25
  Alumina                         2,00            4,50           1,50

                                 99,40           97,60          97,00
  Water and loss                    60            2,40           3,00

                                   100             100            100

From which it will be seen that the best tobacco soil hitherto found
in India contains about sixteen per cent., or nearly one-sixth, of
iron, which is mostly in a state of peroxide; and that the inferior
sort of tobacco grows in a soil containing only six per cent., or
one-sixteenth of iron, which is, moreover, mostly in the state of
protoxide, or black oxide. Mr. Piddington thought it worth examining
what the quantity of iron in the different sorts of tobacco would be,
and found that while the ashes of one ounce, or 480 grains of Havana
and Sandoway cheroots gave exactly 1.94 grains, or 0.40 per cent., of
peroxide of iron the ashes of the same quantity of the Hingalee, or
best Bengal tobacco, only gave 1.50 grains, or 0.32 per cent.; and it
appears to exist in the first two in a state of peroxide, and in the
last as a protoxide of iron; rendering it highly probable that the
flavor of the tobacco to the smoker depends on the state and quantity
of the iron it contains! Green copperas water, which is a solution of
sulphate of iron, is often used by the American and English
tobacconists and planters, to colour and flavor their tobacco; and
this would be decomposed by the potass of the tobacco, and sulphate of
potass and carbonate of iron is formed. Carbonate of iron is of an
ochre-yellow color. Mr. Piddington says he took care to ascertain that
this process had not been performed with the tobacco used for this
experiment; and adds that Bengal cheroot makers do not know of this
method. Mr. Laidley, of Gonitea, dissents from the idea suggested by
Mr. Piddington that ferruginous matter in the soil is essential to the
successful growth of tobacco. He observes that if we attend only to
the iron contained, why every plant will be found to require a
ferruginous soil; but tobacco contains a notable quantity of nitrate
of potass and muriate of ammonia (the latter a most rare ingredient in
plants), and these two salts are infinitely more likely to affect the
flavor of the leaf than a small portion of oxide of iron, an inert
body. Now as neither of these can be supplied by the atmosphere, we
must search for them in the soil, and accordingly he imagined that a
compost similar to the saltpetre beds which Napoleon employed so
extensively in France, would be a good manure for tobacco lands;
namely, calcareous matter, such as old mortar, dung, and the ashes of
weeds or wood. He was aware that good tobacco might be grown in
Beerbhoom, having raised some himself several years ago from American
seed. The plants grew most vigorously, and he further observed, in
confirmation of his opinion about the proper manure, that in other
districts in which he had resided the natives always grew the tobacco
(each for his own use) upon the heap of rubbish at his door,
consisting of ashes, cow-dung, and offal of all kinds. While the soil
of the Gangetic diluvium almost always contains carbonate of lime, the
Beerbhoom soil does not, as far at least as Mr. Laidley had examined
it.

The following is the mode of culture pursued about the city of
Coimbetore. Between the middle of August and the same time in
September, a plot of ground is hoed and embanked into small squares;
in these the seed is sown, and covered by hand three times at
intervals of ten days. To secure a succession of seedlings water is
then given, and the sun's rays moderated by a covering of bushes.
Watering is repeated every day for a month, and then only every fifth
day. The field in which the seedlings are transplanted, is manured and
ploughed at the end of August. Cattle are also folded upon the ground.
Four or five ploughings are given between mid September and the middle
of October, when the field is divided as above into small squares.
These are watered until the soil is rendered a mud. Plants of the
first sowing are then inserted at the end of September, about a cubit
apart, the transplanting being done in the afternoon. At intervals of
ten days the seedlings of the other two sowings are removed. A month
after being transplanted the field is hoed, and after another month
the leading shoot of each plant is pinched off, so as to leave them
not more than a cubit high. Three times during the next month all side
shoots thrown out are removed. When four months old, the crop is ready
for cutting. To render the leaves sweet the field is watered, and the
plants cut down close to the surface, being allowed to remain when cut
until next morning. Their roots are tied to a rope and suspended round
the hedges. In fine weather the leaves are dry in ten days, but if
cloudy they require five more days. They are then heaped up under a
roof, which is covered with bushes and pressed with stones for five
days. After this the leaves are removed from the stems, tied in
bunches, heaped again, and pressed for four days longer. They are now
tied in bundles, partly of the small leaf and partly of the large leaf
bundles, and again put in heaps for ten days--once during the time the
heaps being opened and piled afresh. This completes the drying. A
thousand bundles, weighing about 570 lbs., is a good produce for an
acre.

In 1760, Ceylon produced a considerable quantity of tobacco,
principally about Jaffna, a demand having sprung up for it in
Travancore, and on the Malay coast. The cultivation spread to other
districts of the island, Negombo, Chilaw, and Matura. Not long after
the possession of the island by the British, a monopoly was created by
an import duty of 25 per cent., _ad valorem_, and in 1811 the growers
were compelled to deliver their tobacco into the Government stores at
certain fixed rates. The culture and demand thereupon decreased. In
1853, the duty on the exports of tobacco from this island amounted to
£8,386, and in 1836 to £9,514.

Ceylon now exports a considerable quantity of tobacco. The value of
that exported in 1844 was nearly £18,000: it went exclusively to
British colonies. The shipments since have been as follows:--

  1848   £17,992      ----
  1849    22,300      ----
  1850    20,721   22,184 cwts.
  1851    21,422   22,523   "
  1852    20,531   21,955   "

About 96,000 piculs of cigars, of five different qualities, are
exported annually from Siam. A good deal of very fine tobacco is grown
in the Philippines, and the Manila cheroots are celebrated all over
the globe. The quantity of raw tobacco shipped from Manila in 1847 was
92,106 arrobas (each about a quarter of a cwt.); manufactured tobacco,
12,054 arrobas; and 1,933 cases of cigars. 5,220 boxes of cigars were
shipped from Manila in 1844. 73,439 millions of cigars were shipped in
1850, and 42,629 quintals of leaf tobacco.

The manufacture of cigars in Manila is a monopoly of the government,
and not only is this the case, but it is a monopoly of the closest
description, and any infringement of the assumed rights of the Spanish
Indian government is visited by the most severe penalties. Public
enterprise, however little of that commodity there now exists in the
Spanish character, is thus kept down; and this is not only detrimental
to the nation itself, but is also unjust towards those persons who are
the purchasers of the article, enhanced in price, as is always the
case, by monopoly. The cheroot, which now costs, free of duty, about
one halfpenny, could be rendered for half that sum, according to
well-authenticated opinions. To protect itself from illicit
manufacturers, or smuggling of any kind in connection with cigars, the
government is compelled to maintain an army of gendarmes, in order to
adopt the most stringent means which despotic states alone tolerate.
No person is, therefore, permitted to have even the tobacco leaf in
its raw state on his premises, and gendarmes pay, at stated intervals,
domiciliary visits to the habitations of the people, in search of any
contraband materials. There are several extensive manufactories of
cigars and cheroots belonging to the government in and near Manila.
Mr. Mac Micking, in his recent work on the Philippines, thus describes
the mode of manufacture by those employed by the government:--

    In making cheroots women only are employed, the number of those so
    engaged in the factory at Manila being generally about 4,000. Beside
    these, a large body of men are employed at another place in the
    composition of cigarillos, or small cigars, kept together by an
    envelope of white paper in place of tobacco; these being the
    description most smoked by the Indians. The flavor of Manila
    cheroots is peculiar to themselves, being quite different from that
    made of any other sort of tobacco; the greatest characteristic
    probably being its slightly soporific tendency, which has caused
    many persons in the habit of using it to imagine that opium is
    employed in the preparatory treatment of the tobacco, which,
    however, is not the case.

    The cigars are made up by the hands of women in large rooms of the
    factory, each of them containing from 800 to 1,000 souls. These are
    all seated, or squatted, Indian like, on their haunches, upon the
    floor, round tables, at each of which there is an old woman
    presiding to keep the young ones in order, about a dozen of them
    being the complement of a table. All of them are supplied with a
    certain weight of tobacco, of the first, second, or third qualities
    used in composing a cigar, and are obliged to account for a
    proportionate number of cheroots, the weight and size of which are
    by these means kept equal. As they use stones for beating out the
    leaf on the wooden tables before which they are seated, the noise
    produced by them while making them up is deafening, and generally
    sufficient to make no one desirous of protracting a visit to the
    place. The workers are well recompensed by the government, as very
    many of them earn from six to ten dollars a month for their labor;
    and as that amount is amply sufficient to provide them with all
    their comforts, and to leave a large balance for their expenses in
    dress, &c., they are seldom very constant laborers, and never enter
    the factory on Sundays, or, at least, on as great an annual number
    of feast days as there are Sundays in a year.

The Japanese grow a good deal of tobacco for their own consumption,
which is very considerable. They consider that from Sasma as the best,
then that from Nangasakay, Sinday, &c. The worst comes from the
province of Tzyngaru; it is strong, of a black color, and has a
disgusting taste and smell. The tobacco from Sasma is, indeed, also
strong, but it has an agreeable taste and smell, and is of a bright
yellow color. The tobacco from Nangasakay is very weak, in taste and
smell perhaps the best, and of a bright brown color. The tobacco from
Sinday is very good. The Japanese manufacture the tobacco so well,
says Capt. Golownin, (Recollections of Japan,) that though I was
before no friend to smoking, and even when I was at Jamaica could but
seldom persuade myself to smoke an Havana cigar, yet I smoked the
Japanese tobacco very frequently, and with great pleasure.

The culture of tobacco is a very profitable article for the laborers,
seeing that the produce is obtained from grounds which have already
given the first crop. The qualities of Java tobacco are more and more
prized in the European markets, the preparation and assortment are not
yet all that could be desired, but they have progressed in this
branch, and the contracts made with the new adventurers assure them of
a considerable benefit. But before the Java tobaccos can find an
assured opening in the European markets, it is necessary that the
cultivators should make use of seed from the Havana or Manila. The
residencies of Rembang, Sourabaya, Samarang, Chinbou, and Tagal,
present districts suited for its culture; it has been carried on with
success for a good many years in the residencies of Treanger,
Pakalongan, and Kedu, but only for the consumption of the interior,
and of the Archipelago.

Tobacco is cultivated in Celebes, but merely in sufficient quantity
for local consumption. It is exclusively grown by the Bantik
population--the mode of preparation is the same as in Java; it is
chopped very fine and mostly flavored with arrack. When bought in
large quantities, it may be had for thirty cents the pound; but in
smaller quantities it costs double that price.

Tobacco is cultivated in New South Wales with much success. Australia
produces a leaf equal to Virginia, or the most fertile parts of
Kentucky, but the great difficulty is to extract the superabundant
"nitre." The first crop in New South Wales exceeds one ton per acre,
and the second crop off the same plants, yields about half the weight
of the first. In 1844 there were about 871 acres in cultivation in New
South Wales with tobacco, and the produce was returned at 6,382 cwts.
In New England, New South Wales, as fine a "fig" as could be wished
for is manufactured under the superintendence of a thorough-bred
Virginia tobacco manufacturer--but the impossibility of extracting the
nitre by the heating, or any other process, renders the flavor rank
and disagreeable. Perhaps cheroots, or the lower numbers of cigars,
manufactured from the Australian leaf, might prove more successful.

In Sydney the time for sowing tobacco seed is September, but in Van
Diemen's Land it should be a month later, as tobacco plants cannot
stand the frost. The ground should be made fine, and in narrow beds
three feet wide from path to path, to allow for weeding without
stepping on the beds. The seed, being small, should not be raked in;
but after the ground is raked fine, and perfectly clean, and well
pulverised, mix the seed with wood ashes, and sow over the beds, and
pat in with the spade, or tread in with the naked feet, which is
preferable. The ground should be moist, but not much watered, or it
moulds the plants. When about as large as moderate sized cabbage
plants, they should be put out--three feet or three feet six in the
rows, and five feet apart between the rows. When the plant rises to
about two feet high, it will throw out suckers at each leaf, which
must be carefully taken off with the finger and thumb, and all bottom
and decayed leaves that touch the ground taken off. When the tobacco
plant throws out flower, it must be topped off, leaving about twelve
leaves in the stalk to ripen and come to maturity. When the leaves
feel thick between the finger and thumb, and assume a mottled
appearance, they are fit to cut.

In "Tegg's New South Wales Almanac" it is stated that the end of July
is the usual time for sowing the seed. In order, however, to prevent
the plants from being subsequently destroyed by frost, care must be
taken not to sow the seed until the frost has ceased in any respective
locality (unless raised in a frame). Tobacco requires a rich light
soil, and well manured.

By the instructions for cultivating it, the plant must be three feet
apart each way, which would give 4,840 plants to an acre; assuming
that each plant would yield half a pound for the first crop, this
would give 2,420 lbs. to an acre, which is only 180 lbs. in excess of
a ton. In New South Wales several parties use the tobacco stems for
sheep wash. One pound of tobacco is sufficient to wash five sheep on
an average (one washing), which would give 12,100 sheep to one acre.

Assuming that only one crop was grown in New Zealand in one year, of
2,420 lbs. to an acre, at 3d. per pound, (which is about half the
market price of a fair sample of tobacco in bond,) it would amount to
£30 5s. per acre.

Three rows of Indian corn are planted outside the tobacco plants to
shelter them from the wind. In order to save seed, a few plants are
allowed to flower. The Virginian tobacco is the largest; it is known
by a pink flower; the _Nicotiana rustica_ (common green) has a yellow
flower.

A planter in Northern Australia furnishes the following directions:--

    The land selected for the growth of tobacco ought to be of the most
    fertile description, of a friable description, and upon which no
    water can rest within eighteen inches of the surface. Newly cleared
    brush lands of this nature are the most prolific; upon such, after
    good tillage, put the plants about four feet or more apart, in rows,
    and five feet six inches asunder. In interior or old ground, plant
    proportionately closer. Before topping or nipping off the head, all
    the lower leaves (that is such as may touch the ground) ought to be
    broken off, leaving only from five to seven for the crop, which will
    yield a greater weight and be of a superior quality than if double
    that number were left. When ripe, a dry and cloudy day should be
    selected to cut it, as the sun destroys its quality after cutting.
    It ought then to lie sufficiently long upon the ground so as to welt
    before carting to the sheds, hanging up each stalk next morning so
    as not to touch its fellow.

    The drying sheds ought to be built upon an elevated or dry spot,
    with a hoarded flour of rough split stuff, fifteen or eighteen
    inches from the ground, with apertures as windows to admit or to
    exclude the external atmosphere. In damp weather close all the doors
    and windows, also every night; in contrary weather open all.

    In these drying houses the stalks should remain suspended until the
    vegetable moisture is entirely evaporated, so that on a dry day the
    stems of the leaves will break like a glass pipe, and the finer
    parts crumble into snuff upon compression; after which, in humid
    weather, they will become quite pliable; then strip the leaves off
    the stems, make them up into hands, and pack them tightly into a
    close bin: when full, cover it with boards and old bagged stuff,
    upon which place heavy weights. In this state it undergoes the
    sweating process, which, in this colony, is little understood or not
    properly attended to, and yet, upon the skill displayed thereon, the
    quality of the tobacco greatly depends. I will therefore give some
    general directions upon this portion of the planter's office. If the
    tobacco happen to be too damp when put into the bin, it will attain
    either an injurious or a destructive degree of heat; it must
    therefore he watched for some days after it is packed. To an
    experienced operator I would say, if the heat exceed 80 degrees of
    temperature, immediately unpack and re-hang the whole, waiting its
    condition as before explained, before it is again put into the
    sweating bin. Should the degree of heat be below that stated, it may
    remain for weeks or until the heat has subsided. I have generally
    removed it from the sweating process in about fourteen or twenty
    days, sometimes considerably longer, regulating that act by the odor
    and color of the leaf. If, however, it appears to be attaining a
    very dark brown color and its heat not subsided, it should be taken
    out and closely pressed into large cases or casks, when it will
    again attain a gentle heat called the "second sweating," as is
    invariably the case with the hogsheads of the American leaf tobacco:
    this again improves its quality. Here the grower's operations
    terminate.

    It may be necessary to remark, that how skilful and experienced
    soever the grower may be, it is hardly possible for him to produce a
    good article upon a small scale; for with a less quantity than one
    ton to place in the sweating bin at a time, the requisite heat to
    insure success will not be generated. I would further observe, that
    the practice of the colonists in growing what they term a "second
    crop" is most injurious to their interests, their lands, and the
    quality and character of the colonial tobacco. The American planter
    never attempts it. I would therefore strongly recommend its
    discontinuance, and also never to crop one piece of land with
    tobacco more than two or three years in succession. The Americans
    rarely take more than two crops unless the land be new; after which
    they sow it down with grasses, in which state it remains for two or
    three years until it is again planted with tobacco. I would
    recommend this plan to the growers.

    The character of the American tobacco has been greatly advanced in
    the mercantile world by an ordinance regulating that source of
    national wealth. The planters are thereby obligated to deposit their
    crops in warehouses, over which sworn inspectors preside, who
    rigidly examine every hogshead, and if found to be of mercantile
    quality, grant the owner a certificate, by which instrument only he
    sells his produce. The purchaser is hereby safe in buying these
    certificates. The tobacco to which they refer is delivered to the
    holder on presentation to the inspector. I mention this not as
    applicable here at present, but it most probably may hereafter.

    When the colony is suffering severely for the want of labor, it may
    by some be deemed inopportune in offering remarks upon this article
    of commerce. To such dissentients I will remark, that a great
    portion of the work can be performed by women and children. A moiety
    of our anticipated increase of population will be available for this
    hitherto mismanaged source of wealth. At present the quantity grown
    in the colony is equal to three-fourths of its consumption, and
    which production is of a very inferior quality to the imported.
    These facts tend to show that my notice of the subject is not
    inopportune, and particularly so when the object is to point out
    those errors so generally adopted by the tobacco growers here. Years
    of practical experience, of personal observation upon the
    plantations of North America, and my having been, I believe, the
    grower of the greatest quantity of tobacco in the colony, qualify me
    to afford instructions thereon; whereby, if attended to, our tobacco
    will become fully equal to the American, as was proved to be the
    case by the crops I grew here (upwards of 40 tons),[56] which were
    sold in Sydney by the Commissariat Department at public auction, at
    an advance of twenty per cent. more than the imported leaf. As the
    duty on tobacco is about to be reduced, the present production may
    fall off, unless an immediate improvement in its quality take place.
    Instead of being importers of tobacco, we should, if it was grown
    here to perfection, be exporters of it to all our sister colonies;
    and in its raw state, also to the European markets. At present, for
    home consumption, there is a greater profit to be made by its
    cultivation, if skilfully managed, than in any part of the world;
    for the duty upon imported is a positive bonus to the grower.

In 1849-50 there were fifteen manufactories of tobacco on a small
scale in New South Wales, but these were reduced in 1851 to six.

Many samples of tobacco grown in the colony have been pronounced by
competent judges equal to Virginian, but a very considerable prejudice
exists against it. There is, however, no doubt that the dealers
dispose of a great deal as American tobacco, and get a best price for
it. The reduction of the import duties on foreign tobacco, recently
made by the Legislative Council, will probably retard the progress of
the colonial production and manufacture of this article; but with an
abundance of labor there is no question that this branch of industry
will be again profitably resorted to. The quantity of tobacco
manufactured in New South Wales, in 1847, was 1,321 cwt.; in 1848, 714
cwt.; in 1849, 2,758 cwt.; in 1850, 3,833 cwt.; in 1851, 4,841 cwt.

A correspondent of the _Adelaide Observer_ recommends its culture in
South Australia, and supplies the following useful information:--

    Without entering into botanical details, I will simply state that
    the plant is of a shrubby nature, about five feet high, and ought
    not to be planted nearer than four feet from each other, in rows
    five feet apart--thus allowing for each plant a space of ground four
    feet by five, or 20 square feet. An acre will consequently furnish
    sufficient room for 2,178 plants.

    The tobacco plant will thrive in almost any climate, from the torrid
    zone to the temperature of Great Britain. It luxuriates in rich
    alluvial valleys, where the soil is either of a _loamy_ or a _peaty_
    nature.

    Maiden soil is not recommended. The ground should be trenched,
    worked as fine as possible, and well manured. Tobacco will not
    answer unless the subsoil is thoroughly broken. The best manure is
    that obtained from the bullock-yard, and bark from the tan yard; and
    by two or three ploughings the earth can be brought to a proper
    consistency, and fit for the reception of the plants.

    The usual method adopted in New South Wales, is to raise the plants
    in a warm, sheltered bed, neither exposed to wind nor to the sun's
    rays; but if the weather is dry, they should be well watered night
    and morning. The time of sowing is the end of August or the
    beginning of September in the latitude of Sydney, according to the
    state of the weather; and they may be transplanted when they have
    attained their sixth leaf, which is generally about a month or five
    weeks after they are up.

    The period is rather later in this colony, and care should be taken
    that the plants have gained sufficient strength in the ground after
    transplanting to withstand the effect of the hot winds, and, if
    practicable, the aspect should be either N.E. or N.W., and the rows
    should incline towards either of these points.

    The most suitable spots in this colony for the cultivation of
    tobacco, are Lyndoch Valley and the districts round the town of
    Willunga and Morphett Vale.

    The greatest care is required from the cultivator to prevent the
    destruction of the plant from its greatest enemy, the black grub.
    Daily search should be made for it, and not a plant should be left
    unexamined; they make their appearance about the beginning of
    November, when the plants have scarcely had time to take root. The
    soil between the rows should be kept constantly stirred with a
    three-pronged fork, that air and the sun's rays may be admitted,
    which latter are as indispensable to the growing plant as injurious
    to the seedling. The labor is great, and from first to last requires
    the constant attention of one man throughout the year, with an
    additional hand for about six weeks during the process of curing.

    The profits even in bad seasons are considerable; but when the
    season and soil are favorable, they average upwards of 100 per cent.
    The consumption of tobacco is great in this colony, not only for
    personal use, but for sheep-wash; and the profits may be
    considerably greater for the lower leaves, which, owing to their
    gritty nature, cannot be manufactured, but may be advantageously
    cured for wash.

    It is not my office to argue the point as to the advantages which
    may accrue from a free trade in tobacco; but this I know, and
    confidently assert it, from actual experiments made in this
    province, that a more lucrative article cannot be grown.

    The consumption in South America, in 1850, was 147,178 lbs.; and the
    annual increase since 1840 has been a higher percentage than the
    increase of population, chiefly owing to extension in sheep-farming.

    The probable expense of cultivation per acre may be as under:--

                            £  s.  d.
    Rent                    0 10   0
    Labor, 12 months       52  0   0
    Ditto, 2 months         8 10   0
    Ploughing three times   2  2   0
    Harrowing twice         1  0   0
    Manure, say             2 10   0
    Seed, say               0 10   0

                          £67  2   0

     The Sydney average quantity is said to be 11-1/3 cwt. per acre,
     say 10 cwt.; and the cost price per lb. will be 14½d., or £6 15s.
     4d. per cwt. The profit will at once be seen on this article of
     consumption.



Miscellaneous Drugs.--The blood tree (_Croton gossypifolia_), an
evergreen shrub, native of the Trinidad mountains, is remarkable for
yielding, when wounded, a thick juice resembling blood in color, which
is one of the most powerful astringents I know of, and as such would
be valuable to medical science. The bark of _Croton Cascarilla_ is, as
we have seen in a former section, aromatic, and the seeds of _C.
Tiglium_, the physic nut, are purgative; so are those of the purging
nut (_Jatropha multifida_), and another species (_J. gossypifolia_).

The pods of cow-itch (_Mucuna pruriens_) act as a vermifuge; the roots
of the _Ruellia tuberosa_, or manyroot, and the bulbs of the white
lily (_Pancratium Carribæum_ and _maritimum_), are emetic. The Indian
root or bastard ipecacuan (_Asclepias curassavica_) has medicinal
properties. _A. tuberosa_ is used as a mild cathartic, and a remedy
for a variety of disorders. _Hydrastis canadensis_, or Canadian yellow
root, is a valuable bitter, and furnishes a useful yellow dye.
_Knowltonia vesicatoria_ is used commonly as a blister in the Cape
Colony. _Ranunculus saleratus_ (the _R. indicus_ of Roxburgh, and _B.
camosus_ of Wallich), common in India, is also used by the natives for
blistering purposes.

A kind of sedge rush, common in swampy places in the West India
islands, the _Adme cyperus_, enjoys a reputation for the cure of
yellow fever. It is also stated to be cordial, diuretic and cephalic,
serviceable in the first stages of the dropsy, good in vomitings,
fluxes, &c.

Dr. Impey, the residentiary surgeon of Malwa, has just confidence in
the indigenous drugs in use by the natives of the East, many of which
are quite unknown in European practice. He believes that, in the
Indian bazaars and the jungle, drugs having precisely the same effect
as those of Europe may be discovered, and has recently drawn up a list
of ninety substances, which are perfect substitutes for an equal
number of European medicines. The class of tonics, in particular, is
most amply supplied, and the Englishman is not the only animal who
suffers from disorders of the digestive organs.

My friend Dr. Hamilton, of Plymouth, recently brought under the notice
of the profession the medical properties of the prickly poppy or
Mexican thistle (_Argemone Mexicana_). It is indigenous to and grows
wild in the greatest profusion throughout the whole of the Caribbean
islands, and may be found at every season of the year covered with its
bright golden blossoms, and bearing its prickly capsules in all their
several stages of maturity. It is an annual plant, attaining a height
of about two feet, growing abundantly in low and hot uncultivated
spots. Its stem is round and prickly, furnished with alternate
branches and thorny leaves. The seeds possess an emetic quality. The
whole plant abounds in a yellow milky juice, resembling gamboge in
color, and not improbably possessing properties similar to the seeds.
In Nevis the oil is obtained from the bruised seeds by boiling, and
sold by the negroes in small phials, containing about an ounce each,
under the name of "thistle oil," at the price of a quarter of a dollar
each. The usual dose for dry bellyache is thirty drops upon a lump of
sugar, and its effect is perfectly magical, relieving the pain
instantaneously, throwing the patient into a profound and refreshing
sleep, and in a few hours relieving the bowels gently of the contents.
This oil seems fitted to compete in utility with the far more costly
and less agreeable oil of the croton.

The seeds of the sandbox (_Hura crepitans_) when bruised, operate
powerfully as emetico-cathartic. It is probable that an oil might be
obtained from them similar in its operation to the thistle oil.

A cucurbitaceous fruit, one of the Luffas (called by Von Martius
_Luffa purgans_), a tribe closely allied to the colocynth and
mornordicas, growing in South America, is a powerful purgative, and is
used in the province of Pernambuco, where it is called Cabacinha. The
fruit is about the size of a small pear and resembles the wild
cucumber. An infusion of a fourth part of one of these fruits is
administered chiefly in the form of an injection.

Another species (_Luffa drastica_, of Martius) is also employed for
the same purpose.

The _Luffa purgans_ grows spontaneously in the suburbs of Recieffe,
the capital of the province of Pernambuco, and flowers in November and
December. The fruit is a drastic purgative, and an infusion of it is
used either internally or in the form of clyster. The tincture is
prepared by macerating, for twenty-eight hours or more, four of the
fruit deprived of the seeds in a bottle of spirit 21 degrees. The dose
is three or four ounces daily, which occasions much sickness.



Poisons.--The vegetable kingdom (observes Mr. Simple), to which man is
largely indebted for the materials of food, clothing, and shelter,
produces also some of the most deadly poisons with which science,
experience, or accident, has made him acquainted. In examining the
poisonous productions of the vegetable kingdom, we find that their
properties are generally due to the presence of some acid or alkali
contained in the plant from which they are derived. Oil of bitter
almonds and cherry laurel water are poisonous in consequence of
containing prussic acid. Opium owes its activity to the alkaloid
morphia. The Upas-tiente derives its energetic powers from the
alkaloid strychnia; conia is the active principle of hemlock; veratria
of hellebore; aconita of monk's hood; and although there are several
poisonous plants in which the active principle has not yet been
detected, there can be little doubt that such a principle exists,
although it has hitherto eluded the researches of the
chemist.--("Pharmaceutical Journal," vol. 2, p. 17.)

The bark taken from the roots of the Jamaica dogwood (_Piscidia
erythrina_), which is extensively distributed throughout the
Archipelago of the Antilles, is used for stupefying fish. The pounded
root is mixed with slaked lime and the low wines or lees of the
distillery, and the mixture is put into small baskets or sacks, and so
suffered to wash out gradually, coloring the water to a reddish hue.
The fish rise to the surface in a few minutes, when they float as if
dead.

The expressed juice of the root of _Maranta Arundinacea_ is stated to
be a valuable antidote to some vegetable poisons, and also serviceable
in cases of bites or stings of venomous insects or reptiles. One of
the most popular remedies for the bites of snakes is a decoction of
the leaves of the Guaco, or snake plant, of South America, a species
of willow which flourishes along the banks of the streams in the
sultry regions shaded by other trees. It is said to be both a
preventive and cure.

Mr. Edward Otto, writing from Cuba to the "Gardener's Magazine" for
May, 1842, p. 286, describes the guaco as a tree growing from four to
eight feet in height, with beautiful dark green leaves, having a brown
tinge round the margin. The blossoms are small, of a bluish brown, and
hang like loose bunches of grapes at the points of the shoots, or even
on the stem itself, as it has seldom branches. The milky sap is said
to have poisonous effects. "I was told (he adds) that this plant is
used efficiently in cholera and yellow fever." This tree is said to be
the _Camæladia ilicifolia_ of Swartz, common in Antigua and Hayti,
being known in Antigua by the popular name of the holly-leaved maiden
plum.



ALOES.--The drug called aloes is the bitter, resinous, inspissated
juice of the leaves of various species of an arborescent plant of the
lily family, with a developed stem and large succulent leaves, growing
principally in tropical and sub-tropical regions, and having a wide
extent of range, being produced in Borneo and the East, Africa,
Arabia, and the West Indies; many are also natives of the Cape of Good
Hope. The plant will thrive in almost any soil, and, when once
established, it is extremely difficult to eradicate.

The cultivation and manufacture are of the most simple kind. The usual
mode of propagating the plants is by suckers; and all the care
required is to keep them free from weeds.

From the high price which the best Barbados aloes fetches in the
market, £7 per cwt., its culture might be profitably extended to many
of the other islands. The aloes plant is indigenous to the soil of
Jamaica, and although handled by thousands of the peasantry and
others, there is not perhaps one in five thousand who understands its
properties or the value of the plant. With the Jamaicans it is
commonly used in fever cases, by slicing the leaves, permitting the
juice to escape partially, and then applying them to the head with
bandages;--this is the only generally known property which it
possesses there.

A series of trials made recently in Paris proved that cordage
manufactured from the fibre of this plant grown in Algiers, was far
preferable in comparative strength to that manufactured from hemp.
Cables, of equal size, showed that that made of the aloe raised a
weight of one-fifth more than that of hemp.

The drug is imported into this country under the names of Socotrine,
East Indian or Hepatic, Barbados, Cape and Caballine aloes. It
contains a substance called Aloetine, which some regard as its active
principle. The various species now defined are--_Aloe spicata_,
_vulgaris_, _Socotrina_, _Indica_, _rubescens_, _Arabica_,
_linguæ-formis_ and _Commelina_. The average imports in 1841 and 1842
were only about 170,780 cwts.; it is now much larger, and a great
portion of the supply is drawn from the Cape colony.

The mode of preparing the drug, which I have myself seen in the West
Indies, is exceedingly simple. When the plant has arrived at proper
maturity, the laborers go into the field with tubs and knives, and cut
the largest and most succulent leaves close to the stalk; these are
placed upright in the tubs, side by side, so that the sap may flow out
of the wound. Sometimes a longitudinal incision is made from top to
bottom of the leaf, to facilitate the discharge. The crude juice thus
obtained is placed in shallow flat-bottomed receivers, and exposed to
the sun until it has acquired sufficient consistency to be packed in
gourds for exportation. In preparing the coarser kind, or horse aloes,
the leaves are cut into junks and thrown into the tubs, there to lie
till the juice is pretty well drained out; they are then squeezed by
the hand, and water, in the proportion of one quart to ten of juice,
is added, after which it is boiled to a due consistence and emptied
into large shallow coolers.

The following analysis by M. Edmond Robiquet of a specimen of
Socotrine aloes, obtained from M. Chevallier, is given in the sixth
volume of the "Pharmaceutical Journal," p. 277. The constituents in
100 parts were:--

  Pure aloes (Aloetine)           85.00
  Ulmate of potash                 2.00
  Sulphate of lime                 2.00
  Carbonate of potash           }
  -------------lime             } traces.
  Phosphate of lime             }
  Gallic acid                       .25
  Albumen                          8.

The true Socotrine aloes is the produce of _A. Socotrina_, which grows
abundantly in the island of Socotra in the Indian Ocean. Lieutenant
Wellstead says, the hills on the west side of the island are covered
for an extent of miles with aloe plants. The aloe grows spontaneously
on the limestone mountains of Socotra, from 500 to 3,000 feet above
the level of the sea. The produce is brought to Tamarida and
Colliseah, the principal town and harbor for exports. In 1833, the
best quality sold for 2s. a pound, while for the more indifferent the
price was 13d. The value is much impaired by the careless manner in
which the aloes is gathered and packed. Aloes once formed the staple
of its traffic, for which it was chiefly resorted to; but only small
quantities are now exported. It was formerly shipped by the way of
Smyrna and Alexandria, but is usually now brought by the way of
Bombay; Melinda, on the Zanzibar coast, and Maccula on the Arabian
shore, furnish the greater part of that sold in Europe as Socotrine
aloes. It comes home in chests or packages of 150 to 200 lbs. wrapt in
skins of the gazelle, sometimes in casks holding half a ton or more.
It is somewhat transparent, of a garnet or yellowish red color. The
smell is not very unpleasant, approaching to myrrh. Socotrine aloes,
although long considered the best kind, is now below Barbados aloes in
commercial value.

About two tons were imported from Socotra in 1833, but a much larger
quantity could be obtained if required.

The price of Socotrine aloes in the Liverpool market, in the early
part of 1853, was 30s. to £6 the cwt.; of Cape, 30s. to 32s.

_East Indian_, or _Hepatic aloes_.-- The real hepatic aloes, so called
from its liver color, is believed to be the produce of _A. Arabica_,
or _perfoliala_, which grows in Yemen in Arabia, from whence it is
exported by the way of Bombay to Europe. According to Dr. Thomson and
the "Materia Medica," it is duller in its color than the other kinds,
is bitterer, and has a less pleasant aroma than the Socotrine aloes.
It should not be liquid, which deteriorates the quality.

_A. Indica_--a species with reddish flowers, common in dry situations,
in the north-west provinces of India, is that from which an inferior
sort of the drug is produced. It is obtained in Guzerat, Salem, and
Trichinopoly, and fetches a local price of 2d. to 3d. a pound. In the
Bombay market, Socotrine aloes fetches wholesale 16s. to 20s. the
Surat maund of 41 lbs., and Maccula aloes only 9s.

_Barbados aloes_, is the produce of _A. vulgaris_, or _A.
barbadensis_, a native of the Cape colony, and is often passed off for
the Hepatic. It is brought home in calabashes, or large gourd shells,
containing from 60 to 70 lbs. each, or more. It is duskier in hue than
the East Indian species, being a darkish brown or black, and the taste
is more nauseous and intensely bitter.

In 1786 one hogshead and 409 gourds of aloes were exported from
Barbados. In 1827, there were about 96,000 packages shipped from the
island. In 1844, there were 4,600 packages exported. The exports have
fallen off considerably, only about 850 gourds having been shipped in
the season of 1849-50; but in 1851 it increased to 2,505 gourds.

_Caballine_, or _Horse-aloes_, is the coarsest species or refuse of
the Barbados aloes, and from its rank fetid smell is only useful for
veterinary medicine. It is also obtained from Spain and Senegal.

A very good description of the mode of cultivating and preparing the
aloes in Barbados is given in the 8th vol. of the "London Medical
Journal":--

    The lands in the vicinity of the sea, that is from two to three
    miles, which are rather subject to drought than otherwise, and are
    so strong and shallow as not to admit of the planting of sugar-canes
    with any prospect of success, are generally found to answer best for
    the aloe-plant. The stones, at least the larger ones, are first
    picked up, and either packed in heaps upon the most shallow barren
    spots, or laid round the field as a dry wall. The land is then
    lightly ploughed and very carefully cleared of all noxious weeds,
    lined at one foot distance from row to row, and the young plants set
    like cabbages, at about five or six inches from each other. This
    regular mode of lining and setting the plants is practised only by
    the most exact planters, in order to facilitate the frequent weeding
    by hand; because if the ground be not kept perfectly clean and free
    from weeds, the produce will be very small. Aloes will bear being
    planted in any season of the year, even in the dryest, as they will
    live on the surface of the earth for many weeks without a drop of
    rain. The most general time of planting them, however, is from April
    to June.

    In the March following, the laborers carry a parcel of tubs and jars
    into the field, and each takes a slip or breadth of it, and begins
    by laying hold of a bunch of the blades, as much as he can
    conveniently grasp with one hand, whilst with the other he cuts it
    just above the surface of the earth as quickly as possible (that the
    juice may not be wasted), and then places the branches in the tub
    bunch by bunch or handful by handful. When the first tub is thus
    packed quite full, a second is begun (each laborer having two); and
    by the time the second is filled, all the juice is generally drained
    out of the blades in the first tub. The blades are then lightly
    taken out and thrown over the land by way of manure, and the juice
    is poured out into a jar. The tub is then filled again with blades,
    and so alternately, till the laborer has produced his jar full, or
    about four gallons and a half of juice, which is often done in six
    or seven hours, and he has then the remainder of the day to himself,
    it being his employer's interest to get each day's operation as
    quickly done as possible. It may be observed that although aloes are
    often cut in nine, ten, or twelve months after being planted, they
    are not in perfection till the second or third year, and that they
    will be productive for a length of time, say ten or twelve years, or
    even for a longer time, if good dung or manure of any kind is
    stirred over the field once in three or four years, or oftener if
    convenient.

    The aloe juice will keep for several weeks without injury. It is
    therefore not boiled till a sufficient quantity is procured to make
    it an object for the boiling house. In the large way, three boilers,
    or coppers are placed to one fire, though some have but two, and the
    small planters only one boiler. The boilers are filled with the
    juice, and as it ripens or becomes more inspissated by a constant
    but regular fire, it is ladled from boiler to boiler, and fresh
    juice is added to that farthest from the fire, till the juice in
    that nearest the fire (by much the smallest of the three) becomes of
    a proper consistency, to be skipped or ladled out into gourds or
    other small vessels used for its final reception. The proper time to
    skip or ladle it out of the last boiler is when it has arrived at
    what is termed a resin height, or when it cuts freely or in thin
    flakes from the edges of a small wooden slice that is dipped from
    time to time into the boiler for that purpose. A little lime water
    is used by some aloe boilers during the process, when the ebullition
    is too great.

CAPE ALOES is the produce chiefly of _A. spicata_, and _A. Commelini_,
which are found growing wild in great abundance in the interior of the
Cape Colony. It has not the dark opaque appearance of the other
species. About fifty miles from Cape Town is a mountainous tract,
almost entirely covered with numerous species and varieties of the
plant, and some of the extensive arid plains in the interior of the
colony are crowded with it. The settlers go forth and pitch their
waggous and campa on these spots to obtain the produce. The shipments
from Table Bay and the eastern port of Algoa Bay are very
considerable. The odor of the Cape aloes is stronger and more
disagreeable than that of the Socotrine or Barbados, and the color is
more like gamboge. It is brought over in chests and skins, the latter
being preferred.

Mr. George Dunsterville, surgeon of Algoa Bay, gives the following
description of the manufacture of Cape aloes:--

    A shallow pit is dug, in which is spread a bullock's hide or sheep's
    skin. The leaves of the aloe plants in the immediate vicinity of
    this pit are stripped off and piled up on the skin to variable
    heights. These are left for a few days. The juice exudes from the
    leaves, and is received by the skin beneath. The Hottentot then
    collects in a basket or other convenient article the produce of many
    heaps, which is then put into an iron pot capable of holding
    eighteen or twenty gallons. Fire is applied to effect evaporation,
    during which the contents of the pot are constantly stirred to
    prevent burning. The cooled liquor is then poured into wooden cases
    of about three feet square by one foot deep, or into goat or sheep
    skins, and thus is filled for the market. In the colony aloes
    realises about 2¼ d. to 3½ d. per pound. The Hottentots and Dutch
    boors employ indiscriminately different species of aloe in the
    preparation of the drug.

    The Cape aloes, which _is_ usually prized the highest in the English
    market, is that made at the Missionary institution of Bethelsdorp (a
    small village about nine miles from Algoa Bay, and chiefly inhabited
    by Hottentots and their missionary teachers). Its superiority arises
    not from the employment of a particular species of aloe, for all
    species are used, but from the greater care and attention paid to
    what is technically called the cooking of the aloes; that is, the
    evaporation, and to the absence of all adulterating substances
    (fragments of limestone, sand, earth, &c.), often introduced by
    manufacturers.

Mr. Moodie, in his "Ten Years' Residence in Southern Africa," gives a
somewhat similar account.

Mr. Bunbury states that, about the neighbourhood of Graham's Town,
three large kinds of aloe are very abundant, which form striking and
characteristic features of the scenery; they grow irregularly
scattered over the parched and naked faces of the hills, but most
abundantly among the low broken ledges and knolls of sandstone rock,
and are often seen spiring up above the evergreen bushes in the
ravines, and crowning the cliffs. One kind grows to the height of a
man. They are plants of a strange, rigid, and ungraceful appearance,
but with very handsome flowers, which form tall and dense spikes, of a
fine coral-red color in two of the species _(A. arborescens_ and
_lineata?_), and of an orange scarlet in the third _(A.
glaucescens?_). When in blossom they are conspicuous at a great
distance, and might easily be mistaken, when seen from far off, for
soldiers in red uniforms.

The importance of this indigenous plant to the Cape Colony, may be
estimated from the following figures:--


  AMOUNT OF ALOES, THE PRODUCE OF THE COLONY, AND VALUE THEREOF,
  EXPORTED IN THE YEARS ENDING 5TH JANUARY 1841, 1842, AND 1846.
                   lbs           £
  1841           485,574       8,821
  1842           602,620      11,877
  1846           266,725       3,018


  EXPORTS AND VALUE FROM THE EASTERN PROVINCE.
                   lbs.          £
  1835            68,042         474
  1836            30,808         285
  1837            13,400         115
  1838            28,867         306
  1839            75,500         918
  1840            82,478       1,145
  1841           220,214       4,271
  1842           283,305       5,003
  1844           318,035       3,225


  EXPORTS AND VALUE FROM THE WESTERN PROVINCE.
                   lbs.          £
  1841           242,860       4,175
  1842           379,315       6,874
  1844           506,796       6,586

ASAFOETIDA.---This drug of commerce is procured from the milky juice
of _Ferula asafoetida_, a plant recently described by Dr. Falconer,
under the name of _Narthex asafoetida_. It is found in Persia, the
mountains of Chorasan, the central table land of Affghanistan, and
some seeds of it, sent to this country by Dr. Falconer, germinated in
the Botanical Garden at Edinburgh, and are now vigorous thriving
plants of six years growth. Its leaves have a resemblance to those of
a pæony; the fruit is distinguished by divided and interrupted vittae,
which form a network on the surface. The perennial roots grow to a
very large size, and are seldom of any use until after four or five
years' growth. The asafoetida is procured by taking successive slices
off the top of the root and collecting the milky juice., which is
allowed to concrete into masses of a fetid resinous gummy matter, with
a sulphur oil, similar to that of garlic, which is probably its active
ingredient.

An inferior sort is obtained from _F. persica_, another species with
very much divided leaves, growing chiefly in the southern provinces of
Persia. It comes over usually in casks and cases. The British
consumption of the drug is about 10,000 lbs. a year. A little is
procured from Scinde. In 1825 the quantity imported was 106,770 lbs.,
in 1839 only 24 cwts.

The wholesale price in the Liverpool market, in January 1853, was £1
to £3 10s. the cwt.

CAMPHOR.--The Camphor tree (_Camphora officinarum_, _Laurus Camphora_)
is a native of China, Japan, and Cochin China, of the laurel tribe,
with black and purple veins. Camphor is procured from all parts of the
tree, but it is obtained principally from the wood by distillation,
and subsequent sublimation.

Many plants, such as the cinnamon tree, supply a kind of camphor, but
the common camphor of the shops is the produce chiefly of _C.
officinarum._

Two kinds of unrefined camphor are known in commerce.--1. The Dutch,
which is brought from Batavia, and is said to be the produce of Japan.
This is imported in tubs covered by matting and each surrounded by a
second tub, secured on the outside by hoops of twisted cane. Each tub
contains about one cwt. Most of this goes to the continent. 2.
Ordinary crude camphor is imported from Singapore and Bombay, in
square chests lined with lead-foil, and containing 1¼ to 1½ cwts. It
is chiefly produced in the island of Formosa, and is brought by the
Chin Chew junks in very large quantities to Canton, whence foreign
markets get supplied.--("Pereira's Materia Medica.")

In the southern part of Japan the tree grows in such abundance that,
notwithstanding the great consumption of it in the country, large
quantities are exported. Koempfer says, that the Japanese camphor is
made by a simple decoction of the wood and roots, but bears no
proportion in value to that of Borneo. There is also an imitation of
camphor in Japan, but every body can distinguish it from the genuine.

The camphor of Sumatra is procured from the stem of a large tree,
_Dryobalanops Camphora_, Colebrook; _D. aromatica_, Graertner. It is
secreted in crystalline masses naturally into cavities of the wood. It
supplies this camphor only after attaining a considerable age. In its
young state it yields, however, by incision, a pale yellow liquid,
called the liquid camphor of Borneo and Sumatra, which consists of
resin and a volatile oil having a camphorated odor.

An account of this tree, and of the mode of procuring the peculiar and
high-priced camphor which it yields, is given by Dr. Junghuhn, who has
travelled lately in Sumatra, and Prof. De Vriese, of Leyden, in the
"Nederlandsch Kruidkundig Archief" for 1851. An abstract of the
memoir, translated into English by Miss De Vriese, is published in
"Hooker's Journal of Botany " for February and March 1852:--

    The Dryobalanops is a gigantic tree, rising for fifty or even a
    hundred feet above those which compose the chief mass of the forests
    where they grow, just as the steeples of the churches appear above
    the roofs of the houses in a town. The trunks of the full-grown
    trees are from 7 to 10 feet in diameter at the very base, and from 5
    to 8 feet higher up; they rise to the height of 100 or 130 feet, and
    their ample crown is from 50 to 70 feet in diameter. The tree has a
    limited range, being confined to the seaward slope of the mountains
    of southwestern Sumatra, most abundant on the lower slopes and the
    outlying hills of the alluvial plain, and extending in latitude from
    1deg. 10m. to 2deg. 20m. N., and perhaps further to the north.
    Camphor oil occurs in all the trees, and is most abundant in the
    younger branches and leaves. The solid camphor is found only on the
    trunks of older trees, especially in fissures of the wood, and in
    smaller quantity than is generally supposed. Colebrooke, and authors
    who have copied from him, assert that camphor is found in the heart
    of the tree in such a quantity as to fill a cavity of the thickness
    of a man's arm, and that a single tree yields about eleven pounds.
    The price of this camphor, which at Padang sells for about 340
    dollars per hundred weight, suffices to show that the account is
    much exaggerated. The camphor occurs only in small fissures, from
    which the natives, having felled the trees and split up the wood,
    scrape it off with small splinters or with their nails. From the
    oldest and richest trees they rarely collect more than two ounces.
    After a long stay in the woods, frequently of three months, during
    which they may fell a hundred trees, a party of thirty persons
    rarely bring away more than 15 or 20 pounds of solid camphor, worth
    from 200 to 250 dollars. The variety and price of this costly
    substance are enhanced by a custom which has immemorially prevailed
    among the Battas, of delaying the burial of every person who during
    his life had a claim to the title of Rajah (of which each village
    has one) until some rice, sown on the day of his death, has sprung
    up, grown and borne fruit. The corpse, till then kept above ground
    among the living, is now, with these ears of rice, committed to the
    earth, like the grain six months before; and thus the hope is
    emblematically expressed that, as a new life arises from the seed,
    so another life shall begin for man after his death. During this
    time the corpse is kept in the house, enclosed in a coffin made of
    the hollowed trunk of a Durion, and the whole space between the
    coffin and the body is filled with pounded camphor, for the purchase
    of which the family of the deceased Rajah frequently impoverish
    themselves. The camphor oil is collected by incisions at the base of
    the trunk, from which the clear balsamic juice is very slowly
    discharged.

In Sumatra the best camphor is obtained in a district called Barus,
and all good camphor bears that local name. It appears that the tree
is cut down to obtain the gum and that not in one tenth of the trees
is it found. Barus camphor is getting scarce, as the tree must be
destroyed before it is ascertained whether it is productive or not.
About 800 piculs are annually sent to China. The proportion between
Malay and Chinese camphor is as eighteen to one; the former is more
fragrant and not so pungent as the latter.

Nine hundred and eighty-three tubs of camphor were exported from Java
in 1843; 625 bales were imported in 1843, the produce of the Japanese
empire; and 559 piculs exported from Canton in 1844.

The price of unrefined camphor in the Liverpool market in July, 1853,
was £4 to £4 10s. the cwt. There have been no imports there direct in
the last two years.

    Camphor (says Dr. Ure) is found in a great many plants and is
    secreted in parity by several laurels; it occurs combined with the
    essential oils of many of the _labiacæ_; but it is extracted for
    manufacturing purposes only from the _Laurus Camphora_, which
    abounds in China and Japan, as well as from a tree which grows in
    Sumatra and Borneo, called in the country _kapur barus_, from the
    name of the place where it is most common. The camphor exists, ready
    formed, in these vegetables between the wood and the bark; but it
    does not exude spontaneously. On cleaving the tree _Laurus
    Sumatrensis (Qy. Dryobalanops Camphora)_, masses of camphor are
    found in the pith. The wood of the Laurus is cut into small pieces
    and put, with plenty of water, into large iron boilers, which are
    covered with an earthen capital or dome, lined within with rice
    straw. As the water boils, the camphor rises with the steam, and
    attaches itself as a sublimate to the stalks, under the form of
    granulations of a grey color. In this state it is picked off the
    straw and packed up for exportation to Europe."--(" Dictionary of
    Arts and Manufactures.")

The price of camphor at Canton in July, 1850, was from fourteen to
fifteen dollars per picul.

Cinchona.--Peruvian or Jesuit's Bark--One of the most valuable and
powerful astringents and tonics used in medicine, is the produce of
several species of cinchona, natives of the Andes, from 11 north
latitude to 20 south latitude, at elevations varying from 1,200 to
10,000 feet above the level of the sea, and in a dry rocky soil. There
are at least twelve trees which are supposed to furnish the barks of
commerce, and great obscurity prevails as to the species whence the
various kinds of cinchona bark are derived. The names of yellow, red,
and pale bark have been very vaguely applied, and are by no means well
defined. Dr. Lindley mentions twenty-six varieties; of which
twenty-one are well known. The barks are met with either in thick,
large, flat pieces, or in thinner pieces, which curl inwards during
drying, and are called quilled.

Quinine is one of the most important of the vegetable alkaline
bitters. It was first discovered by Vauquelin, in 1811, and its
preparation on a large scale pointed out by Pelletier and Caventon in
1820. It is obtained by boiling the yellow bark (_Cinchona_) in water
and sulphuric acid, and then treating it with lime and alcohol, when
the quinine is precipitated in the form of a white powder. Upwards of
120,000 ounces are made annually in Paris.

Cinchona, or the Peruvian bark, was gathered to the amount of two
million dollars in one year recently, and the demand is constantly
increasing.

Peruvian bark is cut in the eastern Provinces of Bolivia, skirting the
river Paraguay, and now conveyed an immense distance by mules over a
mountainous region to El Puerto, the only port of Bolivia on the
Pacific. It is thence brought by Cape Horn to the cities of the United
States and Europe. Now that Government has been successful in opening
the South American rivers, this important article of commerce will be
furnished in market by the Paraguay and La Plata rivers, at a much
reduced price.

A species of bark from Colombia, known as Malambo or Matias bark, has
been frequently administered by Dr. Alexander Ure as a substitute for
cinchona with good effect. It offers the useful combination of a tonic
and aromatic. It is supposed to be the produce of a species of
_Drimys_. It is stated that in New Granada, and other districts of
Central America, where the tree is indigenous, incisions are made in
the bark, and there exudes an aromatic oil which sinks in water.

Cinchona bark contains two alkaloids, cinchonia and quina, to which
its active properties are due; the former is best obtained from gray
bark, the latter from yellow bark. In combination with these there
exists an acid called kinic acid.

The imports of cinchona bark to this country are from 225,000 to
556,000 lbs. annually, and about 120,000 lbs. are retained for home
consumption. It comes over in chests and serons, or ox-hides, varying
from 90 to 200 lbs. We imported from France, in 1850, 489 cwt. of
Peruvian bark, of the value of £6,840; and in 1851, 1,128 cwt., of the
value of £15,787; also the following quantities of sulphate of
quinine, on which there is a duty of 6d. and 3-10ths per ounce.

           oz.      £
  1848   3,856    5,898
  1849   1,114    1,560
  1850   8,976   12,566
  1851   7,605   10,647

The following is the arrangement of these barks adopted by Pereira,
who has gone very fully into the subject:--

    A. True cinchonas, with a brown epidermis.

    I. Pale barks 1. Crown or Loxa bark. _C. Condaminea_. 2. Gray or
    silver or Huanuco bark. _C. micrantha_. 3. Ash or Jaen bark. _C.
    ovata_. 4. Rusty or Huamalies bark. _C. pubescens_.

    II. Yellow barks. 5. Royal, yellow or Calisaya bark. _C. sp ?_

    III. Red barks. 6. Red bark. _C. sp ?_

    B. True cinchonas, with a white epidermis.

    I. Pale barks. 7. White Loxa bark.

    II. Yellow barks. 8. Hard Carthagena bark. _C. cordifolia_. 9.
    Fibrous ditto. Perhaps _C. cordifolia_. 10. Cuzco bark. _C. sp.?_
    11. Orange bark of Santa Fe. _C. lancifolia_.

    III. Red barks. 12. Bed bark of Santa Fe. _C. oblongifolia_.

The genus Exostemma yields various kinds of false cinchona bark, which
do not contain the cinchona alkalies. The following are some of the
kinds noticed by Pereira:--

  1. St. Lucia or Piton bark. _Exostemma floribundum_.
  2. Jamaica bark. _E. caribaeum_.
  3. Pitaya bark. _E. sp?_
  4. False Peruvian bark. _E. peruvianum_.
  5. Brazilian bark. _E. souzianum_.

The mode adopted by the bark-peelers of obtaining cinchona varies
somewhat in different districts. The Indians (says Mr. Stevenson,
"Twenty Years' Residence in South America") discover from the
eminences where a cluster of trees grow in the woods, for they are
easily discernable by the rose-colored tinge of their leaves, which
appear at a distance like bunches of flowers amid the deep-green
foliage of other trees. They then hunt for the spot, and having found
it out, cut down all the trees, and take the bark from the branches,
and after they have stripped off the bark, they carry it in bundles
out of the wood, for the purpose of drying it. The peelers commence
their operation about May, when the dry season sets in. Some writers
state that the trees are barked without felling.

In a letter published in one of the Calcutta papers not long ago, from
the pen, I believe, of Mr. Piddington, he strongly urged the
introduction of the cinchona tree into British India:--

    There is (he observes) one tree, the introduction and the copious
    distribution of which within certain appropriate points of the
    sub-Himalayan range, "would confer a greater blessing on the great
    body of natives, than any effort the Government has made or can
    make, and that is the cinchona bark tree.

    Without any reference to the greater or less force of medical
    theories as to the efficacy of cinchona bark, I now only take an
    experienced and practical view, well knowing that the sufferings of
    many millions of poor and rich natives, especially in the jungle
    districts, are yearly very great, and the mortality quite enormous
    from remittent and intermittent fevers, by far the greater part of
    which would be immensely relieved, or wholly cured, by the free use
    of cinchona bark.

    If by abundance the price be once brought within the poor native's
    reach, he will readily take to it, having no objection whatever on
    account of caste to anything of the nature of the bark of a tree.

    If the cinchona tree were once growing in abundance, quinine could
    be easily prepared in India, from the facility of procuring, and
    cheapness of spirits of wine used in the process of its elimination.

    I take it that every hundred Sepahees sick of fevers remaining in
    hospital off duty for thirty days, drawing an average pay of eight
    rupees each, form a full monthly loss to Government of eight hundred
    rupees; while a free use of quinine and bark would cure them in ten
    days on the average, costing at present about forty rupees; thus by
    the twenty days' services gained, Government would save nearly five
    hundred rupees.

    But the cinchona tree once glowing abundantly, quinine would of
    course become infinitely cheaper.

    Under a proper system of culture, quill bark only need be taken
    without destroying the trees, and an earlier return be obtained.

    There never yet has been a substitute found for cinchona bark and
    its salts, as an antiperiodic and tonic.

    It yet remains for some one to find an equally efficacious
    substitute, and thus make a fortune. In the mean time the importance
    of the cinchona is paramount.

    The cinchona tree, like the pimento, deteriorates under cultivation,
    and in moist, warm, rich valleys the bark becomes inert. The best
    bark is from trees growing on mountain tops or steep declivities.

    From the full accounts of Condamine, Mutis, and Humboldt, a soil and
    climate like that of the north west sub-Himalayan range is admirably
    adapted to the planting and prospering of cinchona trees.

    In Lord W. Bentinck's time, before there were steamers in or to
    India, seeing the immense benefit to be derived, I sent in a
    proposition to procure young cinchona plants from Vera Cruz, begging
    to be then permitted to proceed there on that account, and my
    proposition was civilly and even favorably received; but these were
    not the days to act on it.

    Of about the twenty species of cinchona trees the following would of
    course be the best to bring--the _Cinchona bineifolia_, the
    _cinchona cordifolia_, the _cinchona oblongifolia_, the _cinchona
    micrantha_, and the _cinchona condaminea_.

The Calumba plant (_Cocculus palmatus_, Decandolle, or _Minispermum
palmatum_) furnishes the medicinal Colombo root, which is one of the
most useful stomachics and tonics in cases of dyspepsia. It is
scarcely ever cultivated, the spontaneous produce of thick forests on
the shores of Oibo and Mozambique and many miles inland on the eastern
shores of Africa, Madagascar and Bombay, proving sufficient. The
supplies principally go to Ceylon. The roots are perennial, and
consist of several fasciculated, fusiform, branched, fleshy, curved
and descending tubers, from one to two inches thick, with a brown
warty epidermis; internally deep yellow, odorless, very bitter.

The main roots are dug up by the natives in March (the hot season).
The offsets are cut in slices and hung up on cords to dry in the
shade. It is deemed fit to ship when, on exposure to the sun, it
breaks short, and of a bad quality when it is soft and
black.--("Pereira's Materia Medica.")

It contains a bitter crystallizable principle called Calumbin.

The commercial parcels are often adulterated with the roots of _Costus
indicus, C. speciosus_, and _C. Arabicus_ (Kusmus, Putckuk, &c.). It
is imported into this country in bags and chests of from one to three
cwt., and ranges in price from £1 to £2 the cwt. The imports in 1846
to London were 82 packages, and in 1850, 214 packages, but the stock
held in London is always large, being nearly 2,500 packages.

Colocynth, furnished by _Cucumis colocynthis_ and _C.
pseudocolocynthis_, is the dried medullary part of a wild species of
gourd which is cultivated in Spain. It also grows wild in Japan, the
sandy lands of Coromandel, Cape of Good Hope, Syria, Nubia, Egypt,
Turkey, and the islands of the Grecian Archipelago. It may be obtained
in the jungles of India in cart loads. The fruit, which is about the
size of an orange, with a thin but solid rind, is gathered in autumn,
when ripe and yellow, and in most countries is peeled and dried either
in the sun or by stoves. It comes over from Cadiz, Trieste, Mogadore,
&c., in cases, casks, &c., and duty was paid on about 11,000 lbs. in
1839.

CUBEBS.--The dried unripe fruit of _P. Cubebi_, or _Cubeba
qfficinalia_, a climbing plant of the pepper tribe, native of Prince
of Wales' Island, Java, and the Indian islands furnishes the medicinal
cubebs, which is used extensively in arresting discharges from mucous
membranes. In appearance cubebs resemble black pepper, except that
they are higher colored and are each furnished with a stalk two or
three lines long. Dr. Blume says, that the cubebs of the shops are the
fruit of _P. caninum_. This species of pepper, when fresh and good,
contains nearly 10 per cent. of essential oil.

In 1842 the quantity entered for home consumption was 67,093 lbs. The
average imports are about 40 to 50 tons annually. 3 cases were
imported into Liverpool in 1851. The price in the Liverpool market, in
January 1853, was £3 10s. to £4 10s. the cwt.

GAMBOGE.--This resinous juice, which is a most important article of
commerce, is furnished by some of the plants of Gambogia, natives
principally of South America. It is a powerful irritant, and is
employed medicinally as a drastic and hydragogue cathartic. From its
bright yellow color it is also used as a pigment.

Gamboge fetches in the London market from £5 to £11 per cwt.

Some of the species of _Stalagmites_ (Murray), natives of Ceylon and
the East, yield a similar yellow viscid juice, hardly distinguishable
from gamboge, and used for the same purpose by painters. They are a
genus of fine ornamental trees, thriving well in soils partaking of a
mixture of loam and peat.

According to Koenig, the juice is collected by breaking off the leaves
or young branches. From the fracture the gamboge exudes in drops, and
is therefore called _gum gutta_. It is received on leaves, coco-nut
shells, earthen pots, or in bamboos; it gradually hardens by age, and
is then wrapped up in leaves prior to sale.

The common gamboge of Ceylon is produced by a plant which Dr. Graham
was led to view as a species of a new genus under the name of
_Hebradendron Gambogoides_. A very different species, the _Garcinia
Gambogia_, of Roxburgh, once supposed to produce gamboge, and indeed
actually confounded by Linnæus with the true gamboge tree of Ceylon,
he has proved not to produce gamboge at all.

This substance is also obtained from several other plants, as the
_Mangostana Gambogia_ (Gaertner), _Hypericwm bacciferum_ and
_Cayanense_, natives of the East Indies, Siam and Ceylon, whence it is
imported in small cakes and rolls or cylindrical twisted masses. Its
composition is as follows: number 1 being an analysis by Professor
Christison of a commercial specimen from Ceylon; number 2 of a fine
sample of common ditto:--

                           1       2
  Resin, or fatty acid   78.84   74.8
  Coloring matter         4.03    3.5
  Gum                    12.59   16.5
  Residue                 4.54    5.2

                        100.    100.

The average imports of gamboge into the port of London, during the
past five or six years, have been from 400 to 500 chests of one to two
cwt. each.

Gentian.--The yellow gentian root (_Gentiana lutea_) is the officinal
species, and a native of the Alps of Austria and Switzerland.

The stems and roots of _G. amarella_ and _campestris_, British
species, and _G. cruciata, purpurea, punctata_, &c., are similar in
their effects, having tonic, stomachic, and febrifugal properties. So
has _G. kurroo_ of the Himalayas. The root is generally taken up in
autumn, when the plant is a year old. It is cut longitudinally into
pieces of a foot or a foot and a half long. They are imported into
this country in bales from Havre, Marseilles, &c., and a good deal
comes from Germany. In 1839, 470 cwts. were entered for home
consumption.

Chiretta is the herb and root of _Agathotes Chirayta_, Don; _Gentiana
Chirayta_, Fleming; or _Ophelia chirayta_, a herbaceous plant, growing
in the Himalaya mountains about Nepaul and the Morungs.

Ipecacuan.-- _Cephælis Ipecacuanhæ_, Richard, yields the ipecacuan of
the shops. The plant is met with in the woods of several Brazilian
provinces, as Pernambuco, Bahia and Rio Janeiro. It is found growing
in moist shady situations, from 8 to 20 degs. south latitude. The
roots, which are the officinal part, are contorted, knotty and
annulated, and about the thickness of a goose quill.

Besides this brown or gray annulated ipecacuan, there are spurious
kinds, such as the striated or black Peruvian, the produce of
_Pyschotria elliptica_, and other species; and white or amylaceous
ipecacuan, furnished by _Richardsonia scabra_, an herbaceous
perennial, native of the provinces of Rio Janeiro and Minas Geraes.
_Manettia glabra_ or _cordifolia_, also furnishes ipecacuan in Buenos
Ayres. It is imported into this country from Rio in bales, barrels,
bags, and serons, and the average annual imports in the eight years
ending in 1841 were 10,000 lbs. In 1840, the shipments from Rio were
as much as 20,000 lbs.

Castelnau states, that one expert hand can gather 15 lbs. of the
ipecacuan root in a day, which will fetch in Rio one dollar per pound.
He estimates that, from 1830 to 1837, not less than 800,000 lbs. of
this drug were exported from the province of Matto Grosso to Rio.

Jalap.--This drug is obtained from the dried tubers or root-stock of
_Ipomoea Jalapa_ or _Convolvulus Jalapa_, a perennial plant, native of
America. Some suppose it takes its specific name from Xalapa, in
Mexico, whence we chiefly import it. It grows in the woods near
Chicanquiaco, at an altitude of 6,000 feet above the level of the sea.
Large quantities might be gathered and exported in Jamaica. The root
is of a roundish tuberous form, black externally, and of a deep,
yellowish grey within, and varies in size from that of a walnut to
that of a moderate sized turnip. It contains a resin in which its
active properties reside. It is brought to this country in thin
transverse slices, and the amount entered for home consumption is
about 45,000 lbs. a year. It is imported in bales, from Vera Cruz
direct, or indirectly by way of New York, and other places.

Two sorts of jalap root occur in commerce. The one which was first
introduced into the market, and which is even at the present day most
frequently met with, is obtained from the _Ipomoea Schiedeana_ of
Zuccarini, a plant growing on the eastern declivity of the Mexican
Andes, and discovered by Von Schiedes. The root, as met with in
commerce, consists of pieces varying from the size of a nut to that of
the fist, sometimes whole, sometimes cut into disks, and at other
times divided into two or three portions. The external surface is of a
more or less dark gray brown color, corrugated and rough. It is very
hard, presents a shining resinous even surface when broken, and is
difficult to reduce to powder. The powder is of a brownish color, has
a faint peculiar odor and irritant taste.

The second quality, which was introduced into commerce is great
quantities a few years ago, by the name of stalk jalap, is now more
scarce, and obtained from the _Ipomoea orazabensis_ of Pelletan, a
plant growing without cultivation in the neighbourhood of the Mexican
town of Orizaba. The root, as met with in the trade, consists of
pieces varying from one to three inches in length, and 1½ to two
inches in diameter. They are of a higher color than the first-named
root, and of decidedly fibrous structure. The chief constituents of
both varieties is a peculiar resin, of which they contain about 10 per
cent.

Scammony.--The root of _Convolvulus Scammonia_, another plant of the
same family, affords, when cut, a gummy resinous exudation or milky
juice, which soon concretes and forms scammony. The plant grows
abundantly in Greece, the Grecian Islands, and various parts of the
Levant. It is imported from Aleppo in drums, weighing from 75 to 125
lbs. each, and from Smyrna in compact cakes like wax packed in chests.
In 1839, the quantity on which duty (2s. 6d. per lb.) was paid
amounted to 8,581 lbs. The duty received for scammony, in 1842, was
£607. A spurious kind is prepared from _Calystegia (Convolvulus)
sepium_, a native of Australia, and several plants of the Asclepiadacæ
order.

Dr. Russell ("Med. Obs. and Inqui.") thus describes the mode of
procuring scammony:--

    Having cleared away the earth from the upper part of the root, the
    peasants cut off the top in an oblique direction, about two inches
    below where the stalks spring from it. Under the most depending part
    of the slope they affix a shell, or some other convenient
    receptacle, into which the milky juice flows. It is then left about
    twelve hours, which time is sufficient for the drawing off of the
    whole juice; this, however, is in small quantities, each root
    affording but a few drachms. This milky juice from the several roots
    is put together, often into the leg of an old boot, for want of some
    more proper vessel, when in a little time it grows hard, and is the
    genuine scammony. Various substances are often added to scammony
    while yet soft. Those with which it is most usually adulterated are
    wheat flour, ashes, or fine sand and chalk.

Liquorice.--The plant which yields the liquorice root of commerce is
_Glycirrhiza glabra_ or _Liquiritia officinalis_. It is a native of
Italy and the southern parts of Europe, but has been occasionally
cultivated with success in Britain, especially at Pontefract, in
Yorkshire, and at Mitcham, in Surrey. The plant is a perennial, with
pale blue flowers. It grows well in a deep, light, sandy loam, and is
readily increased by slips from the roots with eyes. The root, which
is the only valuable part, is long, slender, fibrous, of a yellow
color, and when grown in England is fit for use at the end of three
years. The sweet, subacid, mucilaginous juice is much esteemed as a
pectoral. It owes its sweetness to a peculiar principle called glycrin
or glycirrhiza, which appears also to be present in the root and
leaves of other papilionaceous plants, as _G. echinata_ and
_glandulifera, Trifoliwm alpinum_, and the wild liquorice of the West
Indies, _Abrus precatorius_, a pretty climber.

The greatest portion of our supplies of the extract, which amount to
7,000 or 8,000 cwts. a year, are obtained from Spain and Sicily. The
juice, obtained by crushing the roots in a mill, and subjecting them
to the press, is slowly boiled, till it becomes of a proper
consistency, when it is formed into rolls of a considerable thickness,
which are usually covered with bay leaves. It is afterwards usually
re-dissolved, purified, and, when formed into small quills, is known
as refined liquorice.

In 1839, 1,166 tons of liquorice paste were exported from Naples,
valued at £45 per ton. Mr. Poole, in his Statistics of Commerce,
states that the consumption of liquorice root and paste in this
country averages 500 tons per annum. 110 cwt. of the juice and 100
cwt. of the root are annually brought into Hull from the continent.

Matico--the Peruvian styptic, a powerful vegetable astringent, was
first made known to the medical profession of England by Dr. Jeffreys,
of Liverpool, in the _Lancet_, as far back as January 5th, 1839. A
paper on its history and power was published in May, 1843, in the
"Transactions of the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association,"
vol. 10. It is stated to be the _Piper angustifolium_ of Ruiz and
Parsons. Dr. Martin believes it to be a species of _Phlomis_. The
leaves are covered with a fine hair.

The powdered leaves of the _Eupatorium glutinosum_, under the name of
Matico, are used about Quito for stanching blood and healing wounds. A
good article on the pharmaceutical and chemical character of matico,
by Dr. J.F. Hodges, appeared in the "Proceedings of the Chemical
Society of London," in 1845. It is stated, by Dr. Martin, that, like
the gunjah, which the East Indians prepare, from the _Cannabis
Indica_, the leaves and flowers of the matico have been long employed
by the sensual Indians of the interior of Peru to prepare a drink
which they administer to produce a state of aphrodisia. The leaves and
flowering tops of the plant are the parts imported and introduced to
notice as a styptic, which property seems to depend on their structure
and not on their chemical composition.

Quassia.--The quassia wood of the pharmacopoeia was originally the
product of _Quassia amara_, a tall shrub, never above fifteen feet
high, native of Guiana, but also inhabiting Surinam and Colombia. It
is a very ornamental plant, and has remarkable pinnate leaves with
winged petioles. This wood is well known as one of the most intense
bitters, and is considered an effectual remedy in any disorder where
pure bitters are required. Surinam quassia is not, however, to be met
with now. That sold in the shops is the tough, fibrous, bitter bark of
the root of _Simaruba (Quassia) excelsa_ and _officinalis_, very large
forest trees, growing in Cayenne, Jamaica, and other parts of the West
India Islands, where they bear the local name of bitter-wood. Its
infusion is used as a tonic. 23 tons of bitter-wood were shipped from
Montego Bay, Jamaica, in 1851. Quassia acts as a narcotic poison on
flies and other insects. Although prohibited by law, it is frequently
employed by brewers as a substitute for hops. The duty of £8 17s. 6d.
per cwt., levied on quassia, is intended to restrict its use for such
a purpose.

Rhubarb.--This most important plant belongs to the genus Rheum. The
officinal rhubarb is the root of an undetermined species. There are
about thirteen different kinds which are said to yield rhubarb.
Lindley enumerates fifteen. I however take Professor Balfour's
classification:--

    1. _Rheum palmatum_, native of Bucharia, which has perhaps the best
    title to be considered the true rhubarb-plant, grows spontaneously
    in the Mongolian empire on the confines of China.

    2. _R. undulatum_, native of China, which yields much of the French
    rhubarb.

    3. _R. compactum_, native of Tartary, another species yielding
    French rhubarb, and often cultivated in Britain for its acid
    petioles.

    4. _R. Emodi_ (Wallich). This species yields a kind of Himalayan
    rhubarb. Its petioles are much used for their acid properties.

    5. _R. Rhaponticum_, native of Asia. Used in France and Britain in
    the same way as the third species. It is much cultivated in the
    department of Morbihan.

    6. _R. hybridum_ (Murr). Much cultivated in Germany for its root and
    in Britain for its stalks.

    7. _R. Webbianum_ (Royle). 8. _R. Spiceformi_ (Royle). 9. _R.
    Moorcroftianum_ (Royle). Himalayan species or varieties.

    10. _R. crassinervium_ (Fisch), a Russian species.

    11. _R. leucorhizum_ (Pall), a Siberian and Altai species, said to
    yield imperial or white rhubarb. It has striped flowers, while all
    others are whitish green.

    12. _R. Caspicum_ (Fisch), a Russian and Altai species.

    13. _R. Ribes_, native of the Levant, but some say an Afghanistan or
    Persian species.

All these grow in the cold parts of the world, as on the Altai
mountains, in Siberia, Thibet, North of China, and on the Himalayan
range. The rhubarb procured from one or more of these species is known
in commerce under the names of Russian or Turkey, Chinese or East
Indian, and English rhubarb.

The plants all thrive well in a rich loamy soil, or light sandy soil,
and are increased by divisions of the roots or by seed.

The extent of country from which rhubarb of one kind or another is
actually collected, according to Christison, stretches from Ludall, in
77½ east longitude, to the Chinese province of Shen-si, 29 degrees
further east, and from the Sue-chan mountains, in north latitude 26
degrees, nearly to the frontiers of Siberia, 24 degrees northward. The
best rhubarb is said to come from the very heart of Thibet, within 95
degrees east longitude and 35 degrees north latitude, 500 or 600 miles
north of Assam.

The Chinese rhubarb is inferior to that of Russia and Turkey. The
price varies in China from 38 dollars per picul upwards, and about
1,500 piculs are annually exported, on an average at 50 dollars per
picul. In 1844, 2,077 piculs were shipped from Canton for Great
Britain; and of 95,701 lbs. imported in 1841, 43,640 lbs. were brought
from China, 8,349 lbs. from the Philippines, 7,290 lbs. from the East
Indies, and 33,710 lbs. from the United States; only 1,462 lbs. were
brought from Russia. The imports from the East Indies have decreased
more than 70 per cent. in the last twelve years, as compared with the
preceding. The wholesale prices are, for round rhubarb, 8d. to 3s. per
lb.; flat, 6d. to 3s. 3d. per lb.; Dutch trimmed, 6s. to 7s. per lb.;
Russian, 13s. to 13s. 6d. per lb.

In 1831, we imported 133,462 lbs. from the East India Company's
possessions, and 6,901 lbs. from Russia. In 1843, only 71,298 lbs.
came from the East. From China we received, in 1843, 172,882 lbs.

The quantities of rhubarb on which duty of 1s. per lb. was paid in the
six years ending 1840, were as follows;--

              East Indian.         Foreign.
                  lbs.               lbs.
  1835           32,515             10,647
  1836           36,836              7,752
  1837           44,669              5,946
  1838           37,026              7,402
  1839           22,575             12,525
  1840           16,745             22,203

The imports and consumption of rhubarb are thus stated in the
_Pharmaceutical Journal_:--

             Imports.       Consumption.
               lbs.            lbs.
  1826       102,624         32,936
  1831       140,395         40,124
  1836       122,142         44,468
  1841        95,701         67,877
  1846       427,694           --
  1847       305,736           --
  1848       116,005           --
  1849        94,914           --

The rhubarb brought into Siberia grows wild in Chinese Tartary,
especially in the province Gansun, on hills, heaths, and meadows, and
is generally gathered in summer from plants of six years of age. "When
the root is dug up, it is washed to free it from earthy particles;
peeled, bored through the centre, strung on a thread, and dried in the
sun. In autumn all the dried rhubarb collected in the province is
brought in horsehair sacks, containing about 200 lbs., to Sinin (the
residence of the dealers), loaded on camels, and sent over Mongolia to
Kiachta, and the ports and capital of China.

Sarsaparilla.--The root of various species of _Smilax_ constitutes the
sarsaparilla of the shops. It is an evergreen climbing undershrub,
having whitish green flowers, and grows readily from suckers. It is a
native of the temperate and tropical regions of Asia and America. The
officinal part is the bark, which comes off from the rhizomes. They
are mucilaginous, bitter, and slightly acid. Sarsaparilla is used in
decoction and infusion as a tonic and alterative. The following are
enumerated as sources whence sarsaparilla of various kinds is derived.

_Smilax China_ and _sagittæfolia_, yielding the Chinese root, are said
to come from the province of Onansi in China.

_S. pseudo China, S. Sarsaparilla, S. rubens_, and _S. Watsoni,_
furnish the drug of North America.

The sarsaparilla distinguished in commerce as the Lisbon or Brazilian
is the root of _S. papyracea_ of Poiret. It is an undershrub, the stem
of which is compressed and angular below, and armed with prickles at
the angles. The leaves are elliptic, acuminate, and marked with three
longitudinal nerves. This species grows principally in the regions
bordering the river Amazon, and on the banks of most of its tributary
streams. It is generally brought from the provinces of Para and
Maranham. It is in large cylindrical bundles, long and straight, and
the flexible stem of the plant is bound round the bundles, so as to
entirely cover them. Its fibres are very long, cylindrical, wrinkled
longitudinally, and furnished with some lateral fibrils. Its color is
of a fawn brown, or sometimes of a dark grey, approaching to black.
The color internally is nearly white. Besides this species there are
others indigenous, such as _S. officinalis_, which grows in the
province of Mina; _S. syphilitica_, which grows in the northern
regions, and three new species, _S. japicanga, S. Brasiliensis_, and
_S_. _syringioides_. There is also met with in Brazil another plant,
_Herreria sarsaparilla_, belonging to the same natural order, which
abounds in the provinces of Rio, Bahia, and Mina, and the roots of
which receive the name of wild sarsaparilla.

From Mexico, Honduras, and Angostura very good qualities are imported.
_S. zeylanica, glabra_, and _perfoliata_ furnish sarsaparilla from
Asia, and _S. excelsa_ and _aspera_ are used as substitutes for the
officinal drug in Europe.

_Smilax officinalis_, found in woods near the Rio Magdalena in New
Granada, furnishes the best in the market, which is commonly known as
Jamaica Sarza. It differs from the other kinds in having a deep red
cuticle of a close texture, and the color is more generally diffused
through the ligneous part. It is shipped in bales, formed either of
the spirally formed roots, as in the Jamaica and Lima varieties, or of
unfolded parallel roots, as in the Brazilian varieties. The roots are
usually several feet long, about the thickness of a quill, more or
less wrinkled, and the whole quantity retained for home consumption,
in 1840, was 143,000 lbs. In 1844, 184,748 lbs., and in 1845 111,775
lbs. were shipped from Honduras.

The prices in the London market, at the close of 1853, were --Brazil,
1s. 3d. per lb.; Honduras, 1s. 3d. to 1s. 8d. per lb.; Vera Cruz, 6d.
to 11d. per lb.; Jamaica, 1s. 8d. to 3s. 4d. per lb. The duty received
on sarsaparilla in 1842 was £1,536.

The average annual quantity of sarsaparilla obtained from Mexico and
South America, exclusive of Brazil, and taken for home consumption, in
the twelve years ending with 1843 was 37,826 lbs.

  IMPORTS OF BRAZILIAN SARSAPARILLA.
                   lbs.
  1827            28,155
  1828            49,280
  1829            52,772
  1830            19,842
  1831            31,972
  1832            91,238
  1833            13,077
  1834            28,803
  1835            22,387
  1836             1,718
  1837            12,842
  1838              --
  1839             9,484
  1840             4,141
  1841             1,399
  1842             5,572

The total imports in 1849 were 118,934 lbs.

Sarsaparilla has been found growing in the Port Phillip district of
Australia, and has been shipped thence in small quantities. It seems
to be indigenous to the Bahamas, and is to be found on many of the out
islands. Mr. Wm. Dalzell, of Abaco, collected some considerable
quantity at a place called Marsh Harbor, which was found to be of a
superior quality.

Some thousands of pounds of sarsaparilla were brought to Falmouth,
Jamaica, last year, and bought by merchants for export. It came from
the parish of St. Elizabeth, and there are whole forests covered with
this weed, for such in reality it is. It is too the real black Jamaica
sarsaparilla, that is so much valued in the European and American
markets. It is also found in other parts of the island.

In 1798 3,674 lbs. of sarsaparilla were shipped from La Guayra; 2,394
lbs. in 1801 from Puerto Cabella, and 400 quintals from Costa Rica, in
1845, valued at eight dollars a quintal.

SENNA.--Several varieties of Cassia, natives of the East, are grown
for the production of this drug. The dried leaves of C. _lanceolata_
or _orientalis_, grown in Egypt, Syria, and Arabia, the true Mecca
senna, are considered the best. In Egypt the leaves of _Cynanchum
Arghel_ are used for adulterating senna, _Cassia obovata_ or _C.
senna_, also a native of Egypt, cultivated in the East Indies, as well
as in Spain, Italy, and Jamaica. It is a perennial herb, one or two
feet high. In the East Indies there is a variety (_C. elongata_)
common about Tinnivelly, Coimbatore, Bombay, and Agra, &c. Several of
this species are common in the West India islands. The plants, which
are for the most part evergreens, grow from two to fifteen feet high;
they delight in a loamy soil, or mixture of loam or peat.

The seed is drilled in the ground, and the only attention required by
the plant is loosening the ground and weeding two or three times when
it is young.

The senna leaves imported from India are not generally so clean and
free from rubbish as those from Alexandria. They are worth from 20s.
to 27s. per cwt. in the Bombay market.

The prices are--Alexandria, l½d. to 6d. per lb.; East Indian, 2d. to
3d. per lb.; Tinnevelly, 7d. to 9½d. per lb.

Senna is collected in various parts of Africa by the Arabs, who make
two crops annually; one, the most productive, after the rains in
August and September, the other about the middle of March. It is
brought to Boulack, the port of Cairo, by the caravans, &c., from
Abyssinia, Nubia, and Sennaar, also by the way of Cossier, the Red
Sea, and Suez. The different leaves are mixed, and adulterated with
arghel leaves. The whole shipments from Boulack to Alexandria, whence
it finds it way to Europe, is 14,000 to 15,500 quintals.

The quantities imported for home consumption were--

          From the East Indies.     Other places.     Total.
                  lbs.                   lbs.          lbs.
  1838          72,576                 69,538        142,114
  1839         110,409                 63,766        174,175

In 1840, 211,400 lbs. paid duty, which is now only 1d. per lb.

In 1848, we imported 800,000 lbs. from India; in 1849, the total
imports were 541,143 lbs. The imports into the United Kingdom were, in
1847, 246 tons; 1848, 402 tons; 1849, 240 tons.

Alexandrian senna (_Cassia acutifolia_). This species is said by some
to constitute the bulk of the senna consumed for medical purposes in
Europe. It is much adulterated with the leaves of _Cynanchum Arghel,
Tiphrosia apollinea_, and _Coriaria myrtifolia_.

_C. lanceolata_ and _C. ethiopica_ furnish other species of the same
article, the greater part of the produce of which find its way to
India, through the Red Sea, Surat, Bombay and Calcutta, the imports
into Calcutta, in 1849, having been 79,212 lbs. _C. obovata_ furnishes
the Aleppo and Italian drug.

At least eight varieties of senna leaf are known in commerce in
Europe--1. the Senna palthe; 2. Senna of Sennaar or Alexandria; 3. of
Tripoli; 4. of Aleppo; 5. of Moka; 6. of Senegambia; 7. the false or
Arghel; 8. the Tinnevelly.

In Egypt the senna harvest takes place twice annually, in April and
September; the stalks are cut off with the leaves, dried before the
sun, and then packed with date leaves. At Boulka, the drug is sorted,
mixed, and adulterated, and passed into commerce through Alexandria.

Alexandrian senna, according to Mr. Jacob Bell ("Pharmaceutical
Journal," vol. 2, p. 63), contains a mixture of two or more species of
true senna. It consists principally of _Cassia obovata_ and _C.
obtusata_, and according to some authorities it occasionally contains
_C. acutifolia_. This mixture is unimportant, but the _Cynanchum
Arghel_, which generally constitutes a fifth of the weight on an
average, possesses properties differing in some respects from true
senna, and which render it particularly objectionable. The Tinnevelly
senna, that most esteemed by the profession, is known by the size of
the leaflets, which are much larger than those of any other variety;
they are also less brittle, thinner and larger, and are generally
found in a very perfect state, while the other varieties, especially
the Alexandrian, are more or less broken. The leaves of the Cynanchum
are similar in form to those of the lanceolate senna, but they are
thicker and stiffer, the veins are scarcely visible, they are not
oblique at the base, their surface is rugose, and the color grey or
greenish drab; their taste is bitter and disagreeable, and they are
often spotted with a yellow, intensely bitter gummo-resinous
incrustation. Being less fragile than the leaflets of the true senna,
they are more often found entire, and are very easily distinguishable
from the varieties which constitute true Alexandrian senna.

In their botanical character they are essentially different, being
distinct leaves, not leaflets, which is the case with true senna.

The SUMBUL root, which has recently been introduced into the French
market, is the root of an umbelliferous plant, which is characterised
by a strong odor of musk. The pilgrims, on their return from Mecca,
generally import to Salonika, Constantinople, &c., among other
articles of trade, various plants with a musk-like odor. The
preparation of these vegetable substances is said to be effected by
smearing them over with musk-balsam.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: Ure's Dictionary of Arts and Manufactures.]

[Footnote 2: Fractional parts are not necessary to include.]

[Footnote 3: Dr. Lindley is in error as to the discriminating
duties--British cacao pays 9s., and foreign 18s.]

[Footnote 4: According to Breen's History of St. Lucia up to 1844.]

[Footnote 5: Caffeine (the principle of coffee) and theobromine (the
principle of cacao) are the most highly nitrogenised products in
nature, as the following analysis will show:--

_Caffeine_, according to Pfaff and Liebig, contains--

  Carbon               49.77
  Hydrogen              5.33
  _Nitrogen_           28.78
  Oxygen               16.12

_Theobromine_, according to Woskreseusky, contains--

  Carbon               47.21
  Hydrogen              4.53
  _Nitrogen_           35.38
  Oxygen               12.80

Of the two, cacao contains the larger quantity of nitrogen; and this
chemical fact explains why cacao should be so much more nutritive than
tea, though the principle of tea (theine) is nearly identical with the
principle of cacoa--tea containing in 100 parts 29.009 of nitrogen. On
this subject Liebig has made an observation which I cannot avoid
noticing. He says, "We shall never certainly be able to discover how
men were led to the use of the hot infusion of the leaves of a certain
shrub (tea), or of a decoction of certain roasted seeds (coffee). Some
cause there must be, which would explain how the practice has become a
necessary of life to whole nations. But it is surely still more
remarkable that the beneficial effects of both plants on the health
must be ascribed to one and the same substance, the presence of which
in two vegetables, belonging to different natural families, and the
produce of different quarters of the globe, could hardly have
presented itself to the boldest imagination. Yet recent researches
have shown, in such a manner as to exclude all doubt, that caffeine,
the peculiar principle of coffee, and theine, that of tea, are in all
respects identical."--_(Anim. Chem.,_ pp. 178-9.) We really can see
nothing in all this but the manifestation of that instinct which,
implanted in us by the Almighty, led the untutored Indian (as we are
pleased to call him) to breathe into the nostril of the buffalo or the
wild horse, and by that single act to subdue his angry rage, or that
impelled the first discoverer of combustion to extract fire from the
attrition of two pieces of wood. The American Indian, living entirely
on flesh, "discovered for himself in tobacco smoke a means of
retarding the change of matter in the tissues of the body, and thereby
of making hunger more endurable."--(P. 179.) But the wonder ceases,
when we reflect that man was endued with certain properties by his
Maker which must have been at some remote period, of which we can form
no idea, active and manifest the moment he breathed the breath of
life. To inquire how he lost this property is not our business at
present, but it is only by supposing the _quondam_ existence of such a
property, active and manifest, that can in any way explain a first
knowledge of the therapeutic, or threptic, qualities of plants and
shrubs. With regard to the identity of theine, caffeine, theobromine,
&c., it would be as well that the reader should keep in mind that it
is so chemically _only_, for in appearance, taste, weight, odor, &c.,
no substances can differ more. Does the palate exert some peculiar
action on the ingesta, so as to give to each a distinct sapor? Or
_vice versa_?]

[Footnote 6: In the West Indies, from my own experience, I have found
this to be one of the worst descriptions of soil. _P.L.S._]

[Footnote 7: Correspondent of the Singapore _Free Press_, December,
1852.]

[Footnote 8: It is important, in considering what tea may be had from
China, to consider the manner of its production. It is grown over an
immense district, in small farms, or rather gardens, no farm producing
more that 600 chests. "The tea merchant goes himself, or sends his
agents to all the small towns, villages, and temples in the district,
to purchase tea from the priests and small farmers; the large
merchant, into whose hands the tea thus comes, _has to refire it and
pack it for the foreign market."--(Fortune's Tea Districts.)_ This
refiring is the only additional process of manufacture for our market.
Mr. Fortune elsewhere, in his valuable work, giving an account of the
cost of tea from the farmers, the conveyance to market, and the
merchant's profit, states that " the small farmer and manipulator is
not overpaid, but that the great profits are received by the
middlemen." No doubt these men do their utmost to keep the farmers in
complete ignorance of the state of the tea-market, that they may
monopolise the advantages, but it is pretty certain that the news of a
bold reduction of duty, and the promise of an immensely increased
consumption, would reach even the Chinese farmers, and make them pick
their trees more closely--a little of which amongst so many would make
a vast difference in the total supply.]

[Footnote 9: See article Thea, by Dr. Royle, in "Penny Cyclopædia,"
vol xxiv., p. 286.]

[Footnote 10: Hooker's "Bot. Mag.," 1.3148. It is the Assam tea
plant.]

[Footnote 11: Report on Tea Cultivation submitted to House of Commons.
See Blue Book, 1839, p. 1-3.]

[Footnote 12: In a short time rain gauges will be established at
Bheemtal, Huwalbaugh, Paoree, and Kaolagir, in order to measure the
quantity of rain that falls annually, for the purpose of ascertaining
how much the quantity and quality of the produce of tea is affected by
the weather.]

[Footnote 13: In China this process, according to the statement of tea
manufacturers, is carried on to a great extent.]

[Footnote 14: Dr. Jameson, in a late communication, remarks--"From the
accounts I have received of that place (Darjeeling), I doubt not but
that the plants there grown will yield tea of a superior
description."]

[Footnote 15: The crops of this district, such as rice, mundooa, and
other grains, are so plentiful and cheap as scarcely to pay the
carriage to the nearest market town, much less to the plains. In
Almorah a maund of rice or mundooa sells for something less than a
rupee; barley for eight annas; and wheat for a rupee.]

[Footnote 16: There is frequently a discrepancy in the figures in the
Parliamentary papers, which will account for a want of agreement in
some of these returns.]

[Footnote 17: See the "Pharmaceutical Journal" for June, 1849, p. 15,
et seq.]

[Footnote 18: Reports of Dr. Roxburgh, Mr. Touchet of Radanagore, and
Mr. Cardin of Mirzapore, Cutna. Papers on East India Sugar, page 258.]

[Footnote 19: Many are of opinion, that although the juice of this
cane is larger in quantity, yet that it contains less sugar. There is
some sense in the reason they assign, which is, that in the Mauritius
and elsewhere it has the full time of twelve or fourteen months
allowed for its coming to maturity--whereas the agriculture of India,
and especially in Bengal, only allows it eight or nine months, which,
though ample to mature the smaller country canes, is not sufficient
for the Otaheite.]

[Footnote 20: Roxburgh on the Culture of Sugar and Jaggary in the
Rajahmundry Circar; Third Ap. to Report on East India Sugar, p. 2.]

[Footnote 21: L'Exploitation de Sucreries. Porter on the Sugar Cane,
53,321.]

[Footnote 22: That the above application would be beneficial, is
rendered still more worthy of credit from the following
experience:--In the Dhoon, the white ant is a most formidable enemy to
the sugar planter, owing to the destruction it causes to the sets when
first planted. Mr. G.H. Smith says, that there is a wood very common
there, called by the natives _Butch_, through, which, they say, if the
irrigating waters are passed in its progress to the beds, the white
ants are driven away. (Trans. Agri-Hort. Soc. of India, v. 65.)]

[Footnote 23: Fitzmaurice on the Culture of the Sugar Cane.]

[Footnote 24: The kilogramme is equal to 2 lb, 3 oz. avoirdupois.]

[Footnote 25: A lecture on the nutritive value of different articles
of food, by C. Daubeny, M.D., "Gardener's Chronicle" (London), January
20th, 1849, p. 37.]

[Footnote 26: Transactions of the New York State Agricultural Society,
1849, p. 646.]

[Footnote 27: A lecture "On the Geographical Distribution of Corn
Plants," by the Rev. E. Sidney--Proceedings of the Royal Institution
(London), May 18th, 1849.]

[Footnote 28: Boussingault's Rural Economy, American edition, pp. 85
and 86.]

[Footnote 29: Zenas Coffin, one of the oldest whalemen in Nantucket,
states that corn meal in tight rum puncheons when sent to the Went
Indies will keep sweet, while in common flour barrels it will spoil.
Report of the Commissioner of Patents for 1847, p. 133.]

[Footnote 30: From remarks of Col. Skinner, and others, at a meeting
of the American Institute, held in April 1846. Transactions of
American Institute, 1846, p. 509 _et seq._]

[Footnote 31: Comptes Rendus des Séances de L'Academie des Sciences,
February 5th, 1819.]

[Footnote 32: A Treatise on Diet and Regimen, by Wm. Henry Robertson,
M.D., vol. i. p. 153.]

[Footnote 33: The Plant: a Biography; by M.H. Schleiden, M.D.,
Professor of Botany in the University of Jena. English translation, p.
54.]

[Footnote 34: Transactions of the New York State Agricultural Society
for 1847, p. 190. In this communication, Mr. Bentz does not describe
the process which he adopts, but enumerates some of its supposed
advantages.]

[Footnote 35: Quoted by Boussingault, Rural Economy, Amer. edition, p.
410.]

[Footnote 36: A Treatise on Diet and Regimen, by Wm. Henry Robertson,
M.D., Vol. i. p. 140.]

[Footnote 37: Experimental Researches on the Food of Animals, &c., by
R.D. Thomson, M.D., p. 156.]

[Footnote 38: Chemistry of Vegetable and Animal Physiology, translated
by Prof. J.F.W. Johnston, p. 684.]

[Footnote 39: See Dr. R.D. Thomson's Experimental Researches on the
Food of Animals, &c.]

[Footnote 40: Mulder's Chemistry of Vegetable and Animal Physiology;
English Translation, p. 816.]

[Footnote 41: I have had no opportunity of analysing samples of flour
from the South-Western States, and therefore cannot extend this
comparison to them.]

[Footnote 42: Transactions of "Agri.-Hort. Society, of Calcutta," vol.
iv. p. 125.]

[Footnote 43: Dict. of Arts and Manufacture.]

[Footnote 44: Pharmaceutical Journal, vol. 3, p. 138.]

[Footnote 45: The glasses used were all of the sort described in
Griffin's catalogue under the name of Clark's test-glasses. They were
all, as nearly as possible, of the same size and shape.]

[Footnote 46: I have determined the amount of nitrogen contained in
the meal made from the whole maize, the growth of the colony, as also
from plantain meal; I have also ascertained its amount in cassava
meal, prepared in the manner mentioned in the text, and in meal
prepared from the cassava sliced, dried, and ground without expressing
the juice. Assuming Liebig's formula of Proteine, namely, C-48 N-6
H-36 0-4 the results stand thus:--

                                      Nitrogen.    Proteine compounds.
                                      Per cent.         Per cent.
  Maize meal (unhusked)                 1.73              10.72
  Plantain meal                          .88               5.45
  Cassava meal (juice expressed)         .36               2.23
  Ditto from the sliced and dried roots  .78               4.83
]

[Footnote 47: Les Moyens de prévenir la Maladie des Pommes de Terre.
Expériences et Conclusions de A.N.C. Bollman, Conseiller d'état,
Professeur, &c. 8vo, St. Petersburg, 1853.]

[Footnote 48: If cinnamon seeds after washing be exposed to the sun,
even for twenty minutes, the shells will crack in two, and this
prevents the seeds from growing.]

[Footnote 49: No export duties exist in the Straits Settlements.]

[Footnote 50: Since these remarks were written, the duty has been
wholly abolished.]

[Footnote 51: Although this was the amount of produce for 1842, it
must be remarked that that crop was a complete failure, and the
average crop for some years past has been 46,666 pounds.]

[Footnote 52: Ure's Dictionary of Arts and Manufactures.]

[Footnote 53: The vernacular name for stale or putrid urine.]

[Footnote 54: "Lit" was the name applied to the plant, from which the
dye was to be prepared, and "pig" is the Scotch synonym for any kind
of earthenware vessel---in which the maceration was generally carried
on.]

[Footnote 55: Pitkins' Statistics of the United States.]

[Footnote 56: A great portion of the crop I grew had leaves measuring
two feet nine inches in length and eighteen inches wide, being larger
than I ever knew to have been grown in America. The average weight I
obtained per acre, was 25 cwt.; whereas I see by the public returns,
the average of what is grown here is only 17 1-7th cwt.]




  INDEX.

  _Albrus precatorius_, 643

  Acacia bark, 493
    _Catechu_, 495, 577
    _dealbata_, 505

  _Acer saccharinum_, 205

  Acre, coffee trees to the, 69

  Achira plant, 355

  Achote, a name for arnotto, 447

  _Acrocomia fusiformis_, 519

  _Adeps Myristica_, 402

  _Adme cyperus_, 626

  _Adenanthera Pavonina_, 378

  _Adansonia digitata_, 378

  African arrowroot, 353
    lard, 525
    purple millet, 307

  Africa, pepper grown in, 422
    tobacco culture in, 615

  Agar-Agar moss, 378, 379

  Agi or Guinea pepper, 429

  Agave  Americana--a substitute for soap, 574

  Agaiti oil, 520

  Agricultural wealth of tropical regions, 2

  Aipi, 376

  Akyab, exports of rice from, 297

  _Aleurites triloba_, 521, 538

  Alexandrian senna, 648

  Algaroba beans, 313
    bark, 503

  Algiers, tobacco culture in, 615

  Alizaine, 478

  Alkanet root, 442

  Allspice, the common name for pimento, 430

  Almond oil, 510, 533

  Aloes, statistics of exports from the Cape, 632
    varieties of, 628

  _Alpinia Galanga_, 419
    _Cardamomum_, 419
    _racemosa_, 414

  _Alstræmeria pallida_, 330

  _Althea rosea_, 442

  _Amaranthus gangiticus_, 434

  American arrowroot, 352
    flour, countries to which, shipped, 223

  Americans consume most coffee, 40

  Amboyna wood, 439

  _Amomum_, species of, 419
    _Zingiber_, 414

  _Anacardium occidentale_, 495, 521

  Analyses, various, of tobacco, 592-93

  Analysis of the coffee plant, 49
    ashes of the coffee tree, 43
    of catechu, 579
    of Havana tobacco, 591, 615
    of other varieties, 615
    of oil cake, 546
    of soils, 617
    of soils, not so requisite abroad, 7
    of the sugar cane, by Dr. Evans, 154
    of sugar soils in the East, 172

  _Anethum graveolens_, 376
    _Sowa_, seeds of, 434

  Angola weed, 486

  Aniseed, 437

  Antigua arrowroot, statistics of, 353
    cost of cultivating sugar, 189

  Ants, remedy for, 181

  _Anchusa tinctoria_, 442

  Andropogon, species of, 572

  _Anileria_, a manufactory for indigo, 460

  Apricot oil, 511, 536

  Apios, 355, 371

  Aquilaria, species of, 439

  Arghel leaves, 647

  _Arachis hypogoea_, 513

  _Arenga saccharifera_, the _gomutus saccharifera_ of Rumphius, 136, 314

  Areometer, an instrument for testing oil, 532

  _Arbor alba_, 566

  Areca nuts, value of the exports from Ceylon, 579
    palm, 577

  _Argemone Mexicana_, 511, 521, 626

  Arnotto, 447

  Arpent, a French land measure, about one-seventh less than an acre, 251

  Arracan, exports of rice from, 297

  _Arracacha esculenta_, 355, 375

  Arrack, 556
    used to flavor tobacco, 621

  Arroba, a Spanish weight of 25 lbs., the fourth part of a quintal.

  Arrowroot, Benzon's analysis of, 348
    culture and commerce of, 345
    made from the Palmyra shoots, 376
    starch of, 331, 334-35, 337

  Arsenic for steeping grain, poisonous effects from, 233

  _Artocarpus incisa_, 318, 330

  _Arum colocasia_, 364
    _esculentum_, 364
    _Rumphii_, 365

  Asafoetida, 633

  _Asclepias curassavica_, 625
    _gigantea_, 494
    _tingens_, 442

  Assamee, an Indian name for the ryot or cultivator, 467

  Assam, introduction of tea culture, 94
    tea sales, 98
    Company, origin of, 98
    manufacture of tea in, 126

  Assaroo, rain sowing, 468

  _Astoria theiformis_, used as tea at Santa Fe, 80

  Attap leaf for thatching, 405, 559

  Attar of roses, 570

  Aucklandia, 438

  _Auracaria Bidwillii_, 377

  Australia, consumption of tea in, 87, 88
    sugar cultivation recommended, 139

  Austria production of beet-root sugar in, 197, 200

  _Avicenna tomentosa_, 444

  Avocado seed yields a dye stuff, 444

  Awl tree, 443


  Babool wood, 493

  Bahu, a land measure in Java, equal to 71 acres.

  Bajree, the Indian name for _Holcus Spicatus_, 306

  Bales of Cuba tobacco, size of, 613

  Balfour (Prof.) on the starch in potatoes, 330
    on species of rhubarb, 647

  Ball's account of the cultivation, &c., of tea, 103

  Banana, starch in, 331
    used as a shade for the cacao, 15

  _Baptista tinctoria_, 453

  Barbacue, a platform for coffee drying, 69

  _Baphia nitida_, 447

  Barbados arrowroot, 337, 353
    culture of aloes in, 630
    cost of cultivating sugar, 189
    ginger, 415
    sugar crops of, 149
    yam, 334, 335, 337, 338, 362

  Barcelona, exports of cacao from, 13

  Bark of the larch, its utility, 376

  Barks for tanning, 492

  Barley, history and consumption of, 255
    imported, 218
    meal imported, 218
    produce of in England and Wales, 248, 256
    average prices of, 256

  Barrel of rice weighs 600 lbs. net, 291

  Barus camphor, 634

  Barwood, 445, 447

  Basket of rice, a measure equal to 55½ lbs., English,

  _Bassia butyracea_, 136, 512
    _longifolia_, 511
    oil seeds of, 537

  _Batatas edulis_, 330, 331, 357

  _Bauhinia variegata_, 492

  Bayley (Mr.), on consumption of tea in the manufacturing districts

  Bay rush or tapioca, 376

  Beans, analysis of, 264
    and peas, quantities imported, 313
    imported, 218

  Bearing time of different plants, 9

  Beck (Prof.) on various wheats, 222
    on the American breadstuffs, 226

  Beet root sugar produced on the Continent, 144
    cost of producing, 189, 204

  Beet, varieties of the root, 191

  Belgians, large consumers of coffee, 40

  Belgium, production of beet root sugar in, 200

  Benares, production of indigo in, 475

  Ben, oil of, 523

  Bencoolen, pepper grown in, 423
    spice culture in, 412

  Bengal, cost of cultivating sugar in, 189
    indigo, 464
    introduction of the coffee tree into, 40
    production of indigo in, 475
    production of opium in, 580
    rice, 296

  Bennet on Ceylon, 316

  Bennett (Dr.), description of gambier, 500

  Berar, edible root of, 377

  Berberry, a dye stuff, 442

  Berbice, exports of coffee from, 73

  Bergamot, essence of, 566

  Berger's process of making rice starch, 344

  Bermuda arrowroot, statistics of, 353
    mode of cultivating arrowroot, 346

  Berry wax, 540

  Betel leaf, 577

  Bhoe Moong, the Indian name for the ground nut, 515

  Bhull rice lands, 293

  Biggah, distinction between this land measure, 471

  _Bignonia Chica_, 444

  Bihai, 320

  Bitter cassava, 331

  _Bixa orellana_, 447

  Black ginger, 415
    pepper, statistics of, 428
    tea, imports of the last fifteen years, 82
    mode of manufacturing, 112

  Blood tree, 625

  Bollman (Prof.), on the potato rot, 359

  Bolitus used as food, 377

  Bonynge (Mr. F.) promotes tea culture in America, 97

  _Borassus gomutus_, 315

  Borneo, pepper produced in, 422

  Bourbon, cacao grown in, 36
    produce of rice in, 293

  Bousa, an African beer, 308

  Boussingault's analysis of wheat, 244

  Boyams, food plant, 377

  Bran, analysis of, 231

  _Brassica oleracea_, oil from the seed, 539

  Brazilian arrowroot, 330, 367, 369

  Brazil, exports of coffee to America, 63
    cost of producing sugar in, 189
    culture of ginger, 418
    production of coffee in, 40, 41, 63
    introduction of the tea plant, 128
    statistics of sugar production, 182
    tobacco export from, 594
    wood, 485

  Bread fruit, 318, 330
    made from millet, 306
    nut of Jamaica, 319
    stuffs of commerce, 217

  Brick tea of Thibet, 92

  British Guiana, coffee produced in, 73
    West Indies, decline of coffee culture in, 40, 63, 67
    exports of coffee from, 73

  Brood-boon, 319

  Bromelia Pinguin, fruit of, used for soap, 574

  Broom corn, 307, 308
    sedge, 308

  _Brosimum Alicastrum_, edible nuts of, 319

  _Broussonitia tinctoria_, 485

  Brown bread, its wholesomeness, 230

  Bruce, (Mr. C.A.) on the manufacture of tea in Assam, 126

  _Buchanania latifolia_, 494, 521

  Buckwheat, average weight of crop in New Brunswick, 253
    oil from, 510
    culture of, 259
    analysis of, 260

  Buck yam, 333, 335, 362

  Bullhoof, yields a narcotic, 589

  Bunbury (Mr.) on Cape aloes, 632

  Butch wood, used to keep off ants, 181

  _Butea frondosa_, 507
    varieties of, 442
    tannin from, 494

  Butter of cacao, 11, 12
    obtained from the dolichos bean, 313


  _Cabacinha_, the Portuguese name for a purgative plant, 626

  Caballine aloes, 630

  Cacao beans or seeds, analysis of, 12
    age at which may be transplanted, 6
    expenses of a plantation, 33
    information respecting, 9
    plantation, enormous returns formerly obtained from, 34
    quantity consumed in the United Kingdom, 11
    total imports into the United Kingdom, 35
    total imports from America and the West Indies, 35
    trees, where indigenous, 33
    oppressive duties levied on, 34

  Cacomite, a species of Tigridia, 374

  Cacoon, oil from, 511

  Cadet's analysis of barks, 495

  _Cæsalpinia_, species of, 446
    _Brasiliensis_, 485

  _Cæsalpinia Coriari_, 493
    _oleospermum_, 511

  Caffeine, analysis of, 80

  Cajeput oil, 566

  _Caladium costatium_, 377
    _esculentum_, 331
    _sagittifolium_, 334

  Calambak wood, 439

  _Calandra oryza_, 279

  Calcutta, exports of castor oil, 545

  Calidad, the best kind of Cuba tobacco, 613

  California, tea proposed to be cultivated in, 97

  _Callistemon ellipticum_, 505

  _Calophyllum Inophyllum_, 513

  Calumba plant, 638

  Calumbin, 638

  _Calystegia sepium_, 642

  _Camassia esculenta_, 376

  Camata, a variety of valonia, 508

  _Camelina sativa_, 509, 511, 564

  Camotes, a Spanish name for the sweet potato, 375

  _Camæladia ilicifolia_, 628

  Campbell (Dr. A.), on the tea culture at Darjeeling, 116

  Camphor, on the collection of, 633
    obtained from the roots of the cinnamon, 389

  _Cannabis indica_, 643

  Camwood, 447

  Canada, production of maple sugar in, 206
    West, grain exports of, 251

  Canadian yellow root, 626

  Canary Isles, millet exported from, 306
    moss, 486
    seed, 311

  Candleberry myrtle, 540

  Candlewood, 539

  Candles made of cinnamon suet, 390

  Candle tree, 521, 538

  Cane sugar, composition of, 136, 155, 157

  _Canella alba_, 396

  Canna, species of, 355

  _Canothus Americanus_, used as tea, 80

  Caoutchouc, 539

  Capa, a term in Cuba for good tobacco, 614

  Cape aloes, manufacture of, 631
    weed, 486

  Capsicum, 428

  _Carapa_, species yielding oil, 518
    oil, 441, 519
    _guianensis_, 512

  Caracas, large produce of cacao in, 13

  Caraveru, a red pigment, 444

  Carraway seed oil, 437, 566

  Cardomoms, bastard, 419
    plants furnishing, 419

  _Carduus Virginianus_, 376

  Carob bean, 312, 313

  Carolina rice, shipments of, 285

  Carrageen, 379

  Carrots, average weight per bushel in New Brunswick, 253

  _Carthamus tinctoria_, 450
    oil from, 512

  Caruto, a name for the Lana dye, 444

  Carver's treatise on tobacco culture, 607

  _Carum carui_, 566

  _Caryophyllus aromaticus_, 397

  _Caryota urens_, 314

  Cascarilla bark, 396

  Cashew bark, 495
    nut oil, 512

  Cassareep, an antiseptic, 339, 343, 369

  Cassava cakes, 342
    culture of, 367
    fecula of, 330
    flour exports from St. Lucia, 369
    meal, 341
    roots, information respecting, 9
    starch, yield per acre, 370

  Cassia, a rival to cinnamon, 391
    _auriculata_, 494
    bark of China, superiority of, 393, 394
    buds, 396
    _lignea_, 394, 396
    statistics of imports and consumption of, 394

  Castor oil, 510, 511, 527, 536, 542, 563

  Catechu or Cutch, 579
    tannin in, 495

  Cattle, consumption of Indian corn by, 271

  Catty, a Chinese weight, 400

  Cayenne, nutmeg introduced, 412
    pepper grown in, 427
    pepper, 429
    pottage, 429

  _Celastrus paniculatus_, 521

  Celebes, coffee grown in, 62
    production of coffee in, 41
    rice culture in, 302
    tobacco, 621

  Centrifugal machine for sugar, 140

  _Cephælis Ipecacuanhæ_, 641

  _Ceratonia siliqua_, 312, 313

  Cereal grasses, 216

  _Ceroxyion andicola_, 541

  _Cersium virginianum_, 376

  _Cetraria islandica_, 343, 379

  Ceylon arrowroot, 353
    cardamoms, 419, 421
    coco-nut culture in, 556
    culture of rice in, 295

  Ceylon, exports of castor oil from, 545
    adapted for indigo culture, 475
    gamboge, 639
    the great seat of cinnamon culture, 383
    pepper exported from, 426
    imports of _Terra Japonica_, 502
    moss, 379
    produce of tobacco in, 619
    production of coffee in, 41
    tea plant introduced, 95
    Value of the betel nuts exported, 579

  Chay-root, 449, 478

  _Chamarops Palmetto_, 495

  Chandu, the prepared extract of the opium, 585

  _Chenopodium quinon_, 310

  Cherrots, Manilla, 619

  Chesnuts, consumed in France, 361

  Chest of opium, about 140 lbs., 58

  Chick pea, 312
    the inspissated juice of the poppy, 582

  Chicory, extensive consumption of, 37

  Chillies, growth of, 428

  Chimo, powdered potatoes, 361

  China, population of, 86
    shipments of tea from, 84

  Chinese arrowroot, 352

  _Chironia sapinda_, 521

  _Chloranthus_, flowers used to flavor tea, 85

  Chocolate nuts, 11
    imported, 35
    paste, as prepared by the Marienna, 18

  Christison (Prof.), analysis of gamboge, 640

  Chiretta, 641

  Chrysoptranic acid, 488

  _Cibotium Billardieri_, 380

  Cigars, consumption of, 596
    duty received on, 597
    large consumption of in New York, 599
    profit on manufacture of, 612
    number exported from Cuba, 614
    exported from Siam, 619

  Cinchona bark, 635

  Cinnamon, 382
    export duty on, 391
    oil, 565
    properties of good, 387
    statistics of export from Ceylon, 390, 391
    suet, 522
    varieties of the tree, 386

  Citronella oil, 565, 573

  Clagett and Co.'s (Messrs.) tobacco circulars, 601

  Clarifying cane juice, 155

  Clark, (Mr.) on a new variety of tobacco, 613

  Classification and arrangement adopted in the work, 5

  _Claytonia acutiflora_, 371

  Clerihew's coffee apparatus, 52

  Climate suited for various plants, 9

  Clove bark, 383

  Cloves, 397
    oil, 390, 398
    statistics of, 411
    varieties of the tree, 398
    where grown, 402

  Cobres a first quality of indigo, 456

  Coca plant, 576

  _Cocculus indicus_, 576
    _palmatus_, 638

  Cochin China, coco nut oil exported from, 556
    culture of rice, 298
    exports of cinnamon, 393
    tea considered inferior, 94

  Cochineal, value of the dye stuff, 440

  Cocoa, see Cacao, 9
    fat, 519
    nut butter, 560
    information respecting, 9
    oil, 527
    palm, 547

  _Cocos nucifera_, 547
    _fusiformis_, 519
    or eddoes, 364

  Cocum oil, 521

  Coffee, adulteration of, and substitutes for, 37
    consumption of, 39, 596
    cultivation in Ceylon, 46
    in Africa, 77
    in India, 44
    information respecting, 9
    manures suited for, 50
    tree, description of, 43
    production in various countries, 41
    produce per tree and per acre, 69, 481
    leaf, suited for making a beverage by infusion, 78
    Dr. Hooker's opinion thereon, 79
    plantation, beauty of, 67
    prices of, in London, 47
    signs of its being properly cured, 71
    trade, progress of, 36

  Coimbatore, culture of tobacco in, 618.

  Coir, Coco nut, 551, 552, 555, 556.

  Colman (Mr.), on grain production, 219
    on sugar, 204

  _Colocasia_, varieties of cultivated, 364

  _Colocynth_, 638
    oil, 511

  Colombo root, 638
    shipments of coffee from, 48

  Coloring principles of the lichens, 487
    teas in China, 104

  Colza oil, 510, 513, 539

  _Conium Arracacha_, 375

  Connecticut, culture of tobacco in, 606

  Consumption of rhubarb, 645

  _Convolvulus Jalapa_, 641
    _Scammonia_, 642

  Conquin tay, plantain meal, 324

  Constantinople opium, 585

  Consumption of arrowroot, 354
    of arnotto, 449
    cacoa in the United Kingdom, 36
    cassia bark, 394
    castor oil, 544
    coco nut oil, 562
    coffee, 36, 64, 596
    coffee in various countries, 41
    cinnamon, 391
    cloves, 401
    ginger, 418
    indigo, 477
    mace, 414
    nutmegs, 414
    opium, 580
    palm oil, 527
    pepper, 428
    pimento, 431
    sago in the United Kingdom, 318
    sugar in India, 140
             Great Britain, 139
    tea, statistics of, 82, 596
    tobacco, 596, 595

  _Convolvulus batatas_, 333, 334, 356

  Coolies employed in Mauritius, 150

  Copey, a Cuba dye wood, 485

  Copperah, 536, 549, 556, 560, 661

  Corakan flour, 304

  Coriander seed, 437

  _Coriaria myrtifolia_, 493

  Cork tree bark, 504

  Corn, the common name for maize in America, 270

  Cortes, a description of indigo, 456

  _Corypha umbraculifera_, 316

  _Costus Arabicus_, 438
    _indicus_, &c., 638

  Costa Rica, production of coffee in, 41, 64

  Cotton, information respecting, 9
    seed oil, 564
    cake, 564

  Courida bark, 495

  Cow-itch, 625

  Crane potato, 372

  Crawfurd (Mr. J.), estimate of pepper produce, 422

  _Croix lachryma_, 304

  Crop hogshead of tobacco, weight of, 605

  _Croton Cascarilla_, 396
    _Eleuteria_, 397
    _gossypifolia_, 625
    oil, 522
    _Tiglium_, 522

  Cuba, coffee plantations in, 77
    culture of tobacco in, 613
    exports of coffee to America, 63
    cost of producing sugar in, 147, 189
    exports of coffee from, 73
    progress of sugar cultivation in, 148
    production of coffee in, 41
    rice grown in, 292
    statistics of coffee exported, 76
    tobacco plantations in, 614

  Cubebs, medicinal, 639

  Cucumber seed oil, 512

  _Cucumis Colocynthus_, 638

  Cudbear, imports of, 486
    452

  Culilaban bark, 383

  _Curcuma longa_, 419
    species of, 434
    varieties of, yielding E.I. arrowroot, 351

  Curry stuff, imports into Ceylon, 434

  Cush, an Indian name for millet, 306

  Cutch, the Indian name for catechu, or gambier, 600
    exported from Pinang, 503
    imports of, 502

  Cuyupa, an Indian tuber, 374

  _Cycas circinalis_, 314

  _Cynamchum_ leaves, 649

  _Cynosurus corocanus_, 306

  _Cytisus Cajan_, 304


  _Dacrydium cupressinum_, 505

  Dadap, a prop for the pepper, 425, 42
    a name given in Java to the _Erythrina_, 55, 58

  _Datisca cannabina_, 442

  Davis' (Dr.), analysis of maize, 265

  Day's analysis of barks, 495

  Demerara, exports of coffee from, 73
    rice grown in, 292

  Dholl, the Indian name for varieties of _Cajanus_, 312

  Dhak tree, bark of, 507

  Dhurra, the Egyptian name for millet, 306

  _Dicypellium caryophyllatum_, 384

  _Didynamia gymosperma_, 520

  Dietetic articles used for the preparation of popular beverages, 11

  Dillock, a preparation with cayenne, 429

  _Dioscorea aculeata_, 334, 362

  _Diospyros glutinosa_, 494

  _Dipterix odorata_, 434

  _Dipterocarpus_, oil from, 511

  Divi-divi, 503

  Division of seasons in the tropics, 6

  Dodder cake, 564

  Dogwood, bark of, 627

  _Dolichos biflorus_, varieties of, 312
    _bulbosus_, roots used as food, 377
    oil, 521

  Domba oil, 513

  Dominica, exports of coffee from, 73
    introduction of the clove tree, 399

  _Dracæna terminalis_, 355

  Drimys bark, 636

  Dryobalanops, species furnishing camphor, 634

  Dubranfaut's process of sugar making, 197, 201

  Dunsterville (Mr.), on Cape aloes, 631

  Duquesne (M.), process of making sugar from beet, 202

  Duration of various plants, 9

  Dutch pound, lighter than the English avoirdupoise pound; 100 Dutch pounds equal to 101 and 1-5th lbs.

  Dutch West Indies, production of coffee in, 41

  Duty, large, levied on tobacco, 598

  Dye stuffs, various, 440
    from British plants, 452
    furnished by the cacao bean, 12

  Dye woods, 445, 447


  Eagle wood, 439

  Earth mouse, 374

  Earth-nut oil, 513

  East India ginger, 416, 418
    sugar, 139
      cultivation in, 152

  East Indies, imports of indigo from, 477
    rhubarb, 645

  Eddoes or cocos, 364

  Edward's preserved potatoes, 361

  Egyptian corn, 307
    opium, 585

  Elais, species furnishing palm oil, 524

  _Elate sylvestris_ fruit, a masticatory, 579

  _Elettaria Cardomomum_, 421

  _Eleusine corocana_, 304

  _Encephalartos cafer_, 319

  English opium, 586

  Eno bark, a black dye, 444

  _Epidendrum_, species of, 431

  _Ervum lens_, 312

  Erythric acid, 489

  Erythrina, a shade tree for the cacao, 15

  _Erysimum perfoliatum_, oil from, 512

  Essences, 565

  Essential oils, 565

  Ethiopian pepper, 421

  _Eucalyptus_, bark of, for tanning, 494
    _resinifera_, 506

  _Eugenia caryophyllata_, 397
    _Pimento_, 430

  _Eulophia virens_, 354

  _Eupatorium glutinosum_, 643

  _Euphorbia Lathyris_, 510

  _Euterpe montana_, 549

  Evans' (Dr.) Sugar Planter's Manual, 140

  _Evernia vulpina_, 488

  _Evodia triphylla_, used as a perfume, 550

  Factory maund, about 70 pounds, 471

  _Fagara piperita_, 421

  Fanega, a Spanish measure, the fifth part of an English quarter, equal to 12 quarrees, or 62 and 2-5ths acres, 13, 327

  Fanegada, a Spanish land measure, 9

  Farinaceous plants, 216

  Fennel flower, 421

  _Ferula asafoetida_, 633

  Fern roots as food, 377, 380

  _Fevillea scandens_, 511

  Finlayson's description of gambier manufacture, 500

  Fish oils consumed, 509
    poison, 627

  Fitzmaurice on the sugar cane, 180

  Fixed oils, 510

  Flax seed oil, 509, 501

  Flores, a commercial classification of indigo, 456

  Florida, tobacco culture in, 609

  Flour, damaged, shipped from America, 227
    and meal, our imports of, 218
    obtained from spurry seed, 377

  Flowering of the sugar cane, 182

  Food plants of commerce, 217
    nutritious properties of various kinds, 232

  Foo-foo, the dough of the plantain, 324

  Fortune (Mr. R.) on the tea districts, 89
    engaged by the East India Company, 100
    report on the Indian tea plantations, 106, 117

  Fortune's (Mr. R.) wanderings in China, 103

  Fownes (Mr.) on clarifying cane juice, 164

  France, production of beet sugar in, 194, 200
    rice cultivated in, 292

  Frazla, the Arabian name for a bale of variable weight, in Mocha about 16 lbs. avoirdupoise,

  Free trade policy, effects of, 2

  French berries for dyeing, 443
    Slave Colonies, cost of producing sugar in, 189
    West Indies, production  of coffee in, 41

  _Fucus amylaceus_, 380
    _tenax_, furnishes glue, 378
    as food for cattle, 379

  Fundi or Fundungi, an African grain, 310

  Fustic, 445, 447, 485


  Gallipoli oil, 531

  Gallo tannic acid, 492

  _Galidupa arborea_, 521

  Garancine, quantity and value of, 483, 484

  Gambier plant, 496

  Gamboge, 451
    plants furnishing, 639

  _Garcinea elliptica_, 451

  Garbelled, a term for sorted or picked

  Gabilla, a finger or hank of tobacco, 613

  Galangale root, 351, 418

  _Garcinea Gambogia_, 640

  Garnett (Mr. A.) on the culture of the plantain, 320

  Galam butter, 538

  _Gastrodia sesamoides_, 375

  Gesner (Dr.), plants recommended by, for cultivation, 371

  _Genipa Americana_, 444

  _Genista tinctorea_, 453
    _tomentosa_, 486

  Gentian, plants furnishing it, 640

  Ghee, 538

  Ginger, culture of, 414

  Gin, made from rye in Holland, 258

  _Gigartina Iichenoides_, 379

  Gingelie seed oil, 511, 533
    oil, used to adulterate almond oil, 534

  Ginseng, 436

  Glen (Mr. J.), his experiments on Cassava starch, 370

  Gloves made from bark, 376

  Gluten contained in various grain crops, 264
    definition of, 234

  Gluten, composition of, 221

  Glycirrhiza, 643

  _Glyrine Apios_, 371
    _subterranea_, 371

  Glycerine, 643

  _Glycirrhiza glabra_, 642

  _Gnizotia oleifera_, 535

  Gohyan, an Indian name for upland rice, 282

  Gold of pleasure oil, 509
    cake of, 564

  Gomuti palm sugar, 136
    315

  _Gomatus saccharifer_, 314

  Goor, the Indian name for half-made sugar, 308

  Gorham's (Prof.) analysis of maize, 264

  Gourds used for packing aloes, 630

  _Gracelaria lichenoides_, 379

  Graham (Dr.), on gamboge, 639

  Gram, the Indian name for the _Ervum lens_, and _Cicer arietinum_, 312

  Grain crops, 217
    produce  per acre in England, 219
    of Paradise, 419, 420
    average prices of in New Brunswick, 254

  Grape sugar, properties of, 136
    sugar, analysis of, 155

  Grater for rasping arrowroot, 338

  Grenada, cost of cultivating sugar in, 189

  Great Exhibition, results of, 2

  Green tea, mode of manufacturing, 113
    tea, imports of the last 15 years, 82

  Griffith (Dr.) on tea plants in Assam, 111

  Groundnut oil, 511

  Guano, not much required in tropical countries, 7

  Guayaquil, large exports of cocoa from, 13

  _Guazuma ulmifolia_, 164

  Guillemen's (M.) report on the tea plantations of Brazil, 128

  Guiana, cost of cultivating sugar in, 189

  Guinea pepper, 429
    grains, 420
    yam, 331, 334, 335, 337, 362
    corn, 306

  Gums used by the dyers, 453

  Gum tree of Australia, 494

  Gun stock tree, 164

  _Gunnera scabra_, 495

  Gunny bags, rough canvas bags, 392

  Guntang, an Indian dry measure of rather more than 15 pounds, 297

  Guaco, or snake plant, 627
    as a fertilizer, 278

  _Gynerium saccharoides_, 136

  _Gyrophora murina_, 486


  _Hamatoxylon campechianum_, 484

  Hamilton (Dr.), on oil of ben, 523
    notices by, 617

  Havana tobacco, classification of, 613
    exports of tobacco from, 614
    shipments of sugar from, 147

  Hayti, exports of tobacco, 615
    exports of ginger, 418
    coffee from, 67
    indigo from, 460

  Hazel nut, oil from, 510

  _Hebradendron Cambogoides_, 451, 639

  Heather, dye from, 453

  Hectare, a French land measure, equal to about 2½ acres, 204

  Hectolitre, a French measure  192¼ bushel's

  Helot's lichen test, 452

  Herreria sarsaparilla, 646

  _Heliconia humilis_, 320

  Hemlock tree, bark of, 494

  Hemp seed oil, 509

  Henna, a dye stuff, 486

  Hepatic aloes, 630

  Herring's palm kernel oil, 525

  Hernandez (Mr.) on Cuba tobacco, 608

  _Heuchera Americana_, 494

  _Hibiscus rosa sinensis_, 494

  Hingalee, the best Bengal tobacco, 617

  Hino bark, 606

  Hogs, large consumption of maize by, 271

  Holcomb (Mr.) on the wheat crop of America, 245

  _Holcus avenaceus_, 307
    _spicatus_, 366
    _saccharatum_, 306

  Holland, tea sent to, 86

  Honduras, export of indigo from,  460

  Hooker (Dr.) on brick tea, 92

  Hops, cascarilla bark used to adulterate, 397

  Horse gram, 312

  Hungary, production of beet sugar in, 197

  _Hura crepitans_, 512, 626

  Husking rice, 290

  Hydraulic press for coco nut oil, 557
    press, 329

  _Hydrastica canadensis_, 625

  _Hymenoea Courbaril_, 313

  _Hyperanthera Moringa_, 523

  Hypericum, species of, furnishes gamboge, 454, 640


  Iceland moss, 343, 379

  Illepe oil, 537, 511

  _Ilex Paraguayensis_, indigenous to Brazil, 130
    description of, 133

  _Illicum anisatum_, 438

  Impey (Dr.) on Malwa opium, 587
    on Indian drugs, 626

  Implements of colonial agriculture few and simple, 6
    requisite for manufacturing tea, 115

  Imports of arrowroot, 351, 354
    arnotto, 449
    cacao, from America and the West Indies, 35
    cloves, 401
    cinchona bark, 636
    tea into Great Britain, 82
    tobacco, 597
    coco-nut oil, 562
    palm oil, 525, 527
    pimento, 431
    opium, 580
    nutmegs, 414
    pepper, 428
    castor oil, 544
    sago, 318
    indigo, 477
    coffee, 37

  Import commerce, our principal, articles furnished by the Vegetable Kingdom, 4

  Incense wood, 439

  Indigo, details of, 453
    plants yielding, 442
    information respecting, 10
    mode of manufacturing, 457
    production of in India, 474
      in Natal, 463

  _Indigofera_, species of, 453

  India, tea culture in, 98
    culture of indigo in, 463

  Indiana, tobacco culture in, 607

  Indian aloes, 630
    berries, 576
    corn, imports of, 263
      information respecting, 9
      analysis of, 264
      sources of supply, 262, 263
      starch, 343
      meal imported, 218
    yield per acre, 356
    compared with Guinea corn, 307
      meal, composition of, 307
    opium, 586
    root, 625
    shot, 345

  Indian corn, weight of, 280
    madder, 484

  Intoxicating liquors made from Cassava, 369

  Iodine, 378

  Ipecacuan, bastard, 653
    641

  _Ipomoea batatas_, 365
    _brachypodo_, 522
    _Jalapa_, 641

  Ireland, tobacco consumed in, 596
    cost of producing beet root sugar in, 193

  Irish rock moss, 379

  Iron, quantity of, in tobacco, 617
    bark tree, 506

  Irrigation for the tea plant never practised in China, 122

  _Isatis Indigotica_,104
    _tinctoria_, 452


  Jaggery sugar, 555

  Japanese camphor, 633
    tobacco, 620

  Japan, tea culture, 94

  _Jatropha curcas_, oil from, 512

  Jacobson's (Mr.) work on tea culture in Java, 102

  Jalap, 641

  Jamaica, cost of cultivating sugar in, 189
    culture of coffee in, 67
    culture of Guinea corn, 306
    decline of sugar production, 148, 149
    exports of coffee from, 73
    ginger, 415, 417
    sarsa, 646, 47

  Jameson (Dr.) on the culture of tea in India, 106

  Java, cinnamon cultivated in, 383, 392
    clove does not succeed there, 399
    coffee exported   to the United States, 63
    coco-nut oil exported from, 556
    cost of producing sugar in, 189
    culture of coffee in, 53
    culture of rice in, 299
    cultivation of indigo in, 476
    gambier grown in, 502
    nutmegs exported from, 413
    pepper grown in, 422-23
    production of coffee in, 41
    statistics of, 300
    statistics of indigo exported, 476
    statistics of tea culture in, 102
    sugar culture in, 152
    tea plantations, 94
    tobacco, 621

  Jack fruit tree, 319

  Janipha, starch in, 331
    _Manihot_, 315

  Jasmine oil, 570, 574

  _Jatropha gossypyfolia_, 625
    _cureas_, oil from, 523

  Jellies, clearness of, 337

  Jesuit's bark, 635

  Joar, the Indian name of the _Sorghum vulgare_ or millet, 304, 306

  Job's tears, 304

  Johnson (Dr.) on manufacture of rose water, 570
    (Mr.) on indigo culture, 466
    (Prof.) analyses of grain crops, 264
    (Prof.) on grain crops of New Brunswick, 253

  Jones's process for making rice starch, 344

  Jumowah, irrigated sowings, 468

  Juniperus, oil of, 565


  Kafir bread, 319

  Kamas root, an edible, 376

  Kanari kernels made into cakes, 547
    oil, 546

  Katjang oil, produce of the ground nut, 515, 299

  Kawan, the Java tallow tree, 511

  Kashmir, culture of rice in, 295

  Kemmayes, an Arabian truffle, 381

  Kew Gardens, tea plant grows in, 101

  Kekune oil, 539

  Kentucky tobacco, statistics of, 598, 600

  Keora oil, 565

  Khoonte, the Indian name for a second cutting, 471

  Kiln-drying madder, 481
    of bread stuffs, 221, 229

  Kilogramme, a French weight, equal to 21bs. 3oz. avoird., 194

  Kino, Australian, 506
    East India, 507

  _Knowltonia vessicatoria_, 626

  Koster's Travels in Brazil, 186

  Kous-kous, 311

  Kooyah plant, 376

  Kukui oil, 539

  Kumaon, tea plantations in, 117


  Laudanum, 584

  _Lawsonia inermis_, 486

  _Laminaria saccharina_, 379

  _Lathyrus tuberosus_,374

  Larch bark edible, 376

  _Laurus camphora_, 633, 35

  La Guayra, cacao from, 13
    production of coffee in, 41
    exports of coffee from, 62

  Lana dye, 444

  _Lecythis Tabucajo_, 512

  Lemon grass oil, 672

  Legumes, varieties of, 312

  Lecanora, species of, 432

  Lentils, 312

  Leaf tobacco shipped from the Havana, 614

  Liberia, suitability for coffee culture, 77

  Lichen tribe as food, 378

  Lichens, 486

  Lichenin, 343

  _Licospermun racemosum_, 605

  Lindley (Dr.) on the cinchonas, 635

  Litmus, 452

  Lignum aloes, 439

  Litre, a French measure, equal to 1¾ English pint nearly, 202

  Lime, its influence on cane juice, 161

  Lindley (Prof.) on the wheat of South Australia, 221

  Lindley's classification of the plantain tribe, 322

  Liptospermum, oil of, 565

  _Lilium Pomponium_, 356

  Lindley (Dr.) on the lichens, 486

  Linseed, 535
    oil, 509, 537
    imported, 563
    cake imported, 564

  Little (Mr.) on opium, 587

  Libra, a Spanish kind of tobacco, 613

  Liquorice, 642
    paste, 643

  Logwood, 445, 447, 484

  Lotus seeds, used as food, 356

  Locust tree, 313
    pods, 503

  Louisiana, cost of producing sugar in, 189
    production of sugar in, 146

  Loxa bark, 636

  Luffas, properties of, 626

  Luggie, a measuring rod, 471

  Lucca oil, 531


  Macfarlane (Mr. A.) on the tea plant,117

  Madder, culture of, 478
    Indian, 484
    statistics of imports, 484

  _Madia sativa_ oil, 520
    _sativa_, 444

  Mahowa oil, 537

  _Maclura tinctoria_, 485

  Mauritius weed, 486

  Mangrove bark, for tanning, 493

  Mac Micking (Mr.) on making cigars, 620

  Margose oil, 537

  Macaw tree, 519

  Maxwell (Dr.) on Neem oil, 537

  Marc of olives, 531

  Mango, kernel of, for bread, 378

  Marmala water, 574

  Malabar cardamoms, 419

  Manila, exports of indigo from, 476
    exports of sugar from, 153
    cigar making, 620
    hemp, whence obtained, 321

  Mattrasses, stuffed with blades of Indian corn, 281

  Macculloch's (Mr.) estimate of indigo, 478

  Maize, number of varieties cultivated, 278
    analysis of, 264
    imported, 218
    meal, imported, 218
    on the culture of, 260
    sugar, 215
    information respecting, 9
    Dr. Phillip's analysis of, 307
    starch of, 334, 335, 337, 343
    system of culture in America, 273
    culture in the East Indies, 282
    immense produce per acre, 281
    varieties grown in, Peru, 281
    statistics of production in America, 269
    statistics of exports from the United States, 272

  Malphigia bark, for tanning, 495

  Maslin, quantity grown in France, 250

  Mace, imports of, 414
    false color of, 409
    proportion of, to nutmegs, 408

  Malt, quantity made, 255

  Mahoe, furnishes a dye stuff, 444

  Mauritius, exports of pepper, 426
    nutmeg introduced in, 412
    pepper grown in, 422
    cost of sugar cultivation in, 187, 189
    tea culture in, 94
    progress of sugar culture in, 150
    clove culture of, 398, 401
    black beans, 304

  Mangrove bark, 450, 506

  Madagascar cardamoms, 419

  _Mangostana Gambogia_, 451, 640

  Maple sugar, 205

  _Manettia glabra_, 641

  Madeira, introduction of the tea plant, 94

  Madras, tea culture suitable for, 101
    exports of indigo from, 464
    cost of producing sugar in, 189

  Marah (Mr.) prize essay on coffee culture, 69

  Malambo bark, 636

  Machinery for sugar, 140
    for coffee, 51
    for arrowrot, 350, 348
    required for  the plantain, 324
    required for sago, 318

  Magdalena river, cacao indigenous on its shores, 14

  _Magnolia fuseata_, used to flavor tea, 85

  Majoon, an opium confection, 585

  Malabar, production of coffee in, 41
    cassia, 394
    ginger, 415
    pepper produced in, 422

  Malwa opium, 580

  Manure, a special for tobacco, 592

  Manures, suited to the coffee tree, 50
    for the nutmeg, 406
    suited for arrowroot, 347
    scarcely required in tropical countries, 6
    suited for the sugar cane, 172
    suited to maize 278

  Manioc, see Cassava

  Manihot, species of, 367
    _utilissima_, 315

  Mansana, a land measure of 100 square yards, or nearly two British statute acres, 455

  Manyroot, 625

  _Maranta arundinacea_, juice of an antidote to poisons, 627

  _Marattia alata_, 380

  Maryland tobacco, statistics of, 598, 600

  Mate, a name for the Paraguay tea, 133

  Matico, 643

  Matias bark, 636

  Maund of Surat, 39¼ lbs.
    an Indian weight of varable quantity

  _Melaleuca minor_, 566

  _Metrosideros tomentosa_, 505

  _Mesembryanthemum nodiflorum_, 494

  _Menispermum coceulus_, 576
    _palmatum_, 638

  Megass, a name given to the dried cane stems, or trash used for fuel, 168

  Meleguetta pepper, 420

  Melsen's process of sugar boiling, 203

  _Mespilus Bengalensis_, 443

  Mendo, a wild sweet potato of North America, 372

  Menomine, an Indian edible root, 372

  Mexican thistle, 626

  Mexico, imports of indigo from, 477

  _Metroxylon sagus_, 314

  Millet, varieties of, cultivated, 304
    the great Indian, 306

  Miller on tobacco culture, 608

  Mill, rude one, used in Siam for hulling paddy, 302
    for crushing plantain stems, 327

  Mills for cleaning rice, 286, 288

  Minot, a Canadian grain measure about one-eighth less than a bushel, 251

  Milloco, a tuberous plant, 374

  Mint, culture of, 567

  Mimosa bark, 504

  Mico or mijo, a vegetable butter made in Java, 313, 512

  Monkey bread, 378
    pot seed oil, 512

  Morinda, species of, 443, 449

  Morewood (Mr. E.), his exertions in Natal, 140
    experiments in sugar culture, 187

  Mocha, production of coffee in, 41
    cultivation of coffee in,' 43

  Mother cloves, definition of, 397

  Moussache, the fecula of the manioc, 315

  Mountain rice, 285, 290, 296

  Morphia, proportion in opium, 584, 585

  _Mora excelsa_, 495

  _Morinda citrifolia_, 478

  Moringa oil, 523
    species of, 523

  Musa, species of, 319

  Musquash root of the Micmacs, 371

  Mustard seed, 437

  Muscovado sugar, cost of producing, 189

  _Mucuna pruriens_, 625
    _utilis_, 304

  _Muchowa_ oil, 511

  _Musa textilis_, 321

  Mustard oil, 510, 511
    seed, 509, 535

  Munjeet, 449

  _Munjestha_, 484

  _Muracuja ocellata_, a narcotic, 489

  _Myrica cerifera_, 494, 540
    _macrocarpa_, 542

  _Myrtus carophyllata_, 284
    _Pimenta_, 430

  _Myristica_, varieties of the tree, 401
    _sebifera_, 512

  Myrobolans, 506

  Myrtle wax, 540

  Mysore, production of coffee in, 41


  _Napoota_ oil, 620

  _Nauclea Gambir_, 496

  Namur oil, 572

  Natal Agricultural Society, its endeavours to promote sugar cultivation, 139
    indigo culture in, 463
    sugar culture in, 186

  _Narthex asafoetida_, 633

  _Nelumbium_, seed of, as food, 378
    _speciosum_, the source of Chinese arrowroot, 352

  New South Wales, suited for madder, 482
    tobacco culture in, 621

  Negrohead tobacco, 601

  New Orleans, capabilities for rice culture, 287
    exports of castor oil from, 545

  _Nerium_, 453
    _oleander_, 495

  Neem tree oil, 511, 537

  Nicaragua wood, 445, 447

  _Nipa fruticana_, 136

  Nipah, leaf for thatching, 559

  Nicotine, 590

  _Nicotium_, species of the plant, 590

  Nitrogen, in grain, 307
    in the starch plants, 342
    234, 310
    in the plantain, 323

  Nigella, species of, 421

  North West Provinces, tea culture in, 117

  _Nostoe edulis_, 378

  Northern Australia, directions for growing tobacco, 623

  Nut oil, price of, 517

  Nutgall, tannin in, 492, 495

  Nut pine, 377

  Nutmeg tree, 401
    curing of, 409
    wild, 412

  _Nux vomica_, 577

  _Nyctanthes arbortristes_, 494

  _Nymphæa lotus_, starch obtained from, 352


  Oats, proportion of oil in, 564
    production of in the United Kingdom, 257
    imported, 218

  Oatmeal, imported 218

  Oats and beans, produce of in England, 248

  Oak bark, tannin in, 492

  Ocas, a tuberous plant, 374

  Ocoes or taniers, 331

  _Ocymum tuberosum_, 356, 367

  Ohio tobacco, statistics of, 598, 600

  Oil of aniseed, 438

  Oil, proportions of in various crops, 264
    obtained from the Cacao seeds 11, 12

  Oil of cubebs, 639
    of camphor, 634
    of cassia, 396

  Oil of cloves, 398
    of mace, 402
    of cinnamon, 389, 390
    spikenard, 565
    of Ben, 523
    cake, 513, 531
    mills of India, 535
    cakes of the castor seed, 545
    cake from coco-nut, 552, 563
    coco-nut, 551, 556, 561, 562
    from maize, 564
    of sandal wood, 565
    cake imported, 564
    cake, American, 565

  Oilcake as a manure, 50
    used in China, 313

  Oil palm, 525

  Oils, burning properties of various, 508

  _Oldenlandia umbellata_, 449

  Oleaginous plants, 509

  _Olea fragrans_, 528
    _Europea_, 527

  Olives, mode of preserving the fruit, 530

  Olive oil, prices of, 531
    509, 527
    sources of supply, 563

  Omen-e-chah, the Indian name for a wild bean, 372

  Onions, planted with arrow root, 347

  _Ophelia chitrata_, 641

  Opium, history and trade of, 580

  Orceine, 488

  Orchilla weed, 452
    weed, imports of, 486

  Orchids furnishing salep, 354
    an edible species of, 375
    roots of some used as food, 377

  Orituco cacao, superior quality of, 14

  Oryza, varieties of, 284

  Orlong, a land measure in the East, equal to 1-1/3 acre, 297

  O'Shaughnessy's analysis of Ceylon moss, 380
    on opium, 584

  Oswego starch factory, 343

  Otto of khuskhus, 573

  Otaheite cane, 153

  Oude, production of indigo in, 464, 475

  Oxalic acid, used for vinegar, 312

  Oxley (Dr.) on nutmeg culture, 402


  Paddy, a name for rice in the husk, 297

  Patchouly, 537

  Pannam kilingoes, 376

  Parchment coffee, 60

  _Pao Crava_, one of the spice barks, 384

  _Pachyrrhizus angulatus_, 377

  Palm oil, imports of, 527
    sources of supply, 563

  Palm oil, 509, 524
    wine, 314
    sugar, 136

  Palma Christi, 542

  Palmetto palm, 495

  Palmyra nut, first shoot of, edible, 376

  Pan, a masticatory, 577

  Pancratium, species of, 625

  Pandanus, fruit of eaten as food, 377
    _odoratissimus_, 565

  Panicum, various species of, 304
    _spicatum_, of Roxburgh, 308

  _Panax quinquefolium_, 436

  _Palos de Velas_, 521

  Paper made from plantain fibre, 335

  _Papsalum exile_, 310

  _Papaver somniferum_, 580

  Paraguay tea plant common in Brazil. 130
    description of, 133
    extent of the trade, 133

  Parietinic acid, 488

  _Parmenteira cerifera_, 521

  Parmelia, species of lichens, 486
    a dye-stuff, 488

  Peas, analysis of, 264

  Peeling coffee, 51, 60
    cinnamon, 316

  Peligot (Mr.) on the composition of wheat, 230

  Pepper, black, 421
    pot, a West Indian dish, 369
    prices of, 413
    duty on, 424

  Peppermint oil, 566

  Peon, the Spanish term for a laborer, 135

  _Persea gratissima_, 444

  Perfumed oils, 569

  Persian berries, 443

  Peas imported, 218

  Pessaloo, an Indian name for the _Phaseolus mungo_

  Pereira's classification of the cinchonas, 636

  Peruvian bark, 635

  Pearl sago, 318
    of Persia, 316

  _Piper angustifolium_, 643

  Petty rice, 310

  _Pekea_, species of, yielding oil, 512

  Pea-nut, 516

  Persian tobacco, 615

  Phaseolus, varieties of, 312

  _Phaseolus Mungo max_, 171

  _Phalaris caniesis_, 314

  Phlomis, 643

  Philippines, cassia brought from, 394

  Philippine Islands, sugar cultivation in, 153
    production of coffee in, 41
    varieties of rice grown in, 302

  Philippines, export of indigo from, 476
    cigars made in, 620

  Phillip's (Dr.) analyses of Guinea corn, 307

  _Phyllodadus trichomanoides_, 505

  Physic nut, 512, 625

  Picul, a Dutch weight of 133-1/3 English pounds, 36

  Piddington's (Mr.) analyses of tobacco, 617

  Pigeon-pea, 304

  Pignons, use of as food, 377

  _Pimpinella Anisitm_, 437

  Pimento, 430

  Pinang, nutmegs in, 412
    tea culture attempted, 95
    clove culture in, 399, 400
    pepper culture in, 425

  Piper Betel, 577
    _Cubebi_, 639
    species of, 421

  _Pinus Pinea_, seeds of the cones used for food, 377

  Piney tallow, 512

  Plantation sugar, imports, 139

  Plantado passado, 323

  Plantain, dye stuffs obtained from, 444
    juice recommended for clarifying sugar, 162
    information respecting, 9
    starch in, 331
    blight, 321
    319
    leaves, bags made of, 316
    meal, 324, 341

  Planche, his memoir on the sagos, 315

  _Plumeria_, essences of, 524

  _Plectranthus graveolens_, 573

  Plough used in Brazil, 184

  _Polygonum fagopyrum_, 260

  _Poa Abyssinica_, 308

  Pomegranates, for dyeing, 440

  Potash an important element in maize, 267
    large quantity in maize, 264

  Potatoes, mode of keeping in Peru, 361
    average weight per bushel in New Brunswick, 253
    composition of, 227
    imported, 218
    composition of, 264
    analysis of varieties, 362
    yield per acre, 356

  Potato, information respecting, 10
    meal, syrup made from, 197
    the wild, of North America, 372
    starch in, 330
    starch, used to adulterate arrowroot, 349
    test for detecting, 349
    starch, 334, 335, 337, 362
    crop of the United States, 361
    disease, 358
    proposed cure for, 359, 60
    crop in Ireland, 358
    varieties of, 358
    imports of, 359
    crop in France, 361

  Poisons, 627

  _Pomme des Prairies_, of the Canadians, 373

  Pounding coffee, 61

  Population of Great Britain, &c., 87
    of China, 86, 91, 298

  Porto Rico, exports of coffee, 77
    cost of producing sugar in, 189
    production of coffee in, 41
    exports of tobacco, 615

  Poonac, as manure, 50
    549, 552, 561

  Pomegranate bark, 493, 495

  Poonay oil, 511-13

  _Polygonum tinctorium_, 453

  _Pongamia glabra_, 521

  _Pogostemon patchouly_, 573

  Poppy, culture of, 581
    oil, used to adulterate olive, 532
    509-10-11-18

  _Polypodium crassifolium_, used as a perfume, 550

  Preserved Plantains, 323

  Prices, average of sugar, 145

  Prickly poppy, 626

  Princeza snuff, 594

  Prince of Wales Island, clove culture in, 399

  _Prosopis pallida_, 313

  Protein compounds, 307, 310, 342

  Produce of various plants, 9

  Production, average of various plants, 9

  Provence oil, 531

  Province Wellesley, clove culture in, 400

  Prussia, tobacco consumed by, 596
    production of beet sugar in, 197-98

  Pruning coffee tree, 69

  Psoralia, varieties of, 372

  _Pteris esculenta_, 380

  _Pterocarpus marsupium_, 493
    _santalinus_, 445
    species of, 507

  Pulping mill for coffee, 51

  Purging nut, 625

  Pulse, culture of, 312

  Putchuk or Costus, 438
    638

  Punjaub, proposed culture of tea in, 101

  _Pustulatus_ moss, 486


  Qually, an iron vessel for drying sago, 317

  Quarree, a Spanish land measure, about 5¾ English acres, 326

  Quassia wood, 643

  Quas, a fermented Russian beverage, 308

  Quercitron, 443
    485

  _Quercus tinctoria_, 443, 485
    _suber_, 504

  Quintal, the Spanish cwt., equal to 101¾ lbs. English,

  Quinine, imports of, 636
    manufacture of, 635

  Quillai, bark of, used for soap, 574

  Quinoa, 310
    species of, 507


  Railways, large consumption of oil for, 513

  Ramos (Mr.) his dessicating agent for sugar, 140, 162

  _Ramalina fufuracea_, 486

  Ram-til, 535

  Ramsay (Mr. C. J.) on beet sugar manufacture, 200

  Ranunculus, properties of, 626

  Rape oil, 609

  Rape seed, quantity imported, 563
    oil, 513
    cake, 564

  _Raphis fabelliformis_, 314

  Red pepper, 429
    Sanders wood, 445
    Sandal wood, 378

  _Reseda lutea_, 452

  Revenue from sugar, 143

  Rhamnus, varieties of, 442
    leaves of, used for tea in China, 105

  _Rhizaphora mangle_, 493, 506

  Rhubarb, 644

  Rhus, species of, 450

  _Ricinus communis_, 542

  Rial, a Spanish coin worth 6d., 135

  Rice starch, 344
    imports of, 303
    produce per acre, 356
    meal for feeding pigs, 383

  Rice imported, 218
    starch, Jones's process, 303
    consumption per head in the East 297
    price of in China, 298
    time it may be kept, 292
    threshing mill for, 288
    grown in Demerara, 292
    history of, 283
    American crop of, 285
    returns of produce in Carolina, 291
    weight per bushel, 290

  _Richardsonia scabra_, 641

  Rimu, or red pine, 505

  Robertson (Mr.) on the collection of Paraguay tea, 133

  Robiquet (E.) analysis of aloes, 629

  Rocella dye, 452
    species of lichens, 486

  Room, an Indian dye stuff, 443

  Roucou, a name for arnotto, 447

  Rotation of crops, 243

  Root crops, 355
    prices of in New Brunswick, 254

  Rollers, proportionate advantages of those with 3 & 4, 168

  Roxburgh on the sugar cane, 179

  Roses, cultivation of, 570

  _Rottlera tinctoria_, 442

  Royle's (Prof.) productive resources of India, 103

  _Rubia cordifolia_, 484
    _tinctorium_, 478

  _Ruellia tuberosa_, 625

  Ruellia, a dye stuff, 443

  Rupee, an Indian coin worth about, 2s

  Russia, production of beet sugar in, 199
    consumption of tea in, 92
    tea sent to, 87

  Rye, analysis of, 258
    imported, 218
    meal, imported, 218


  Sappan wood, 445, 446, 447

  Salisbury (Dr.), analysis of maize, 265

  Saxony, beet sugar manufacture in, 199

  Salt, recommended as a fertiliser, 172

  _Santalum album_, 565

  Saa-ga-ban root of the Indians, 371

  Saga, the Java name for bread, 314
    imported, 218
    flour, exports of, 318
    palms, 314
    millet used for, 306

  _Saccharum sinensis_ of Roxburgh, 136, 169
    _violacum_, 136

  Safflower, 450

  Salangore sugar cane, an excellent variety, 154

  Sandwich Islands, arrowroot made in, 352

  Sandbox, seeds of, emetic, 626
    tree, 512

  Saul tree, wood useful for tea boxes, 114

  Sarsaparilla, 645

  _Saguerus Rumphii_, 314, 316
    _inermis_, 314
    _lævis_, 314
    _farinifera_, 316

  Salep, 354

  Samshing, a refuse produce of opium, 585

  Sandoway in Arracan produces superior tobacco, 616

  Saponaceous plants, 674

  Sapindus, varieties of, 574

  _Salvadora persica_, 521

  _Sapindus marginatus_, 521

  Saouari oil, 512

  _Sanguinaria canadensis_, 511

  Scammony, 642

  Scharling's (Dr.) test for adulterated arrowroot, 349

  Schomburgk (Sir R.), arrowroot forwarded by, 352
    discovers a new tuberous plant, 374
    discovers wild plantains, 320

  Scotland, produce of grain in, 249
  Seed leaf tobacco, 606
    wheat in France, 219

  Senna, varieties of, 647

  Sesame oil, 511, 533

  _Setaria italica_, 305
    _germanica_, 304

  Shanghae oil, 511

  Sheet lead, manufacture of for tea cases, 114

  _Shorea robusta_, 114, 521

  Shier (Dr.), his opinion on cassava starch, 370
    analysis of the plantain, 323
    on the starch producing plants, 331

  Shea butter, 538

  Shiraz tobacco, 613

  Sicily oil, 531

  Siam gamboge, 639
    pepper produced in, 422
    indigo found wild in, 476
    exports of cardamoms, 419

  _Sidu lanceolata_, 574

  Sugar, obtained from the palm tree, 314
    made from millet, 306

  _Simaruba amara_, 643

  Singapore, produce of gambier in, 501
    exports of sago, 318
    nutmeg trade of, 413
    pepper grown in, 423, 424, 427
    nutmeg trees in, 400
    produce of mace, 414
    extent of clove culture in, 399

  Sinapis, species of, yielding oil, 512

  Silica, essential for wheat soils, 240

  Singhara nuts, 378

  Sinde, culture of rice in, 293

  Smith (Dr.), his experiments in tea culture in America, 95

  Snuff, duty received on, 597

  _Sorghum officinarum_, 136
    _saccharatum_, 136
    _avenaceum_, 307
    _vulgare_, 304, 306

  Soap, made from coco-nut oil, 559, 562
    worts, 575

  Soil suited to coffee, 68
    for the nutmeg, 403
    for cinnamon, analysis of, 384
    best suited for wheat, 247
    a due consideration and knowledge of, requisite to the planter, 7
    suited for tobacco, 586, 587, 607
    suited for indigo, 468

  Solly (Prof.) on the want of a hand-hook for the cultivator, 1
    on barks for tanning, 493

  Society of Arts, premiums offered by, 2

  Soconusco, the finest cacao, 13

  Socotrine aloes, analysis of, 629

  _Soja hispida_, 313

  Soy, mode of making, 313

  Sohrinjee oil, 478, 523

  South Australia, tobacco  culture  in, 624

  South Carolina, exports of rice from, 285

  Sooranjee, 478, 523

  _Spergula sativa_, flour from the seed, 377

  _Sphoeroccus crispus_, 379

  Spanish moss, 380
    tobacco, on the mannagement of, 612
    oil, 531

  Spices, plants which furnish, 382

  Spikenard oil, 572

  _Spondius lutea_, 495

  _Spergula sativa_, 512

  _Stalagmites cambogoides_, 451
    _gambogoides_, 63

  Star anise, 438

  Starch producing plants, 329

  Starch contained in various grain crops, 264
    made from maize, 265
    plants, comparative yield per acre, 339
    process of manufacture, 342
    large proportion of in rice, 303
    proportion of in potatoes, 362

  _Statice coriaria_, 444
    _Caroliniana_, 494

  Stenhouse (Dr.) on the lichens, 490

  _Stillingia sebifera_, 512

  St. John's bread, 312-13

  St. Lucia, cost of cultivating sugar, in, 189
    exports of coffee from, 73
    shipment of cassava flour, 369

  St. Kitt's, cost of cultivating sugar in, 189

  St. Domingo, exports of coffee to the United States, 63

  St. Vincent, introduction of the clove to, 399
    production of arrowroot in, 347
    production of coffee in, 41
    cost of cultivating sugar in, 189
    arrowroot shipped from, 351

  Straits settlements, nutmeg culture in, 407
    cinnamon culture recommended, 387

  Sumbul root, 649

  Surat maund, 39¼ lbs., 401

  Sumach, 450
    tannin in, 495

  Sunflower oil, 509-10-36

  Sullivan (Mr.) on cost of beet root sugar, 191

  Sugar, cost of producing in different countries, 189

  Sugar cane, varieties of, 137, 153, 168
    mills, relative advantages of different ones, 168
    supply, demand and production, 141
    plants from which it is obtained, 136, 216

  Sugar, information respecting, 10

  Sugar maple, 205

  Sumatra, production of coffee in, 41

  Sumatra, production of pepper in, 422

  Sweet cassava, 331

  Sweet potato, 330-31-37-65

  Swift (Mr.) on the culture of madder, 480

  Swamp potato, 373

  _Sxygium carophyllæum_, 384

  _Sylvanus surinamensis_, 279

  Symplocos, varieties of, 442


  Tacca plant, species of, 354

  Tahiti arrowroot, 354

  Talipot palm, furnishes sago, 316

  Tallicoonah oil, 518

  Tallow tree of China, 512
    tree of Java, 511
    burning properties of, 509

  Tanping, a Chinese oil cake, 312

  Tannin of nutgalls, 492

  Tannia, 334-35-36-37

  Tanahaka bark, 505

  Tapioca sago, 315
    369

  _Tasmannia aromatica_, 421

  Taro, 364

  Tartareous moss, 486

  Taniers, or ocoes, 331

  Taurine, Leibig on, 80

  Tea, total outlay for by the British public, 86
    extent to which the consumption might be pushed, 89
    local consumption of in China, 86, 91
    tannin in, 495
    consumption of, 596
    oil, 518
    range of prices, 83
    consumption of in the British empire, 84
    in all other countries, 84
    Mr. Montgomery Martin's statistics of, 84
    quantity that might be used free of duty, 84
    value of the exports from China,
    high priced, used in the China market, 85
    various Chinese names for, 105
    immense trade in, 80
    names of the green, 81
                 black, 81
    original cost in China, 85
    duty received on, 83

  Teel or Til oil, 511, 533

  Teff, an African bread, 308

  Teinsing, a Chinese vegetable dye, 104

  Temperature requisite for various plants, 8, 9

  Tempering cane juice, 158

  Tenacity of starches, 336

  _Terminalia angustifolia_, 494
    species of, 506

  Terra Japonica, a misnomer, 490
    statistics of imports, 502

  Teuss, a Chinese legume, 312
    oil, 215

  Texas, production of sugar in, 147

  _Thespesia populnea_, 444

  _Thea viridis_, 103, 110
    Bohea, 103, 110

  Theine, analysis of, 80

  Thistle oil, 511, 103, 110, 626
    roots as food, 376

  Theobromine, 11

  _Theobroma_, description of the tree, 11

  Tikoor, a local name for Indian arrowroot, 351

  Til oil, 511

  Tip-sin-ah, a wild prairie turnip of North America, 372

  Tinnevelly senna, 648

  Ti plant, 355

  Tirhoot, production of indigo in, 475

  Tobacco, memorial of American Chamber of Commerce, 595
    culture of in the East, 615
    duty paid on, 594
    leaf, Prof. Johnston's analysis, 592
    plant, 589
    sources of supply, 601
    fly, cure for, 607
    statistics of American exports, 600
    prohibited to be grown in England, 598
    method of curing, 605
    manufacture increasing in the United States, 599
    number of persons engaged in the culture in America, 599
    worm, 610
    stems, trade in, 598
    information respecting, 9
    seed oil, 510-18
    prices in London, 602
    root, a wild edible plant, 376
    cost of cultivating sugar in, 189

  Tonquin beans, 434

  Tous-les-mois, starch of,  330-33-35-37-40

  Topinam bar, 365-76

  Topping the coffee tree, 68

  Towai bark, 505

  Toddy, 555

  Travers (Mr. J.I.) on consumption of tea, 87

  Trinidad, exports of coffee from, 73
    indigo in, 460
    culture of coffee in, 72
    cost of cultivating sugar, 189

  _Tropæolum tuberosum_, 536

  Tripa, a name for damaged tobacco leaves, 611

  _Tripolium alpinum_, 643

  Truffle, 381

  Tuberous plants, new, recommended, 370

  _Tuber cibarium_, 381

  Turkey berries, 442
    opium, 585

  Turmeric, 419, 434, 442
    used for coloring tea, 436

  Turnips, average weight of crop in New Brunswick, 253

  Turpentine, spirits of, 565

  Typha bread, 380

  Tye, a preparation of opium, 585


  _Unearia Gambier_, 496

  United States, production of sugar in, 145
    supplies of coffee to, 63
    imports of tea and value, 92
    value of its agricultural produce, 222
    former culture of indigo, 461
    production of maple sugar in, 215
    tea plant introduced, 95

  Upland rice, 302
    grown in Texas, 285

  Ure (Dr.), on arrowroot manufacture, 347
    on manioc starch, 368
    on tannin in barks, 495
    on indigo manufacture, 472

  _Urania guianensis_, 444


  _Valenaria edulis_, 376

  Valonia, 507

  Van Diemen's Land, culture of oats in, 258

  Vanilla, 431
    plant, grows in Brazil, 130

  Vara, a Spanish land measure, 9

  _Variolaris_, species of lichens, 486

  Varzeas, a Portuguese name for low and marshy ground, 183

  _Vateria indica_, 512

  Vegetable butter, 538
    wax, 540
    soap, 574

  Velvet moss, 486

  Venezuela, coffee culture in, 62

  _Verbesena sativa_, 535

  _Vernonia anthelmentica_, 521

  Vinegar, made from millet, 306

  Virginian tobacco, statistics of, 598, 600
    method of culture, 604

  _Virola sebifera_, 401, 512

  Voandzou, 371

  Voelcker (Dr.), analysis of quinoa, 310

  Volatile or essential oils, 565

  _Vuelta abajo_, the best class of Cuba tobacco, 613
    _arribo_, the inferior kind of ditto, 613

  Vulpinic acid, 488


  Wabessepin, a wild American potato, 372

  Wages paid in the Mauritius, 150

  Walnut, oil from, 510

  Wangle, oil seed, 533

  Watappinee, an Indian edible root, 372

  Water, proportion of in different kinds of wheat, 221
    quantity in potatoes, 227
    for making starch, 341

  Wax berries, 546
    palm, 541

  _Weinmaunia_, bark of, 499
    _racemosa_, 505

  Weight per bushel of crops in New Brunswick, 253
    of coffee per bushel, 47

  Wellstead (Lt.) on Socotro aloes, 629

  Westring (Dr.) on the Swedish lichens, 489-90

  West India ginger, 418

  Wheat, weight of, as an index of value, 236
    imported, 218
    flour do., 218
    culture, statistics of, 220
    annual produce of, 219
    analysis of, by Boussingault, 244
    average price of, 249
    best soil for, 247
    consumption of in England, 248
    produce of in England and Wales, 248
    information respecting, 10
    starch of, 331-35-36-37, 343
    composition of the ash of, 241
    yield per acre, 240
    flour, various analyses of, 237

  White pepper, statistics of, 428

  Whisky, quantity of maize used for, 271

  Wilcockes on Paraguay tea trade, 135

  Williams's Middle Kingdom, extract from, 105

  _Willoughbeia edulis_, 378

  Wilson (Mr. T.) on the cost of producing sugar, 189

  Wilson's rice-cleaning machine, 290

  Winnowing coffee, 51
    machine for tea, 116

  Woad, 452

  Wood dyes, 449
    oil, 511
    (Mr.) on indigo culture, Wool manufacture, oil consumed in, 510

  Wray's practical sugar planter, 140

  _Wrightia tinctoria_, 463


  _Xanthoxylum piperitum_, 421
    _ochroxylon_, 460

  _Xiguilite_, the indigo shrub, 460

  _Xylocarpus granatum_, 519

  _Xylopia aromatica_, 421


  Yam, back, 333, 335, 337-38-39, 362

  Yams, varieties of cultivated, 362

  Yampah root, 376

  Yellow berries, 443

  Yerba, Spanish and native name for the Paraguay tea tree, 133

  _Yucca amarga_, 331

  Yucca, the Peruvian name for cassava, 367, 375


  Zamia, arrowroot obtained from, 319, 352
    _pumila_, 330

  Zanzibar, clove plantations in, 400

  _Zea Mays_, description of, 260

  _Zingiber officinale_, 414

  _Zizania aquatica_, 284

  Zones, Meyen's division of, 25

  Zollverein, production of beet root sugar in, 198