Monday Feb. 18th--Bitter cold. I am just come from writing school. Last
Wednesday P.M. while I was at school Aunt Storer called in to see Aunt
Deming in her way to Mr Inches's. She walk'd all that long way. Thursday
last I din'd & spent the afternoon with Aunt Sukey. I attended both my
schools in the morning of that day. I cal'd at unkle Joshua's as I went
along, as I generally do, when I go in town, it being all in my way.
Saterday I din'd at Unkle Storer's, drank tea at Cousin Barrel's, was
entertain'd in the afternoon with scating. Unkle Henry was there.
Yesterday by the help of neighbor Soley's Chaise, I was at meeting all
day, tho' it snow'd in the afternoon. I might have say'd I was at Unkle
Winslow's last Thursday Eve^g & when I inform you that my needle work at
school, & knitting at home, went on _as usual_, I think I have laid
before you a pretty full account of the last week. You see how I improve
in my writing, but I drive on as fast as I can.


Feb. 21, Thursday.--This day Jack Frost bites very hard, so hard aunt
won't let me go to any school. I have this morning made part of a coppy
with the very pen I have now in my hand, writting this with. Yesterday
was so cold there was a very thick vapor upon the water, but I attended
my schools all day. My unkle says yesterday was 10 degrees colder than
any day we have had before this winter. And my aunt says she believes
this day is 10 degrees colder than it was yesterday; & moreover, that
she would not put a dog out of doors. The sun gives forth his rays
through a vapor like that which was upon the water yesterday. But Aunt
bids me give her love to pappa & all the family & tell them that she
should be glad of their company in her warm parlour, indeed there is not
one room in this house but is very warm when there is a good fire in
them. As there is in this at present. Yesterday I got leave (by my
aunt's desire) to go from school at 4 o'clock to see my unkle Ned who
has had the misfortune to break his leg. I call'd in to warm myself at
unkle Joshua's. Aunt Hannah told me I had better not go any further for
she could tell me all about him, so I say'd as it is so cold I believe
aunt won't be angry so I will stay, I therefore took off my things, aunt
gave me leave to call at Unkle Joshua's & was very glad I went no
further. Aunt Hannah told me he was as well as could be expected for one
that has a broken bone. He was coming from Watertown in a chaise the
horse fell down on the Hill, this side Mr Brindley's. he was
afraid if he fell out, the wheel would run over him, he therefore gave a
start & fell out & broke his leg, the horse strugled to get up, but
could not. unkle Ned was affraid if he did get up the chaise
wheels would run over him, so he went on his two hands and his other
foot drawing his lame leg after him & got behind the chaise, (so he was
safe) & there lay in the snow for some time, nobody being near. at last
2 genteelmen came, they tho't the horse was dead when they first saw him
at a distance, but hearing somebody hollow, went up to it. By this time
there was a countraman come along, the person that hollow'd was unkle
Ned. They got a slay and put him in it with some hay and a blanket,
wrapt him up well as they could & brought him to Deacon Smith's in town.
Now Papa & Mamma, this hill is in Brookline. And now again, I have been
better inform'd for the hill is in Roxbury & poor Unkle Ned was alone in
the chaise. Both bones of his leg are broke, but they did not come thro'
the skin, which is a happy circumstance. It is his right leg that is
broke. My Grandmamma sent Miss Deming, Miss Winslow & I one eight^th of
a Dollar a piece for a New Years gift. My Aunt Deming & Miss Deming had
letters from Grandmamma. She was pretty well, she wrote aunt that Mrs
Marting was brought to bed with a son Joshua about a month since, & is
with her son very well. Grandmamma was very well last week. I have made
the purchase I told you of a few pages agone, that is, last Thursday I
purchas'd with my aunt Deming's leave, a very beautiful white feather
hat, that is, the out side, which is a bit of white hollond with the
feathers sew'd on in a most curious manner white & unsullyed as the
falling snow, this hat I have long been saving my money to procure for
which I have let your kind allowance, Papa, lay in my aunt's hands till
this hat which I spoke for was brought home. As I am (as we say) a
daughter of liberty[49] I chuse to wear as much of our own manufactory
as pocible. But my aunt says, I have wrote this account very badly.
I will go on to save my money for a chip & a lineing &c.

Papa I rec'd your letter dated Jan. 11, for which I thank you, Sir, &
thank you greatly for the money I received therewith. I am very glad to
hear that Brother John papa & mamma & cousin are well. I'll answer your
letter papa and yours mamma and cousin Harry's too. I am very glad mamma
your eyes are better. I hope by the time I have the pleasure of hearing
from Cumberland again your eyes will be so well that you will favor me
with one from you.


Feb. 22d.--Since about the middle of December, ult. we have had
till this week, a series of cold and stormy weather--every snow storm
(of which we have had abundance) except the first, ended with rain, by
which means the snow was so hardened that strong gales at NW soon turned
it, & all above ground to ice, which this day seven-night was from one
to three, four & they say, in some places, five feet thick, in the
streets of this town. Last saturday morning we had a snow storm come on,
which continued till four o'clock P.M. when it turned to rain, since
which we have had a warm air, with many showers of rain, one this
morning a little before day attended with thunder. The streets have been
very wet, the water running like rivers all this week, so that I could
not possibly go to school, neither have I yet got the bandage off my
fingure. Since I have been writing now, the wind suddenly sprung up at
NW and blew with violence so that we may get to meeting to-morrow,
perhaps on dry ground. Unkle Ned was here just now & has fairly or
unfairly carried off aunt's cut paper pictures,[50] tho' she told him
she had given them to papa some years ago. It has been a very sickly
time here, not one person that I know of but has been under heavy
colds--(all laid up at unkle Storer's) in general got abroad again. Aunt
Suky had not been down stairs since her lying in, when I last saw her,
but I hear she is got down. She has had a broken breast. I have spun 30
knots of linning yarn, and (partly) new footed a pair of stockings for
Lucinda, read a part of the pilgrim's progress, coppied part of my text
journal (that if I live a few years longer, I may be able to understand
it, for aunt sais, that to her, the contents as I first mark'd them,
were an impenetrable secret) play'd some, tuck'd a great deal (Aunt
Deming says it is very true) laugh'd enough, & I tell aunt it is all
human _nature_, if not human reason. And now, I wish my honored mamma a
very good night.


Saturday noon Feb. 23d--Dear Pappa, do's the winter continue as
pleasant at Cumberland as when you wrote to me last? We had but very
little winter here, till February came in, but we have little else
since. The cold still continues tho' not so extreme as it was last
Thursday. I have attended my schools all this week except one day, and
am going as soon as I have din'd to see how Unkle Ned does. I was
thinking, Sir, to lay up a piece of money you sent me, but as you sent
it to me to lay out I have a mind to buy a chip & linning for my feather
hatt. But my aunt says she will think of it. My aunt says if I behave
myself very well indeed, not else, she will give me a garland of flowers
to orniment it, tho' she has layd aside the biziness of flower
making.[51]


  [Illustration: GENERAL JOSHUA WINSLOW]


Feb. 25th.--This is a very stormy day of snow, hail & rain, so that I
cannot get to Master Holbrook's, therefore I will here copy something I
lately transcribed on a loose paper from Dr. Owen's sermon on Hab. iii,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. "I have heard that a full wind behind the
ship drives her not so fast forward, as a side wind, that seems almost
as much against her as with her; & the reason they say is, because a
full wind fills but some of her sails.


Wednesday.--Very cold, but this morning I was at sewing and writing
school, this afternoon all sewing, for Master Holbrook does not in the
winter keep school of afternoons. Unkle Henrys feet are so much better
that he wears shoos now.


Monday noon Feb. 25th. I have been to writing school this morning and
Sewing. The day being very pleasant, very little wind stirring. Jemima
called to see me last evening. She lives at Master Jimmy Lovel's.[52]
Dear mamma, I suppose that you would be glad to hear that Betty Smith
who has given you so much trouble, is well & behaves herself well & I
should be glad if I could write you so. But the truth is, no sooner was
the 29th Regiment encamp'd upon the common but miss Betty took herself
among them (as the Irish say) & there she stay'd with Bill Pinchion &
awhile. The next news of her was, that she was got into gaol for
stealing: from whence she was taken to the publick whipping post.[53]
The next adventure was to the Castle, after the soldier's were remov'd
there, for the murder of the 5th March last.[54] When they turn'd her
away from there, she came up to town again, and soon got into the
workhouse for new misdemeanours, she soon ran away from there and sit up
her old trade of pilfering again, for which she was put a second time
into gaol, there she still remains. About two months agone (as well as I
can remember) she & a number of her wretched companions set the gaol on
fire, in order to get out, but the fire was timely discovered &
extinguished, & there, as I said she still remains till this day, in
order to be tried for her crimes. I heard somebody say that as she has
some connections with the army no doubt but she would be cleared, and
perhaps, have a pension into the bargain. Mr. Henry says the way of sin
is down hill, when persons get into that way they are not easily
stopped.


Feb. 27.--This day being too stormy for me to go to any school, and
nothing as yet having happen'd that is worth your notice, my aunt gives
me leave to communicate to you something that much pleas'd her when she
heard of it, & which I hope will please you my Papa and Mamma. I believe
I may have inform'd you that since I have been in Boston, Dr. Byles[55]
has pretty frequently preached & sometimes administer'd the sacrament,
when our Candidates have preached to the O.S. Church, because they are
not tho't qualified to administer Gospel Ordinance, till they be settled
Pastours. About two months ago a brother of the church sent Dr Byles a
Card which contain'd after the usual introduction, the following words,
Mr W---- dont set up for an Expositor of Scripture, yet ventures to send
Dr. Byles a short comment on 1 Cor. ix. 11. which he thinks agreeable to
the genuine import of the text, & hopes the Dr will not disapprove it.
The comment was a dozen pounds of Chocolate &c.--To which the D^r
return'd the following very pretty answer. D^r Byles returns respects to
Mr W & most heartily thanks him for his judicious practical Familie
Expositor, which is in Tast. My aunt Deming gives her love to you mamma,
and bids me tell you, as a matter you will be very glad to know, that
D^r Byles & his lady & family, have enjoy'd a good share of health &
perfect harmony for several years past.

Mr Beacon is come home. My unkle Neddy is very comfortable, has very
little pain, & know fever with his broken bone. My Unkle Harry[56] was
here yesterday & is very well. Poor Mrs Inches is dangerously ill of a
fever. We have not heard how she does today.


March 4th.--Poor Mrs Inches is dead. Gone from a world of trouble, as
she has left this to her poor mother. Aunt says she heartyly pities Mrs
Jackson. Mr Nat. Bethune died this morning, Mrs Inches last night.

We had the greatest fall of snow yesterday we have had this winter. Yet
cousin Sally, miss Polly, & I rode to & from meeting in Mr Soley's
chaise both forenoon & afternoon, & with a stove[57] was very
comfortable there. If brother John is as well and hearty as cousin
Frank, he is a clever boy. Unkle Neddy continues very comfortable. I saw
him last saturday. I have just now been writing four lines in my Book
almost as well as the copy. But all the intreaties in the world will not
prevail upon me to do always as well as I can, which is not the least
trouble to me, tho' its a great grief to aunt Deming. And she says by
writing so frightfully above.


March 6.--I think the appearance this morning is as winterish as any I
can remember, earth, houses, trees, all covered with snow, which began
to fall yesterday morning & continued falling all last night. The Sun
now shines very bright, the N.W. wind blows very fresh. Mr Gannett din'd
here yesterday, from him, my unkle, aunt & cousin Sally, I had an
account of yesterday's publick performances,[58] & exhibitions, but aunt
says I need not write about 'em because, no doubt there will be printed
accounts. I should have been glad if I could have seen & heard for
myselfe. My face is better, but I have got a heavy cold yet.


March 9th.--After being confined a week, I rode yesterday afternoon to
& from meeting in Mr Soley's chaise. I got no cold and am pretty well
today. This has been a very snowy day today. Any body that sees this may
see that I have wrote nonsense but Aunt says, I have been a very good
girl to day about my work however--I think this day's work may be called
a piece meal for in the first place I sew'd on the bosom of unkle's
shirt, mended two pair of gloves, mended for the wash two handkerchiefs,
(one cambrick) sewed on half a border of a lawn apron of aunts, read
part of the xxi^st chapter of Exodous, & a story in the Mother's gift.
Now, Hon^d Mamma, I must tell you of something that happened to me
to-day, that has not happen'd before this great while, viz My Unkle &
Aunt both told me, I was a very good girl. Mr Gannett gave us the favour
of his company a little while this morning (our head). I have been
writing all the above gibberish while aunt has been looking after her
family--now she is out of the room--now she is in--& takes up my pen in
_my_ absence to observe, I am a little simpleton for informing my mamma,
that it is _a great while_ since I was prais'd because she will conclude
that it is _a great while_ since I deserv'd to be prais'd. I will
henceforth try to observe their praise & yours too. I mean deserve. It's
now tea time--as soon as that is over, I shall spend the rest of the
evening in reading to my aunt. It is near candle lighting.


March 10, 5 o'clock P.M.--I have finish'd my stent of sewing work for
this day & wrote a billet to Miss Caty Vans, a copy of which I shall
write on the next page. To-morrow if the weather is fit I am to visit.
I have again been told I was a good girl. My Billet to Miss Vans was in
the following words. Miss Green gives her compliments to Miss Vans, and
informs her that her aunt Deming quite misunderstood the matter about
the queen's night-Cap.[59] Mrs. Deming thou't that it was a black skull
cap linn'd with red that Miss Vans ment which she thou't would not be
becoming to Miss Green's light complexion. Miss Green now takes the
liberty to send the materials for the Cap Miss Vans was so kind as to
say she would make for her, which, when done, she engages to take
special care of for Miss Vans' sake. Mrs. Deming joins her compliments
with Miss Green's--they both wish for the pleasure of a visit from Miss
Vans. Miss Soley is just come in to visit me & 'tis near dark.


March 11.--Boast not thyself of tomorrow; for thou knowest not what a
day may bring forth. Thus king Solomon, inspired by the Holy Ghost,
cautions, Pro. xxvii. 1. My aunt says, this is a most necessary lesson
to be learn'd & laid up in the heart. I am quite of her mind. I have met
with a disappointment to day, & aunt says, I may look for them every
day--we live in a changing world--in scripture call'd a vale of tears.
Uncle said yesterday that there had not been so much snow on the ground
this winter as there was then--it has been vastly added to since then,
& is now 7 feet deep in some places round this house; it is above the
fence in the coart & thick snow began to fall and condtinu'd till about
5 o'clock P.M. (it is about 1-4 past 8 o'clock) since which there has
been a steady rain--so no visiting as I hoped this day, & this is the
disappointment I mentioned on t'other page. Last saturday I sent my
cousin Betsy Storer a Billet of which the following is a copy. Miss
Green gives her love to Miss Storer & informs her that she is very
_sensible_ of the effects of a bad cold, not only in the pain she has
had in her throat, neck and face, which have been much swell'd & which
she is not quite clear of, but that she has also been by the same
depriv'd of the pleasure of seeing Miss Storer & her other friends in
Sudbury Street. She begs, her Duty, Love & Compliments, may be presented
as due & that she may be inform'd if they be in health. To this I have
receiv'd no answer. I suppose she don't think I am worth an answer. But
I have finished my stent, and wrote all under this date, & now I have
just daylight eno' to add, my love and duty to dear friends at
_Cumberland_.


  [Illustration: EBENEZER STORER]


March 14.--Mr. Stephen March, at whose house I was treated so kindly
last fall, departed this life last week, after languishing several
months under a complication of disorders--we have not had perticulars,
therefore cannot inform you, whether he engag'd the King of terrors with
Christian fortitude, or otherwise.

  "Stoop down my Thoughts, that use to rise,
  Converse a while with Death;
  Think how a gasping Mortal lies,
  And pants away his Breath."

Last Thursday I din'd with unkle Storer, & family at aunt Sukey's--all
well except Charles Storer who was not so ill but what, _that_ I mean,
he din'd with us. Aunt Suky's Charles is a pretty little boy & grows
nicely. We were diverted in the afternoon with an account of a queer
Feast that had been made that day in a certain Court of this town for
the Entertainment of a number of Tories--perhaps seventeen. One
contain'd three calves heads (skin off) with their appurtinencies
anciently call'd pluck--Their other dish (for they had but two)
contain'd a number of roast fowls--half a dozen, we suppose,[A] & all
roosters at this season no doubt. Yesterday, soon after I came from
writing school we had another snow storm begun, which continued till
after I went to bed. This morning the sun shines clear (so it did
yesterday morning till 10 o'clock.) It is now bitter cold, & such a
quantity of snow upon the ground, as the Old people don't remember ever
to have seen before at this time of the year. My aunt Deming says, when
she first look'd abroad this morning she felt anxious for her brother, &
his family at Cumberland, fearing lest they were covered up in snow. It
is now 1-2 after 12 o'clock noon. The sun has been shineing in his full
strength for full 6 hours, & the snow not melted enough anywhere in
sight of this house, to cause one drop of water.

[Footnote A: There was six as I have since heard.]


March 17.--Yesterday, I went to see aunt Polly, & finding her going out,
I spent the afternoon with aunt Hannah. While I was out, a snow storm
overtook me. This being a fine sun shine (tho' cold) day I have been to
writing school, & wrote two pieces, one I presented to aunt Deming, and
the other I design for my Honor'd Papa, I hope he will approve of it.
I sent a piece of my writing to you Hon'd Mamma last fall, which I hope
you receiv'd. When my aunt Deming was a little girl my Grandmamma
Sargent told her the following story viz. One Mr. Calf who had three
times enjoy'd the Mayorality of the city of London, had after his
decease, a monoment erected to his memory with the following inscription
on it.

  Here lies buried the body of
    Sir Richard Calf,
  Thrice Lord Mayor of London.
    Honor, Honor, Honor.

A drol gentleman passing by with a bit of chalk in his hand underwrote
thus--

  O cruel death! more subtle than a Fox
  That would not let this Calf become an Ox,
  That he might browze among the briers & thorns
  And with his brethren wear,
  Horns. Horns. Horns.


My aunt told me the foregoing some time since & today I ask'd her leave
to insert it in my journal. My aunt gives her love to you & directs me
to tell you that she tho't my piece of linnin would have made me a dozen
of shifts but she could cut no more than ten out of it. There is some
left, but not enough for another. Nine of them are finish'd wash'd &
iron'd; & the other would have been long since done if my fingers had
not been sore. My cousin Sally made three of them for me, but then I
made two shirts & part of another for unkle to help her. I believe
unless something remarkable should happen, such as a _warm day_, my
mamma will consent that I dedicate a few of my next essays to papa.
I think the second thing I said to aunt this morning was, that I
intended to be _very good all day_. To make this out,

  "Next unto _God_, dear Parents I address
  Myself to you in humble Thankfulness,
  For all your Care & Charge on me bestow'd;
  The means of Learning unto me allow'd,
  Go on I pray, & let me still pursue
  Those Golden ARTS the Vulgar never knew."

    Yr Dutifull Daughter

      ANNA GREEN WINSLOW.

The poetry I transcrib'd from my Copy Book.


March 19.--Thursday last I spent at home, except a quarter of an hour
between sunset and dark, I stepped over the way to Mr. Glover's with
aunt. Yesterday I spent at Unkle Neddy's & stitched wristbands for aunt
Polly. By the way, I must inform you, (pray dont let papa see this) that
yesterday I put on No 1 of my new shifts, & indeed it is very
comfortable. It is _long_ since I had a shift to my _back_. I dont know
if I ever had till now--It seem'd so strange too, to have any linen
below my waist--I am going to dine at Mrs. Whitwell's to day, by
invitation. I spent last evening at Mrs Rogers. Mr Hunt discoursed upon
the doctrine of the Trinity--it was the second time that he spoke upon
the subject at that place. I did not hear him the first time. His
business last eve^g was to prove the divinity of the Son, & holy Ghost,
& their equality with the Father. My aunt Deming says, it is a grief to
her, that I don't always write as well as I can, _I can write pretily_.


March 21.--I din'd & spent the afternoon of Thursday last, at Mrs
Whitwell's. Mrs Lathrop, & Mrs Carpenter din'd there also. The latter
said she was formerly acquainted with mamma, ask'd how she did, & when I
heard from her,--said, I look'd much like her. Madam Harris & Miss
P. Vans were also of the company. While I was abroad the snow melted to
such a degree, that my aunt was oblig'd to get Mr Soley's chaise to
bring me home. Yesterday, we had by far the gratest storm of wind & snow
that there has been this winter. It began to fall yesterday morning &
continued falling till after our family were in bed. (P.M.) Mr. Hunt
call'd in to visit us just after we rose from diner; he ask'd me,
whether I had heard from my papa & mamma, since I wrote 'em. He was
answer'd, no sir, it would be strange if I had, because I had been
writing to 'em today, & indeed so I did every day. Aunt told him that
_his name_ went frequently into my journals together with broken & some
times whole sentences of his sermons, conversations &c. He laugh'd &
call'd me Newsmonger, & said I was a daily advertiser. He added, that he
did not doubt but my journals afforded much entertainment & would be a
future benefit &c. Here is a fine compliment for me mamma.


March 26.--Yesterday at 6 o'clock, I went to Unkle Winslow's, their
neighbor Greenleaf was their. She said she knew Mamma, & that I look
like her. Speaking about papa & you occation'd Unkle Winslow to tell me
that he had kiss'd you long before papa knew you. From thence we went to
Miss Rogers's where, to a full assembly Mr Bacon read his 3d sermon on
R. iv. 6, I can remember he said, that, before we all sinned in Adam our
father, Christ loved us. He said the Son of God always did as his father
gave him commandment, & to prove this, he said, that above 17 hundred
years ago he left the bosom of the Father, & came & took up his abode
with men, & bore all the scourgings & buffetings which the vile Jews
inflicted on him, & then was hung upon the accursed tree--he died, was
buried, & in three days rose again--ascended up to heaven & there took
his seat at the right hand of the Majesty on high from whence he will
come to be the supream and impartial judge of quick & dead--and when his
poor Mother & her poor husband went to Jerusalem to keep the passover &
he went with them, he disputed among the doctors, & when his Mother
ask'd him about it he said "wist ye not that I must be about my Father's
business,"--all this he said was a part of that wrighteousness for the
sake of which a sinner is justafied--Aunt has been up stairs all the
time I have been writeing & recollecting this--so no help from her. She
is come down now & I have been reading this over to her. She sais, she
is glad I remember so much, but I have not done the subject justice. She
sais I have blended things somewhat improperly--an interuption by
company.


March 28.--Unkle Harry was here last evening & inform'd us that by a
vessel from Halifax which arriv'd yesterday, Mr H Newton, inform'd his
brother Mr J Newton of the sudden death of their brother Hibbert in your
family 21 January ult. (Just five months to a day since Grandmamma
Sargent's death.) With all the circumstances relating to it. My aunt
Deming gives her love to Mamma & wishes her a sanctified improvement of
all God's dealings with her, & that it would please him to bring her &
all the family safe to Boston. Jarvis is put up for Cumberland, we hope
he will be there by or before Mayday. This minute I have receiv'd my
queen's night cap from Miss Caty Vans--we like it. Aunt says, that if
the materials it is made of were more substantial than gauze, it might
serve occationally to hold any thing mesur'd by an 1-2 peck, but it is
just as it should be, & very decent, & she wishes my writing was _as_
decent. But I got into one of my frolicks, upon sight of the Cap.


April 1st.--Will you be offended mamma, if I ask you, if you remember
the flock of wild Geese that papa call'd you to see flying over the
Blacksmith's shop this day three years? I hope not; I only mean to
divert you. The snow is near gone in the street before us, & mud supplys
the place thereof; After a week's absence, I this day attended Master
Holbrook with some difficulty, what was last week a pond is to-day a
quag, thro' which I got safe however, & if aunt[A] had known it was so
bad, she sais she would not have sent me, but I neither wet my feet, nor
drabled my clothes, indeed I have but one garment that I could contrive
to drabble.

N.B. It is 1 April.

[Footnote A: Miss Green tells her aunt, that the word refer'd to begins
with a dipthong.]


April 3.--Yesterday was the annual Fast, & I was at meeting all day. Mr
Hunt preach'd A.M. from Zac. vii. 4, 5, 6, 7. He said, that if we did
not mean as we said in pray's it was only a compliment put upon God,
which was a high affront to his divine Majesty. Mr Bacon, P.M. from
James v. 17. He said, "pray's, effectual & fervent, might be, where
there were no words, but there might be elegant words where there is no
prayr's. The essence of pray's consists in offering up holy desires to
God agreeable to his will,--it is the flowing out of gracious
affections--what then are the pray'rs of an unrenewed heart that is full
of enmity to God? doubtless they are an abomination to him. What then,
must not unregenerate men pray? I answer, it is their duty to breathe
out holy desires to God in pray's. Prayer is a natural duty. Hannah
pour'd out her soul before the Lord, yet her voice was not heard, only
her lips moved. Some grieve and complain that their pray's are not
answered, but if _thy will be done is_, as it ought to be, in every
prayer; their prayers are answer'd."

The wind was high at N.E. all day yesterday, but nothing fell from the
dark clouds that overspread the heavens, till 8 o'clock last evening,
when a snow began which has continued falling ever since. The bell being
now ringing for 1 o'clock P.M. & no sign of abatement.

My aunt Deming says, that if my memory had been equal to the memory of
some of my ancestors, I might have done better justice to Mr. Bacon's
good sermon, & that if hers had been better than mine she would have
helped me. Mr Bacon _did_ say what is here recorded, but in other
method.


April 6.--I made a shift to walk to meeting yesterday morning. But there
was so much water in the streets when I came home from meeting that I
got a seat in Mr Waleses chaise. My aunt walk'd home & she sais thro'
more difaculty than ever she did in her life before. Indeed had the
stream get up from our meeting house as it did down, we might have taken
boat as we have talk'd some times of doing to cross the street to our
oposite neighbor _Soley's_ chaise. I remember some of Mr Hunts sermon,
how much will appear in my text journal.


April 7.--I visited yesterday P.M. with my aunt at Mr Waldron's. This
afternoon I am going with my aunt to visit Mrs Salisbury who is Dr
Sewall's granddaughter, I expect Miss Patty Waldow will meet me there.
It is but a little way & we can now thro' favour cross the street
without the help of a boat. I saw Miss Polly Vans this morning. She
gives her love to you. As she always does whenever I see her. Aunt
Deming is this minute come into the room, & from what her niece has
wrote last, takes the liberty to remind you, that Miss Vans is a sister
of the Old South Church, a society remarkable for Love. Aunt Deming is
sorry she has spoil'd the look of this page by her carelessness & hopes
her niece will mend its appearance in what follows. She wishes my
English had been better, but has not time to correct more than one word.


April 9.--We made the visit refer'd to above. The company was old Mrs
Salisbury,[60] Mrs Hill, (Mrs Salisbury's sister she was Miss Hannah
Sewall & is married to young Mr James Hill that us'd to live in this
house) Miss Sally Hill, Miss Polly Belcher Lyde, Miss Caty Sewall, My
Aunt & myself. Yesterday afternoon I visited Miss Polly Deming & took
her with me to Mr Rogers' in the evening where Mr Hunt discours'd upon
the 7th question of the catechism viz what are the decrees of God?
I remember a good many of his observations, which I have got set down on
a loose paper. But my aunt says that a Miss of 12 year's old cant
possibly do justice to the nicest subject in Divinity, & therefore had
better not attempt a repetition of perticulars, that she finds lie (as
may be easily concluded) somewhat confused in my young mind. She also
says, that in her poor judgment, Mr Hunt discours'd soundly as well as
ingeniously upon the subject, & very much to her instruction &
satisfaction. My Papa inform'd me in his last letter that he had done me
the honor to read my journals & that he approv'd of some part of them,
I suppose he means that he likes some parts better than other, indeed it
would be wonderful, as aunt says, if a gentleman of papa's understanding
& judgment cou'd be highly entertain'd with _every little_ saying or
observation that came from a girl of my years & that I ought to esteem
it a great favour that he notices any of my simple matter with his
_approbation_.


April 13th.--Yesterday I walk'd to meeting all day, the ground very
dry, & when I came home from meeting in the afternoon the Dust blew so
that it almost put my eyes out. What a difference in the space of a
week. I was just going out to writing school, but a slight rain
prevented so aunt says I must make up by writing well at home. Since I
have been writing the rain is turn'd to snow, which is now falling in a
thick shower. I have now before me, hon^d. Mamma, your favor dated
January 3. I am glad you alter'd your mind when you at first thought not
to write to me. I am glad my brother made an essay for a Post Script to
your Letter. I must get him to read it to me, when he comes up, for two
reasons, the one is because I may have the pleasure of hearing his
voice, the other because I don't understand his characters. I observe
that he is mamma's "Ducky Darling." I never again shall believe that Mrs
Huston will come up to Boston till I see her here. I shall be very glad
to see Mrs Law here & I have some hopes of it. Mr Gannett and the things
you sent by him we safely receiv'd before I got your Letter--you say
"you see I am still a great housekeeper," I think more so than when I
was with you. Truly I answer'd Mr Law's letter as soon as I found
opportunity therefor. I shall be very glad to see Miss Jenny here & I
wish she could live with me. I hope you will answer this "viva vosa" as
you say you intend to. Pray mamma who larnt you lattan? It now rains
fast, but the sun shines, & I am glad to see it, because if it continues
I am going abroad with aunt this afternoon.


April 14th.--I went a visiting yesterday to Col. Gridley's with my
aunt. After tea Miss Becky Gridley sung a minuet. Miss Polly Deming & I
danced to her musick, which when perform'd was approv'd of by Mrs
Gridley, Mrs Deming, Mrs Thompson, Mrs Avery,[61] Miss Sally Hill, Miss
Becky Gridley, Miss Polly Gridley & Miss Sally Winslow. Col^n Gridley
was out o' the room. Col^n brought in the talk of Whigs & Tories &
taught me the difference between them. I spent last evening at home.
I should have gone a visiting to day in sudbury street, but Unkle Harry
told me last night that they would be full of company. I had the
pleasure of hearing by him, that they were all well. I believe I shall
go somewhere this afternoon for I have acquaintances enough that would
be very glad to see me, as well as my sudbury street friends.


April 15th.--Yesterday I din'd at Mrs. Whitwell's & she being going
abroad, I spent the afternoon at Mad^m Harris's & the evening at home,
Unkle Harry gave us his company some part of it. I am going to Aunt
Storer's as soon as writing school is done. I shall dine with her, if
she is not engaged. It is a long time since I was there, & indeed it is
a long time since I have been able to get there. For tho' the walking
has been pretty tolerable at the South End, it has been intolerable down
in town. And indeed till yesterday, it has been such bad walking, that I
could not get there on my feet. If she had wanted much to have seen me,
she might have sent either one of her chaises, her chariot, or her
babyhutt,[62] one of which I see going by the door almost every day.


April 16th.--I dined with Aunt Storer yesterday & spent the afternoon
very agreeably at Aunt Suky's. Aunt Storer is not very well, but she
drank tea with us, & went down to Mr Stillman's lecture in the evening.
I spent the evening with Unkle & Aunt at Mrs Rogers's. Mr Bacon preach'd
his fourth sermon from Romans iv. 6. My cousin Charles Storer lent me
Gulliver's Travels abreviated, which aunt says I may read for the sake
of perfecting myself in reading a variety of composures. she sais
farther that the piece was desin'd as a burlesque upon the times in
which it was wrote,--& Martimas Scriblensis & Pope Dunciad were wrote
with the same design & as parts of the same work, tho' wrote by three
several hands.


April 17th.--You see, Mamma, I comply with your orders (or at least
have done father's some time past) of writing in my journal every day
tho' my matters are of little importance & I have nothing at present to
communicate except that I spent yesterday afternoon & evening at Mr
Soley's. The day was very rainy. I hope I shall at least learn to spell
the word _yesterday_, it having occur'd so frequently in these pages!
(The bell is ringing for good friday.) Last evening aunt had a letter
from Unkle Pierce, he informs her, that last Lords day morning Mrs
Martin was deliver'd of a daughter. She had been siezed the Monday
before with a violent pluritick fever, which continued when my Unkle's
letter was dated 13th instant. My Aunt Deming is affraid that poor Mrs
Martin is no more. She hopes she is reconcil'd to her father--but is
affraid whether that was so--She had try'd what was to be done that way
on her late visits to Portsmouth, & found my unkle was placably
dispos'd, poor Mrs Martin, she could not then be brought to make any
acknowledgements as she ought to have done.


April 18th.--Some time since I exchang'd a piece of patchwork, which
had been wrought in my leisure intervals, with Miss Peggy Phillips,[63]
my schoolmate, for a pair of curious lace mitts with blue flaps which I
shall send, with a yard of white ribbin edg'd with green to Miss Nancy
Macky for a present. I had intended that the patchwork should have grown
large enough to have cover'd a bed when that same live stock which you
wrote me about some time since, should be increas'd to that portion you
intend to bestow upon me, should a certain event take place. I have just
now finish'd my Letter to Papa. I had wrote to my other correspondents
at Cumberland, some time ago, all which with this I wish safe to your &
their hand. I have been carefull not to repeat in my journal any thing
that I had wrote in a Letter either to papa, you, &c. Else I should have
inform'd you of some of Bet Smith's abominations with the deserv'd
punishment she is soon to meet with. But I have wrote it to papa, so
need not repeat. I guess when this reaches you, you will be too much
engag'd in preparing to quit your present habitation, & will have too
much upon your head & hands, to pay much attention to this scrowl. But
it may be an amusement to you on your voyage--therefore I send it.

Pray mamma, be so kind as to bring up all my journal with you. My Papa
has promised me, he will bring up my baby house with him. I shall send
you a droll figure of a young lady,[64] in or under, which you please,
a tasty head Dress. It was taken from a print that came over in one of
the last ships from London. After you have sufficiently amused yourself
with it I am willing . . .


Boston April 20, 1772.--Last Saterday I seal'd up 45 pages of Journal
for Cumberland. This is a very stormy day--no going to school. I am
learning to knit lace.


April 21.--Visited at uncle Joshua Green's. I saw three funerals from
their window, poor Cap^n Turner's was one.


April 22d.--I spent this evening at Miss Rogers as usual. Mr. Hunt
continued his discourse upon the 7th question of the catechism &
finish'd what he had to say upon it.


April 23d.--This morn^g early our Mr Bacon set out upon a tour to
Maryland, he proposed to be absent 8 weeks. He told the Church that
brother Hunt would supply the pulpit till his return. I made a visit
this afternoon with cousin Sally at Dr. Phillip's.


April 24th.--I drank tea at Aunt Suky's. Aunt Storer was there, she
seemed to be in charming good health & spirits. My cousin Charles Green
seems to grow a little fat pritty boy but he is very light. My aunt
Storer lent me 3 of cousin Charles' books to read, viz.--The puzzeling
cap, the female Oraters & the history of Gaffer too-shoes.[65]


April 25th.--I learn't three stitches upon net work to-day.


April 27th.--I din'd at Aunt Storer's & spent the P.M. at aunt Suky's.


April 28th.--This P.M. I am visited by Miss Glover, Miss Draper & Miss
Soley. My aunt abroad.


April 29th.--Tomorrow, if the weather be good, I am to set out for
Marshfield.


  [Illustration: MRS. EBENEZER STORER]


May 11.--The morning after I wrote above, I sat out for Marshfield.
I had the pleasure of drinking tea with aunt Thomas the same day, the
family all well, but Mr G who seems to be near the end of the journey of
life. I visited General Winslow[66] & his son, the Dr., spent 8 days
very agreeably with my friends at Marshfield, & returned on saterday
last in good health & gay spirits which I still enjoy. The 2 first days
I was at Marshfield, the heat was extream & uncommon for the season. It
ended on saterday evening with a great thunder storm. The air has been
very cool ever since. My aunt Deming observ'd a great deal of lightning
in the south, but there was neither thunder, rain nor clouds in Boston.


May 16.--Last Wednesday Bet Smith was set upon the gallows. She behav'd
with great impudence. Thursday I danc'd a minuet & country dances at
school, after which I drank tea with aunt Storer. To day I am somewhat
out of sorts, a little sick at my stomach.


23d.--I followed my schools every day this week, thursday I din'd at
aunt Storer's & spent the P.M. there.


25.--I was not at meeting yesterday, Unkle & Aunt say they had very good
Fish at the O.S. I have got very sore eyes.


June 1st.--All last week till saterday was very cold & rainy. Aunt
Deming kept me within doors, there were no schools on account of the
Election of Councellers,[67] & other public doings; with one eye (for
t'other was bound up) I saw the governer & his train of life guard &c.
ride by in state to Cambridge. I form'd Letters last week to suit cousin
Sally & aunt Thomas, but my eyes were so bad aunt would not let me coppy
but one of them. Monday being Artillery Election[68] I went to see the
hall, din'd at aunt Storer's, took a walk in the P.M. Unkle laid down
the commission he took up last year. Mr Handcock invited the whole
company into his house in the afternoon & treated them very genteelly &
generously, with cake, wine, &c. There were 10 corn baskets of the feast
(at the Hall) sent to the prison & almshouse.


4th.--From June 1 when I wrote last there has nothing extraordinary
happen'd till today the whole regiment muster'd upon the common. Mr
Gannett, aunt & myself went up into the common, & there saw Cap^t
Water's, Cap^t Paddock's, Cap^t Peirce's, Cap^t Eliot's, Cap^t Barret's,
Cap^t Gay's, Cap^t May's, Cap^t Borington's & Cap^t Stimpson's company's
exercise. From there, we went into King street to Col Marshal's[69]
where we saw all of them prettily exercise & fire. Mr. Gannett din'd
with us. On Sabbath-day evening 7 June My Hon^d Papa, Mamma, little
Brother, cousin H. D. Thomas, Miss Jenny Allen, & Mrs Huston arriv'd
here from Cumberland, all in good health, to the great joy of all their
friends, myself in particular--they sail'd from Cumberland the 1st
instant, in the evening.


Aug. 18.--Many avocations have prevented my keeping my journal so
exactly as heretofore, by which means a pleasant visit to the peacock,
my Papa's & mamma's journey to Marshfield &c. have been omitted. The 6
instant Mr Sam^l Jarvis was married to Miss Suky Peirce, & on the 13th I
made her a visit in company with mamma & many others. The bride was
dress'd in a white satin night gound.[70]


27.--Yesterday I heard an account of a cat of 17 years old, that has
just recovered of the meazels. This same cat it is said had the small
pox 8 years ago!


28.--I spent the P.M. & eve at aunt Suky's very agreeably with aunt
Pierce's young ladies viz. Miss Johnson, Miss Walker, Miss Polly & Miss
Betsey Warton, (of Newport) Miss Betsey is just a fortnight wanting 1
day older than I am, who I became acquainted with that P.M. Papa, Mamma,
Unkle & aunt Storer, Aunt Pierce & Mr & Mrs Jarvis was there. There were
18 at supper besides a great many did not eat any. Mrs Jarvis sang after
supper. My brother Johny has got over the measels.


Sept. 1.--Last evening after meeting, Mrs Bacon was brought to bed of a
fine daughter. But was very ill. She had fits.


September 7.--Yesterday afternoon Mr Bacon baptiz'd his daughter by the
name of Elizabeth Lewis. It is a pretty looking child. Mrs Whitwell is
like to loose her Henry Harris. He is very ill.


8.--I visited with mamma at cousin Rogers'. There was a good many.


14.--Very busy all day, went into the common in the afternoon to see
training. It was very prettyly perform'd.


18.--My Papa, aunt Deming, cousin Rogers, & Miss Betsey Gould set out
for Portsmouth. I went over to Charlestown with them, after they were
gone, I came back, & rode up from the ferry in Mrs Rogers' chaise; it
drop'd me at Unkle Storer's gate, where I spent the day. My brother was
very sick.


Sep^r 17. 18.--Spent the days at aunt Storer's, the nights at home.


19.--Went down in the morn^g & spent the day & night there. My brother
better than he was.


20.--Sabbath day. I went to hear Mr Stilman[71] all day, I like him very
much. I don't wonder so many go to hear him.


21st.--Mr. Sawyer, Mr Parks, & Mrs Chatbourn, din'd at aunt Storer's.
I went to dancing in the afternoon. Miss Winslow & Miss Allen visited
there.


22d.--The king's coronation day. In the evening I went with mamma to
Col^n Marshal's in King Street to see the fireworks.


23d.--I din'd at aunt Suky's with Mr & Mrs Hooper[72] of Marblehead. In
the afternoon I went over to see Miss Betsy Winslow. When I came back I
had the pleasure to meet papa. I came home in the evening to see aunt
Deming. Unkle Winslow sup'd here.


24.--Papa cal'd here in the morn^g. Nothing else worth noticeing.


25.--Very pleasant. Unkle Ned cal'd here. Little Henry Harris was buried
this afternoon.


26. 27.--Nothing extraordinary yesterday & to day.


28.--My papa & unkle Winslow spent the evening here.


29. 30.--Very stormy. Miss Winslow & I read out the Generous Inconstant,
& have begun Sir Charles Grandison. . . .


May 25.--Nothing remarkable since the preceding date. Whenever I have
omited a school my aunt has directed me to sit it down here, so when you
dont see a memorandum of that kind, you may conclude that I have paid my
compliments to mess^rs Holbrook & Turner (to the former you see to
very little purpose) & mrs Smith as usual. The Miss Waldow's I mentioned
in a former are Mr. Danl Waldo's daughters (very pretty misses) their
mamma was Miss Becca Salisbury.[73] After making a short visit with my
Aunt at Mrs Green's, over the way, yesterday towards evening, I took a
walk with cousin Sally to see the good folks in Sudbury Street, & found
them all well. I had my HEDDUS roll on, aunt Storer said it ought to be
made less, Aunt Deming said it ought not to be made at all. It makes my
head itch, & ach, & burn like anything Mamma. This famous roll is not
made _wholly_ of a red _Cow Tail_, but is a mixture of that, & horsehair
(very course) & a little human hair of yellow hue, that I suppose was
taken out of the back part of an old wig. But D---- made it (our head)
all carded together and twisted up. When it first came home, aunt put it
on, & my new cap on it, she then took up her apron & mesur'd me, & from
the roots of my hair on my forehead to the top of my notions, I mesur'd
above an inch longer than I did downwards from the roots of my hair to
the end of my chin. Nothing renders a young person more amiable than
virtue & modesty without the help of fals hair, red _Cow tail_, or D----
(the barber).[74] Now all this mamma, I have just been reading over to
my aunt. She is pleas'd with my whimsical description & grave (half
grave) improvement, & hopes a little fals English will not spoil the
whole with Mamma. Rome was not built in a day.


31st May.--Monday last I was at the factory to see a piece of cloth
cousin Sally spun for a summer coat for unkle. After viewing the work we
recollected the room we sat down in was Libberty Assembly Hall,
otherwise called factory hall, so Miss Gridley & I did ourselves the
Honour of dancing a minuet in it. On tuesday I made Mrs Smith my morning
& p.m. visits as usual, neither Mr. Holbrook nor Turner have any school
this week, nor till tuesday next. I spent yesterday with my friends in
sudbury St. Cousin Frank has got a fever, aunt Storer took an emmetick
while I was there, cousin Betsy had violent pains almost all the
forenoon. Last tuesday Miss Ursula Griswold, daughter of the right Hon.
Matthew Griswold Esq governer of one of his Majesty's provinces, was
made one of our family, & I have the honor of being her chambermade.
I have just been reading over what I wrote to the company present, &
have got myself laughed at for my ignorance. It seems I should have said
the daughter of the Hon Lieu^t. Governor of Connecticutt. Mrs Dixon
lodg'd at Capn Mitchell's. She is gone to Connecticutt long since.


31 May.--I spent the afternoon at unkle Joshua's. yesterday, after tea I
went to see how aunt Storer did. I found her well at Unkle Frank's. Mr
Gerrish & wife of Halifax I had the pleasure to meet there, the latter
sends love to you. Indeed Mamma, till I receiv'd your last favour,
I never heard a word about the little basket &c. which I sent to brother
Johny last fall. I suppose Harry had so much to write about cotton, that
he forgot what was of more consequence. Dear Mamma, what name has Mr
Bent given his Son? something like Nehemiah, or Jehoshaphat, I suppose,
it must be an odd name (our head indeed, Mamma.) Aunt says she hopes it
a'nt Baal Gad, & she also says that I am a little simpleton for making
my note within the brackets above, because, when I omit to do it, Mamma
will think I have the help of somebody else's head but, N.B. for herself
she utterly disclames having either her head or hand concern'd in this
curious journal, except where the writing makes it manifest. So much for
this matter.


  [Illustration: CUT-PAPER PICTURE]




  NOTES.


  NOTE 1.

  Aunt Deming was Sarah, the oldest child of John Winslow and Sarah
  Peirce, and therefore sister of Joshua Winslow, Anna Green Winslow's
  father. She was born August 2, 1722, died March 10, 1788. She
  married John West, and after his death married, on February 27,
  1752, John Deming. He was a respectable and intelligent Boston
  citizen, but not a wealthy man. He was an ensign in the Ancient and
  Honorable Artillery in 1771, and a deacon of the Old South Church in
  1769, both of which offices were patents of nobility in provincial
  Boston. They lived in Central Court, leading out of Washington
  Street, just south of Summer Street. Aunt Deming eked out a limited
  income in a manner dear to Boston gentlewomen in those and in later
  days; she took young ladies to board while they attended Boston
  schools. Advertisements in colonial newspapers of "Board and
  half-board for young ladies" were not rare, and many good old New
  England names are seen in these advertisements. Aunt Deming was a
  woman of much judgment, as is shown in the pages of this diary; of
  much power of graphic description, as is proved by a short journal
  written for her niece, Sally Coverly, and letters of hers which are
  still preserved. She died childless.


  NOTE 2.

  Cumberland was the home in Nova Scotia of Anna Green Winslow's
  parents, where her father held the position of commissary to the
  British regiments stationed there. George Green, Anna's uncle,
  writing to Joseph Green, at Paramaribo, on July 23, 1770, said: "Mr.
  Winslow & wife still remain at Cumberland, have one son & one
  daughter, the last now at Boston for schooling, &c." So, at the date
  of the first entry in the diary, Anna had been in Boston probably
  about a year and a half.


  NOTE 3.

  Anna Green Winslow had doubtless heard much talk about this Rev.
  John Bacon, the new minister at the Old South Church, for much had
  been said about him in the weekly press: whether he should have an
  ordination dinner or not, and he did not; accounts of his
  ordination; and then notice of the sale of his sermons in the
  _Boston Gazette_.

  All Mr. Bacon's parishioners did not share Anna's liking for him; he
  found himself at the Old South in sorely troubled waters. He made a
  most unpropitious and trying entrance at best, through succeeding
  the beloved Joseph Sewall, who had preached to Old South listeners
  for fifty-six years. He came to town a stranger. When, a month
  later, Governor Hutchinson issued his annual Thanksgiving
  Proclamation, there was placed therein an "exceptionable clause"
  that was very offensive to Boston patriots, relating to the
  continuance of civil and religious liberties. It had always been the
  custom to have the Proclamation read by the ministers in the Boston
  churches for the two Sundays previous to Thanksgiving Day, but the
  ruling governor very cannily managed to get two Boston clergymen to
  read his proclamation the third Sunday before the appointed day,
  when all the church members, being unsuspectingly present, had to
  listen to the unwelcome words. One of these clerical instruments of
  gubernatorial diplomacy and craft was John Bacon. Samuel Adams wrote
  bitterly of him, saying, "He performed this servile task a week
  before the time, when the people were not aware of it." The _Boston
  Gazette_ of November 11 commented severely on Mr. Bacon's action,
  and many of his congregation were disgusted with him, and remained
  after the service to talk the Proclamation and their unfortunate new
  minister over.

  It might have been offered, one might think, as some excuse, that he
  had so recently come from Maryland, and was probably unacquainted
  with the intenseness of Massachusetts politics; and that he had also
  been a somewhat busy and preoccupied man during his six weeks'
  presence in Boston, for he had been marrying a wife,--or rather a
  widow. In the _Boston Evening Post_ of November 11, 1771, I read
  this notice: "Married, the Rev'd John Bacon to Mrs. Elizabeth
  Cummings, daughter of Ezekiel Goldthwait, Esq."

  He retained his pastorate, however, in spite of his early mistake,
  through anxious tea-party excitement and forlorn war-threatened
  days, till 1775, with but scant popularity and slight happiness,
  with bitter differences of opinion with his people over atonement
  and imputation, and that ever-present stumbling-block to New England
  divines,--baptism under the Half Covenant,--till he was asked to
  resign.

  Nor did he get on over smoothly with his fellow minister, John Hunt.
  In a curious poem of the day, called "Boston Ministers" (which is
  reprinted in the _New England Historical and Genealogical Register_
  of April, 1859), these verses appear:--

    At Old South there's a jarring pair,
      If I am not mistaken,
    One may descry with half an eye
      That Hunt is far from Bacon.
    Wise Hunt can trace out means of grace
      As leading to conversion,
    But Hopkins scheme is Bacons theme,
      And strange is his assertion.

  It mattered little, however, that Parson Bacon had to leave the Old
  South, for that was soon no longer a church, but a riding school for
  the British troops.

  Mr. Bacon retired, after his dismissal, to Canterbury, Conn., his
  birthplace. His friendly intimacy with Mrs. Deming proved of value
  to her, for when she left Boston, in April, 1775, at the time of the
  closing of the city gates, she met Mr. Bacon in Providence. She says
  in her journal:--

  "Towards evening Mr & M^rs Bacon, with their daughter, came into
  town. M^r Bacon came to see me. Enquir'd into my designs, &c. I told
  him truely I did not know what to do. That I had thot of giting
  farther into the country. Of trying to place Sally in some family
  where she might earn her board, & to do something like it for
  Lucinda, or put her out upon wages. That when I left the plain I had
  some faint hope I might hear from Mr Deming while I continued at
  Providence, but that I had little of that hope remaining. M^r Bacon
  advised me to go into Connecticutt, the very thing I was desirous
  of. Mr Bacon sd that he would advise me for the present to go to
  Canterbury, his native place. That he would give me a Letter to his
  Sister, who would receive me kindly & treat me tenderly, & that he
  would follow me there in a few days."

  This advice Mrs. Deming took, and made Canterbury her temporary
  home.

  Mr. Bacon did not again take charge of a parish. After the
  Revolution he became a magistrate, went to the legislature, became
  judge of the court of common pleas, and a member of congress. He did
  not wholly give up his disputatious ways, if we can judge from the
  books written by and to him, one of the latter being, "A Droll,
  a Deist, and a John Bacon, Master of Arts, Gently Reprimanded."

  His wife, who was born in 1733, and died in Stockbridge in 1821, was
  the daughter of Ezekiel Goldthwait, a Tory citizen of Boston,
  a register of deeds, and a wealthy merchant. A portrait of Mrs.
  Bacon, painted by Copley, is remarkable for its brilliant eyes and
  beautiful hands and arms.


  NOTE 4.

  Rev. John Hunt was born in Northampton, November 20, 1744. He was a
  Harvard graduate in the class of 1764, a classmate of Caleb Strong
  and John Scollay. He was installed colleague-pastor of the Old South
  Church with John Bacon in 1771. He found it a most trying position.
  He was of an amiable and gentle disposition, and the poem on "Boston
  Ministers" asserted that he "most friends with sisters made."
  Another Boston rhymester called him "puny John from Northampton,
  a meek-mouth moderate man." When the gates of Boston were closed in
  1775, after the battle of Lexington, he returned to Northampton, and
  died there of consumption, December 20, 1775. A full account of his
  life is given in _Sprague's Annals of the American Pulpit_. See also
  Note 3.


  NOTE 5.

  "Unkle and Aunt Winslow" were Mr. and Mrs. John Winslow. He was the
  brother of Joshua Winslow, was born March, 1725-26, died September
  29, 1773, in Boston. He was married, on March 12, 1752, to Elizabeth
  Mason (born September, 1723, died January, 1780). They had five
  children: I. Gen. John Winslow, born September 26, 1753, married Ann
  Gardner, May 21, 1782, died November 29, 1819. II. Sarah, born April
  12, 1755, married Deacon Samuel Coverly, of Boston, on November 27,
  1787, died April 3, 1804. See Note 13. III. Henry, born January 11,
  1757, died October 13, 1766. IV. Elizabeth, born November 28, 1759,
  died September 8, 1760. V. Elizabeth, born September 14, 1760,
  married John Holland, died November 21, 1795.

  Gen. John Winslow was the favorite nephew of Joshua Winslow and of
  his wife, and largely inherited their property. He remained in
  Boston through the siege, and preserved the communion plate of the
  Old South Church by burying it in his uncle Mason's cellar. He was
  an ardent patriot, and it is said that his uncle Joshua threatened
  to hang him if he caught him during the Revolutionary War. The
  nephew answered, "No catchee--no hangee, Uncle;" but did have the
  contrary fortune of capturing the uncle, whom he released on parole.
  He was the sixth signer and first treasurer of the Society of the
  Cincinnati. General Winslow's daughter, Mary Ann Winslow, born in
  1790, lived till 1882, and from her were obtained many of the facts
  given in these notes.


  NOTE 6.

  Miss Soley was Hannah Soley, daughter of John Soley and Hannah
  Carey, who were married October 11, 1759. Hannah Soley was born June
  5, 1762, and married W. G. McCarty.


  NOTE 7.

  William and Samuel Whitwell and their families were members of the
  Old South Church, and all were friends of the Winslows and Demings.
  William Whitwell was born September 3, 1714, died April 10, 1795.
  He was a prosperous merchant, an estimable and useful citizen, and
  church member. His first wife was Rebecca Keayne, his second
  Elizabeth Scott (or Swett), who died May 13, 1771; his third, the
  widow of Royal Tyler. The Mrs. Whitwell here referred to must have
  been Mrs. Samuel Whitwell, for William Whitwell just at that
  interval was a widower. Samuel Whitwell was born December 17, O.S.
  1717, died June 8, 1801. His first wife was Elizabeth Kelsey; his
  second, Sarah Wood; his third, Mary Smith.


  NOTE 8.

  Polly Deming was a niece of John Deming.


  NOTE 9.

  Miss Polly Glover was Mary Glover, born in Boston, October 12, 1758,
  baptized at the Old South Church, married to Deacon James Morrell,
  of the Old South, on April 23, 1778, and died April 3, 1842. She was
  the daughter of Nathaniel Glover (who was born May 16, 1704, in
  Dorchester; died December, 1773), and his wife, Anne Simpson. They
  were married in 1750. Nathaniel Glover was a graduate of Harvard,
  and a wealthy man; partner first of Thomas Hancock, and then of John
  Hancock.


  NOTE 10.

  Miss Bessy Winslow was Elizabeth, Anna's cousin, who was then about
  ten years old. See Note 5.


  NOTE 11.

  Miss Nancy or Anne Glover was Mary Glover's sister. See Note 9. She
  was born in Boston, March 28, 1753, baptized in the Old South
  Church, died in Roxbury, August, 1797. She married Samuel Whitwell,
  Jr., son of Samuel Whitwell, a prominent Boston merchant. See Note
  7.


  NOTE 12.

  Miss Sally Winslow was Sarah, daughter of John Winslow (see Note 5),
  and was, therefore, Anna's cousin. She was born April 12, 1755, died
  April 3, 1804. She married, November 27, 1787, Samuel Coverly,
  deacon of the Old South Church. She was the Sally Coverly for whom
  Mrs. Deming's journal was written. Several of Sally Coverly's
  letters still exist, and are models of elegant penmanship and
  correct spelling, and redound to the credit of her writing teacher,
  Master Holbrook. All the d's and y's and t's end with elaborately
  twisted little curls. A careful margin of an inch is left on every
  side. The letters speak so plainly of the formal honor and respect
  paid by all well-bred persons of the day to their elders, even
  though familiar kinsfolk, that I quote one, which contains much
  family news:--

  BOSTON, Feb. 17th, 1780.

  I thank you my dear Aunt for your kind Epistles of April 9th & Nov'r
  10th, the kind interestedness you yet continue to take in my concerns
  merits the warmest returns of Gratitude.

  The Particular circumstances you wish to know I shall with pleasure
  inform you of--Mr. Coverly is the youngest son of a Worthy Citizen
  late of this town but his Parents are now no more. His age is
  thirty-five. His Occupation a Shopkeeper who imports his own goods.
  And if you should wish to know who of your acquaintance he
  resembles, Madam, I would answer He has been taken for our Minister
  Mr Eckley, by whom we were married in my Aunt Demings sick chamber
  the 27th of Nov'r last twelve months since. He has two Brothers who
  both reside in town. I have been remarkably favor'd the last year as
  to my health & we are blest likewise with a fine little Daughter
  between 4 & 5 months old, very healthy, which we have named
  Elizabeth for its Grandmamas and an Aunt of each side. My Brother
  call'd today & inform'd me that M^r Powell intended setting out
  tomorrow for Quebeck & left a Letter for you which I shall send with
  this. He is almost if not quite as big as my uncle was last time I
  saw him--he was well & his family, he has three sons, the youngest
  about eleven months old, he has buried one.

  In your last you mention both my Uncle & yourself as not enjoying so
  great a share of health. I hope by this time you have each regain'd
  that blessing more perfectly. Be pleased with him My Dear Aunt to
  accept My Duty in which Mr Coverly joins me.

  My Sister was very well last week & her son John who is a fine child
  about 3 months old. Capt. Holland has purchas'd a house near fort
  hill which has remov'd her to a greater distance from me. She is now
  gone to the West-indies, she is connected in a family that are all
  very fond of her. We expect soon to remove. M^r Coverly has taken a
  lease of a house for some years belonging to M^r John Amory, you
  will please to direct your next for us in Cornhill N^o 10, I shall
  have the pleasure of your friend M^rs Whitwell for my next neighbor
  there. I had not the pleasure of seeing M^r Freeman whiles here
  altho' I expected it, as his brother promis'd to wait on him here.

  In one of your kind Epistles, Madam, you mention'd some of your
  Movables which you would wish me to take possession of which were at
  my Uncle Demings. The Memorandum you did not send me & my Uncle
  Deming has none nor knows of any thing but a great wheel.

  He is now maried to the Widow Sebry who is very much lik'd and
  appears to be a Gentlewoman, they were very well today. My Aunt
  Mason was to see me a few weeks since with M^rs Coburn M^rs Scolly &
  Miss Becky Scolly from Middleborough. M^rs Scolly has since married
  her youngest daughter to M^r Prentice, Minister of Medfield.

  Please to give my Love to Cousin Sally Deming if she is yet with you
  I hope she has regain'd her usual health. I should be very glad to
  be inform'd how her Mamma is & where & her family.

  Be pleased to continue your Indulgence, as your Epistles My Dear
  Aunt will at all times be most gratefully receiv'd by

  Y^r Oblidg'd Niece

  Sarah Coverly.


  NOTE 13.

  Josiah Waters, Jr., was the son of Josiah and Abigail Dawes Waters.
  The latter lived to be ninety-five years old. Josiah Sr. was a
  captain in the Artillery Company in 1769, and Josiah Jr. in 1791.
  The latter married, on March 14, 1771, Mary, daughter of William and
  Elizabeth Whitwell. See Note 7. Their child, Josiah Waters, tertius,
  born December 29, 1771, lived till August 4, 1818. He was a Latin
  School boy, and in the class with Josiah Quincy at Harvard.


  NOTE 14.

  The life of this slave-girl Lucinda was a fair example of the gentle
  form of slavery which existed till this century in our New England
  States. From an old paper written by a daughter of Gen. John
  Winslow, I quote her description of this girl:--

  "Lucinda was born in Africa and purchased by M^rs Deming when she
  was about seven years of age. She was cherished with care and
  affection by the family, and at Mrs. Demings death was 'given her
  freedom.' From that time she chose to make her home with 'Master
  John' (the late Gen. John Winslow, of Boston), a nephew of M^rs
  Demings--at his house she died after some years. The friends of the
  Winslow family attended her funeral; her pastor the Rev D^r Eckley
  of the Old South and Gen. W. walking next the hearse as chief
  mourners. A few articles belonging to her are preserved in the
  family as memorials of one who was a beloved member of the household
  in the olden time."

  Lucinda figures in Mrs. Deming's account of her escape from besieged
  Boston in 1775, and was treated with as much consideration as was
  Sally, the niece; for her mistress remained behind for a time at
  Wrentham; rather than to allow Lucinda to ride outside the coach in
  the rain.

  In a letter written by Sally Coverly, August 6, 1795, to Mrs. Joshua
  Winslow, at Quebec, she says: "You enquire about Lucinda, she is
  very much gratified by it. She has lived with my Brother this ten
  years and is very good help in their family."


  NOTE 15.

  The "Miss Sheafs" were Nancy and Mary Sheaffe, youngest daughters of
  William Sheaffe, who had recently died, leaving a family of four
  sons and six daughters. He had been deputy collector of customs
  under Joseph Harrison, the last royal collector of the port. He left
  his family penniless, and a small shop was stocked by friends for
  Mrs Sheaffe. I have often seen her advertisements in Boston
  newspapers.

  Mrs. Sheaffe was Susanna Child, daughter of Thomas Child, an
  Englishman, one of the founders of Trinity Church. She lived till
  1811. The ten children grew up to fill dignified positions in life.
  One son was Sir Roger Hale Sheaffe. Susanna, at the age of fifteen,
  made a most romantic runaway match with an English officer, Capt.
  Ponsonby Molesworth. Margaret married John R. Livingstone; she was a
  great beauty. Lafayette, on his return to France, sent her a satin
  cardinal lined with ermine, and an elegant gown. Helen married James
  Lovell. (See Note 52.) Nancy, or Anne Sheaffe, married, in
  September, 1786, John Erving, Jr., a nephew of Governor Shirley, and
  died young, leaving three children,--Maria, Frances, and Major John
  Erving. Mary married Benj. Cutler, high sheriff of Boston, and died
  December 8, 1784, leaving no children. These Sheaffes were nearly
  all buried in the Child tomb in Trinity Church.


  NOTE 16.

  Governor Matthew Griswold was born March 25, 1714, died April 28,
  1799. He married, on Nov. 10, 1743, his second cousin, Ursula
  Wolcott, daughter of Gov. Roger Wolcott. A very amusing story is
  told of their courtship. Governor Griswold in early life wished to
  marry a young lady in Durham, Conn. She was in love with a
  physician, whom she hoped would propose to her, and in the mean time
  was unwilling to give up her hold upon her assured lover. At last
  the governor, tired of being held in an uncertainty, pressed her for
  a definite answer. She pleaded that she wished for more time, when
  he rose with dignity and answered her, "I will give you a lifetime."
  This experience made him extremely shy, and when thrown with his
  cousin Ursula he made no advance towards love-making. At last when
  she was nineteen and he ten years older she began asking him on
  every occasion, "What did you say, Cousin Matthew?" and he would
  answer her quietly, "Nothing." At last she asked him impatiently,
  "What did you say, Cousin Matthew?" and when he answered again
  "Nothing," she replied sharply, "Well, it's time you did,"--and _he
  did_.

  Their daughter Ursula, the visitor at Mrs. Deming's, was born April
  13, 1754, and was a great beauty. She married, in November 22, 1777,
  her third cousin, Lynde McCurdy, of Norwich, Conn.


  NOTE 17.

  "Unkle Joshua" was Joshua Green, born in Boston, May 17, 1731,
  "Monday 1/2 past 9 oclock in the morn^g" and died in Wendell, Mass.,
  on September 2, 1811. He attended the Boston Latin School in 1738,
  and was in the class of 1749 at Harvard. He married, as did his
  brother and sister, a Storer--Hannah, daughter of Ebenezer and Mary
  Edwards Storer--on October 7, 1762. After his marriage he lived in
  Court Street, the third house south of Hanover Street. His wife
  Hannah was for many years before and after her marriage--as was her
  mother--the intimate friend and correspondent of Abigail Adams, wife
  of John Adams. Some of their letters may be found in the _Account of
  Percival and Ellen Green and Some of their Descendants_, written by
  Hon. Samuel Abbott Green, who is a great-grandson of Joshua and
  Hannah Green.


  NOTE 18.

  Madam Storer was Mary Edwards Storer, the widow of Ebenezer Storer,
  a Boston merchant. She was the mother of Anna's uncle Ebenezer
  Storer, of her aunt Hannah Storer Green, and of her aunt Mary Storer
  Green. See Notes 19, 32, 59.


  NOTE 19.

  Miss Caty Vans was the granddaughter of Hugh Vans, a merchant of
  Boston, who became a member of the Old South Church in 1728. He was
  born in Ayr, Scotland, in 1699. He married Mary Pemberton, daughter
  of Rev. Ebenezer Pemberton, and died in Boston in 1763. They had
  four sons, John, Ebenezer, Samuel, and William. One of the first
  three was the father of Caty Vans, who was born January 18, 1770.
  There are frequent references to her throughout the diary, but I
  know nothing of her life. William Vans married Mary Clarke, of
  Salem, and had one son, William, and one daughter, Rebecca, who
  married Captain Jonathan Carnes. The Vans family Bible is in the
  library of the Essex Institute.


  NOTE 20.

  In the cordial hatred of the Puritans for Christmas Anna heartily
  joined. It was not till this century that in New England cheerful
  merriment and the universal exchange of gifts marked the day as a
  real holiday.


  NOTE 21.

  "Aunt Sukey" was Susanna Green, born July 26, 1744, died November
  10, 1775. She married, on October 18, 1769, her cousin, Francis
  Green. The little child Charles, of whom Anna writes, proved to be a
  deaf-mute, and was drowned near Halifax in 1787. Francis Green had
  two deaf-mute children by a second wife, and became prominent
  afterwards in Massachusetts for his interest in and promotion of
  methods in instructing the deaf. In a letter of George Green's,
  dated Boston, July 23, 1770, we read: "Frank Green was married to
  Sukey in October last and they live next house to Mrs Storers." From
  another, dated December 5, 1770: "Frank keeps a ship going between
  here & London, but I believe understands little of the matter,
  having never been bred to business wch was one great objection with
  my father to his courting Sukey." I think he must have developed
  into a capable business man, for I have frequently seen his business
  advertisements in Boston newspapers of his day. Anna's mother
  bequeathed seven hundred and fifty dollars to Francis Green in her
  will. He was a man universally esteemed in the community.


  NOTE 22.

  Dr. Samuel Cooper was born March 28, 1725; died December 29, 1783.
  He graduated at Harvard in 1743, and became pastor of the Brattle
  Street Congregational Church, of Boston. He was a brilliant
  preacher, an ardent patriot, the intimate friend of John Adams and
  Benjamin Franklin, and a very handsome man.


  NOTE 23.

  Master Holbrook was Samuel Holbrook, Anna's writing-master, one of a
  highly honored family of Boston writing teachers. Perhaps the best
  known of this family was Abiah Holbrook. In the _Boston Gazette_ of
  January 30, 1769, I find this notice:--

  "Last Friday morning died Mr Abiah Holbrook in the 51st year of his
  Age, Master of the South Writing School in this Town. He was looked
  upon by the Best Judges as the Greatest Master of the Pen we have
  ever had among us, of which he has left a most beautiful
  Demonstration. He was indefatigable in his labours, successful in
  his Instructions, an Honour to the Town and to crown all an Ornament
  to the Religion of Jesus. His Funeral is to be Attended Tomorrow
  Afternoon at Four Oclock."

  The "beautiful Demonstration" of his penmanship which he left behind
  him was a most intricate piece of what was known as "fine knotting"
  or "knot work." It was written in "all the known hands of Great
  Britain." This work occupied every moment of what Abiah Holbrook
  called his "spare time" for seven years. It was valued at £100. It
  was bequeathed to Harvard College, unless his wife should need the
  money which could be obtained from selling it. If this were so, she
  was to offer it first for purchase to John Hancock. Abiah was a
  stanch patriot.

  Samuel Holbrook was a brother of Abiah. He began teaching in 1745,
  when about eighteen years old. A petition of Abiah, dated March 10,
  1745-46, sets forth that his school had two hundred and twenty
  scholars (Well may his funeral notice say that he was indefatigable
  in his labors!), that finding it impossible to properly instruct
  such a great number, he had appointed his brother to teach part of
  them and had paid his board for seven months, else some of the
  scholars must have been turned off without any instruction. He
  therefore prayed the town to grant him assistance. Think of one
  master for such a great school! In 1750 Samuel Holbrook's salary as
  usher of the South Writing School was fifty pounds per annum.

  After serving as writing-master of the school in Queen Street, and
  also keeping a private school, he was chosen master of the South
  Writing School in March, 1769, to supply the place of his brother
  Abiah deceased. His salary was one hundred pounds. In 1776, and
  again in 1777, he received eighty pounds in addition to his salary.
  He also was a patriot. He was one of the "Sons of Liberty" who dined
  at the Liberty Tree, Dorchester, on August 14, 1769; and he was a
  member of Captain John Haskin's company in 1773. He was a member of
  the Old South Church, and he died July 24, 1784. In his later years
  he kept a school at West Street, where afterwards was Amos
  Lawrence's garden.

  Abiah and Samuel left behind them better demonstrations of their
  capacity than pieces of "knot-work"--in the handwriting of their
  scholars. They taught what Jonathan Snelling described as "Boston
  Style of Wri^ting," and loudly do the elegant letters and signatures
  of their scholars, Boston patriots, clergy, and statesmen, redound
  to the credit of the Masters Holbrook.

  Other Holbrooks taught in Boston. From the Selectmen's Minutes of
  that little town, we find that on November 10, 1773,--

  "Mr Holbrook, Master of the Writing School in the Common, and Mr
  Carter the Master Elect of the school in Queen St having recommended
  Mr Abiah Holbrook, a young man near of age, as a suitable person to
  be usher at Mr Carters school--the Selectmen sent for him, and upon
  discoursing with the young man thought proper to appoint him usher
  of said school."

  And from the _Boston Gazette_, of April 17, 1769, we learn that Mr.
  Joseph Ward "Opened an English Grammar School in King St where Mr
  Joseph Holbrook hath for many years kept a Writing School."

  These entries of Anna's relating to her attending Master Holbrook's
  school have an additional value in that they prove that both boys
  and girls attended these public writing schools,--a fact which has
  been disputed.


  NOTE 24.

  Dr. James Lloyd, born March 14, 1728, died March 14, 1810. He began
  his medical practice in 1752. He was appointed surgeon of the
  garrison at Boston, and was a close friend of Sir William Howe and
  Earl Percy, who for a time lived in his house. He was an
  Episcopalian, and one of the indignant protesters against the
  alteration of the liturgy at King's Chapel. Though a warm Tory and
  Loyalist, he was never molested by the American government. He was
  one of Boston's most skilful and popular physicians for many years.
  While other city doctors got but a shilling and sixpence for their
  regular fee, he charged and received the exorbitant sum of half a
  dollar a visit; and for "bringing little master to town," in which
  function he was a specialist, he charged a guinea.


  NOTE 25.

  A pincushion was for many years, and indeed is still, in some parts
  of New England, a highly conventional gift to a mother with a young
  babe. Mrs. Deming must have made many of these cushions. One of her
  manufacture still exists. It is about five inches long and three
  inches wide; one side is of white silk stuck around the edge with
  old-fashioned clumsy pins, with the words, "John Winslow March 1783.
  Welcome Little Stranger." The other side is of gray satin with green
  spots, with a cluster of pins in the centre, and other pins winding
  around in a vine and forming a row round the edge.


  NOTE 26.

  Though the exchange of Christmas gifts was rare in New England,
  a certain observance of New Year's Day by gifts seems to have
  obtained. And we find in Judge Sewall's diary that he was greeted on
  New Year's morn with a levet, or blast of trumpets, under his
  window; and he celebrated the opening of the eighteenth century with
  a very poor poem of his own composition, which he caused to be
  recited through Boston streets by the town-crier.


  NOTE 27.

  The word "pompedore" or Pompadour was in constant use in that day.
  We read of pompedore shoes, laces, capes, aprons, sacques,
  stockings, and head-dresses.


  NOTE 28.

  Aunt Storer was Mrs. Ebenezer Storer. Her maiden name was Elizabeth
  Green. She was a sister of Mrs. Joshua Winslow. She was born October
  12, 1734, died December 8, 1774; was married July 17, 1751, to
  Ebenezer Storer, who was born January 27, 1729-30, died January 6,
  1807. He was a Harvard graduate, and was for many years treasurer of
  that college. He was one of Boston's most intellectual and respected
  citizens. His library was large. His name constantly appears on the
  lists of subscribers to new books. After his death his astronomical
  instruments became the property of Harvard College, and as late as
  1843 his comet-finder was used there.

  As Anna Green Winslow spent so much of her time in her "Aunt
  Storers" home in Sudbury Street, it is interesting to know that a
  very correct picture of this elegant Boston home of colonial days
  has been preserved through the account given in the _Memoir of Eliza
  Susan Morton Quincy_,--though many persons still living remember the
  house:--

  "The mansion of Ebenezer Storer, an extensive edifice of wood three
  stories in height, was erected in 1700. It was situated on Sudbury
  Street between two trees of great size and antiquity. An old English
  elm of uncommon height and circumference grew in the sidewalk of the
  street before the mansion, and behind it was a sycamore tree of
  almost equal age and dimensions. It fronted to the south with one
  end toward the street. From the gate a broad walk of red sandstone
  separated it from a grass-plot which formed the courtyard, and
  passed the front door to the office of Mr. Storer. The vestibule of
  the house, from which a staircase ascended, opened on either side
  into the dining and drawing rooms. Both had windows towards the
  courtyard and also opened by glazed doors into a garden behind the
  house. They were long low apartments; the walls wainscoted and
  panelled; the furniture of carved mahogany. The ceilings were
  traversed through the length of the rooms by a large beam cased and
  finished like the walls; and from the centre of each depended a
  glass globe which reflected as in a convex mirror all surrounding
  objects. There was a rich Persian carpet in the drawing-room, the
  colors crimson and green. The curtains and the cushions of the
  window-seat were of green damask; and oval mirrors and girandoles
  and a teaset of rich china completed the furniture of that
  apartment. The wide chimney-place in the dining room was lined and
  ornamented with Dutch tiles; and on each side stood capacious
  armchairs cushioned and covered with green damask, for the master
  and mistress of the family. On the walls were portraits in crayon by
  Copley, and valuable engravings representing Franklin with his
  lightning rod, Washington, and other eminent men of the last
  century. Between the windows hung a long mirror in a mahogany frame;
  and opposite the fireplace was a buffet ornamented with porcelain
  statuettes and a set of rich china. A large apartment in the second
  story was devoted to a valuable library, a philosophical apparatus,
  a collection of engravings, a solar microscope, a camera, etc."

  As I read this description I seem to see the figure of our happy
  little diary-writer reflected in the great glass globes that hung
  from the summer-trees, while she danced on the Persian carpet, or
  sat curled up reading on the cushioned window-seat.


  NOTE 29.

  As this was in the time of depreciated currency, £45 was not so
  large a sum to spend for a young girl's outfit as would at first
  sight appear.


  NOTE 30.

  Dr. Charles Chauncey was born January 1, 1705; died February 10,
  1787. He graduated at Harvard in 1721, and soon became pastor of the
  First Church in Boston. He was an equally active opponent of
  Whitefield and of Episcopacy. He was an ardent and romantic patriot,
  yet so plain in his ways and views that he wished _Paradise Lost_
  might be turned into prose that he might understand it.


  NOTE 31.

  Rev. Ebenezer Pemberton was pastor of the New Brick Church. He had a
  congregation of stanch Whigs; but unluckily, the Tory Governor
  Hutchinson also attended his church. Dr. Pemberton was the other
  minister of the two who sprung the Governor's hated Thanksgiving
  proclamation of 1771 on their parishes a week ahead of time, as told
  in Note 3, and the astounded and disgusted New Brick hearers, more
  violent than the Old South attendants, walked out of meeting while
  it was being read. Dr. Pemberton's troubled and unhappy pastorate
  came to an end by the closing of his church in war times in 1775. He
  was of the 1721 class of Harvard College. He died September 9, 1777.


  NOTE 32.

  We find frequent references in the writings and newspapers of the
  times to this truly Puritanical dread of bishops. To the descendants
  of the Pilgrims the very name smacked of incense, stole, and monkish
  jargon. A writer, signing himself "America," gives in the _Boston
  Evening Post_, of October 14, 1771, a communication thoroughly
  characteristic of the spirit of the community against the
  establishment of bishops, the persistent determination to "beate
  down every sprout of episcopacie."


  NOTE 33.

  A negligée was a loose gown or sacque open in front, to be worn over
  a handsome petticoat; and in spite of its name, was not only in high
  fashion for many years, but was worn for full dress. Abigail Adams,
  writing to Mrs. Storer, on January 20, 1785, says: "Trimming is
  reserved for full dress only, when very large hoops and negligées
  with trains three yards long are worn." I find advertised in the
  _Boston Evening Post_, as early as November, 1755: "Horse-hair
  Quilted Coats to wear with Negligees." A poem printed in New York in
  1756 has these lines:--

    "Put on her a Shepherdee
    A Short Sack or Negligee
    Ruffled high to keep her warm
    Eight or ten about an arm."


  NOTE 34.

  A pistareen was a Spanish coin worth about seventeen cents.


  NOTE 35.

  There exists in New England a tradition of "groaning cake," made and
  baked in honor of a mother and babe. These cakes which Anna bought
  of the nurse may have been "groaning cakes." It was always customary
  at that time to give "vails" to the nurse when visiting a new-born
  child; sometimes gifts of money, often of trinkets and articles of
  clothing.


  NOTE 36.

  Miss "Scolley" was Mary Scollay, youngest of the thirteen children
  of John Scollay (who was born in 1712, died October, 1799), and his
  wife Mary. Mary was born in 1759. She married Rev. Thomas Prentiss
  on February 9, 1798, had nine children, and lived to be eighty-two
  years old--dying in 1841. Her sister Mercy was engaged to be married
  to General Warren, but he fell at Bunker Hill: and his betrothed
  devoted herself afterwards to the care and education of his orphaned
  children whom he had by his first wife.


  NOTE 37.

  Miss Bella Coffin was probably Isabella, daughter of John Coffin and
  Isabella Child, who were married in 1750. She married Major
  MacMurde, and their sons were officers in India.


  NOTE 38.

  This Miss "Quinsey" was Ann Quincy, the daughter of Col. Josiah
  Quincy (who was born 1710, died 1784), and his third wife, Ann
  Marsh. Ann was born December 8, 1763, and thus would have been in
  her ninth year at the time of the little rout. She married the Rev.
  Asa Packard, of Marlborough, Mass., in 1790.


  NOTE 39.

  In the universal use of wines and strong liquors in New England at
  that date children took unrestrainedly their proportionate part. It
  seems strange to think of this girl assembly of little Bostonians
  drinking wine and hot or cold punch as part of their "treat," yet no
  doubt they were well accustomed to such fare. I know of a little
  girl of still tenderer years who was sent at that same time from the
  Barbadoes to her grandmother's house in Boston to be "finished" in
  Boston schools, as was Anna, and who left her relative's abode in
  high dudgeon because she was not permitted to have wine at her
  meals; and her parents upheld her, saying Missy must be treated like
  a lady and have all the wine she wished. Cobbett, who thought liquor
  drinking the national disease of America, said that "at all hours of
  the day little boys at or under twelve years of age go into stores
  and tip off their drams." Thus it does not seem strange for little
  maids also to drink at a party. The temperance awakening of this
  century came none too soon.


  NOTE 40.

  Paste ornaments were universally worn by both men and women, as well
  as by little girls, and formed the decoration of much of the
  headgear of fashionable dames. Many advertisements appear in New
  England newspapers, which show how large and varied was the
  importation of hair ornaments at that date. We find advertised in
  the _Boston Evening Post_, of 1768: "Double and single row knotted
  Paste Combs, Paste Hair Sprigs & Pins all prices. Marcasite and
  Pearl Hair Sprigs, Garnet & Pearl Hair Sprigs." In the _Salem
  Gazette_ and various Boston papers I read of "black & coloured
  plumes & feathers." Other hair ornaments advertised in the _Boston
  News Letter_, of December, 1768, were "Long and small Tail Garnets,
  Mock Garland of all sorts and Ladies Poll Combs." Steel plumes,
  pompons, aigrettes, and rosettes all were worn on the head, and
  artificial flowers, wreaths of gauze, and silk ribbons.


  NOTE 41.

  Marcasite, spelled also marcassite, marchasite, marquesett, or
  marquaset, was a mineral, the crystallized form of iron pyrites. It
  was largely used in the eighteenth century for various ornamental
  purposes, chiefly in the decoration of the person. It took a good
  polish, and when cut in facets like a rose-diamond, formed a pretty
  material for shoe and knee-buckles, earrings, rings, pins, and hair
  ornaments. Scarce a single advertisement of wares of milliner or
  mantua maker can he found in eighteenth century newspapers that does
  not contain in some form of spelling the word marcasite, and scarce
  a rich gown or headdress was seen without some ornament of
  marcasite.


  NOTE 42.

  Master Turner was William Turner, a fashionable dancing master of
  Boston, who afterward resided in Salem, and married Judith, daughter
  of Dr. Edward Augustus Holyoke, of Salem, who died in 1829, aged one
  hundred and one years. It was recalled by an old lady that the
  scholars in the school of her youth marched through Boston streets,
  to the music of the fiddle played by "Black Henry," to Concert Hall,
  corner Tremont and Bromfield streets, to practice dancing; and that
  Mr. Turner walked at the head of the school. His advertisements may
  be seen in Boston and Salem papers, thus:--

  "Mr. Turner informs the Ladies and Gentlemen in Town and Country
  that he has reduced his price for teaching from Six Dollars Entrance
  to One Guinea, and from Four Dollars per month to Three. Those
  ladies and Gentlemen who propose sending their children to be taught
  will notice no books will be kept as Mr. T. has suffered much by
  Booking. The pupils must pay monthly if they are desirous the School
  should continue."


  NOTE 43.

  "Unkle Ned" was Edward Green, born September 18, 1733; died July 29,
  1790. He married, on April 14, 1757, Mary Storer (sister of Ebenezer
  Storer and of Hannah Storer Green). They had no children. He was, in
  1780, one of the enlisting officers for Suffolk County. In a letter
  of George Green's, written July 25, 1770, we read: "Ned still lives
  gentleman-like at Southwacks Court without doing any business tho'
  obliged to haul in his horns;" and from another of December 5, 1770:
  "Ned after having shown off as long as he you'd with his yell^o
  damask window curtains &c is (the last month) retired into the
  country and lives w^th his wife at Parson Storers at Watertown. How
  long that will hold I cant say."


  NOTE 44.

  Madam Smith was evidently Anna's teacher in sewing. The duties
  pertaining to a sewing school were, in those days, no light matter.
  From an advertisement of one I learn that there were taught at these
  schools:--

  "All kinds of Needleworks viz: point, Brussels, Dresden Gold,
  Silver, and silk Embroidery of every kind. Tambour Feather, India &
  Darning, Spriggings with a Variety of Open-work to each. Tapestry
  plain, lined, and drawn. Catgut, black & white, with a number of
  beautiful Stitches. Diaper and Plain Darnings. French Quiltings,
  Knitting, Various Sorts of marking with the Embellishments of Royal
  cross, Plain cross, Queen, Irish, and Tent Stitches."

  Can any nineteenth century woman read this list of feminine
  accomplishments without looking abashed upon her idle hands, and
  ceasing to wonder at the delicate heirlooms of lace and embroidery
  that have come down to us!


  NOTE 45.

  Grandmamma Sargent was Joshua Winslow's mother. Her maiden name was
  Sarah Pierce. She was born April 30, 1697, died August 2, 1771. She
  married on September 21, 1721, John Winslow, who lived to be
  thirty-eight years old. After his death she married Dr. Nathaniel
  Sargent in 1749.


  NOTE 46.

  These lines were a part of the epitaph said to be composed by
  Governor Thomas Dudley, who died at Andover, Mass., in 1653. They
  were found after his death and preserved in Morton's _New England's
  Memorial_. They run thus:--

    Dim eyes, deaf ears, cold stomach show
    My dissolution is in view;
    Eleven times seven near lived have I,
    And now God calls, I willing die;
    My shuttle's shot, my race is run,
    My sun is set, my deed is done;
    My span is measur'd, tale is told,
    My flower is faded and grown old,
    My dream is vanish'd, shadow's fled,
    My soul with Christ, my body dead;
    Farewell dear wife, children and friends,
    Hate heresy, make blessed ends;
    Bear poverty, live with good men,
    So shall we meet with joy again.
    Let men of God in courts and churches watch
    O'er such as do a toleration hatch;
    Lest that ill egg bring forth a cockatrice,
    To prison all with heresy and vice.
    If men be left, and other wise combine
    My epitaph's, I dy'd no libertine.


  NOTE 47.

  Miss Polly Vans was Mary Vans, daughter of Hugh and Mary Pemberton
  Vans, and aunt of Caty Vans. She was born in 1733. We have some
  scattered glimpses of her life. She joined the Old South in 1755. In
  the _Boston Gazette_, of April 9, 1770, we read, "Fan Mounts mounted
  by Mary Vans at the house of Deacon Williams, in Cornhill." We hear
  of her at Attleborough with Samuel Whitwell's wife when the gates of
  Boston were closed, and we know she married Deacon Jonathan Mason on
  Sunday evening, December 20, 1778. She was his second wife. His
  first wife was Miriam Clark, and was probably the Mrs. Mason who was
  present at Mrs. Whitwell's, and died June 5, 1774. Mary Vans Mason
  lived till 1820, having witnessed the termination of eight of the
  pastorates of the Old South Church. Well might Anna term her "a
  Sister of the Old South." She was in 1817 the President of the Old
  South Charity School, and is described as a "disinterested friend,
  a judicious adviser, an affectionate counsellor, a mild but faithful
  reprover, a humble, self-denying, fervent, active, cheerful
  Christian." Jonathan Mason was not only a deacon, but a prosperous
  merchant and citizen. He helped to found the first bank in New
  England. His son was United States Senator. Two other daughters of
  Hugh Vans were a Mrs. Langdon, of Wiscasset, Maine, and Mrs. John
  Coburn.


  NOTE 48.

  St. Valentine's Day was one of the few English holidays observed in
  New England. We find even Governor Winthrop writing to his wife
  about "challenging a valentine." In England at that date, and for a
  century previous, the first person of the opposite sex seen in the
  morning was the observer's valentine. We find Madam Pepys lying in
  bed for a long time one St. Valentine's morning with eyes tightly
  closed, lest she see one of the painters who was gilding her new
  mantelpiece, and be forced to have him for her valentine. Anna
  means, doubtless, that the first person she chanced to see that
  morning was "an old country plow-joger."


  NOTE 49.

  Boston was at that date pervaded by the spirit of Liberty. Sons of
  Liberty held meetings every day and every night. Daughters of
  Liberty held spinning and weaving bees, and gathered in bands
  pledging themselves to drink no tea till the obnoxious revenue act
  was repealed. Young unmarried girls joined in an association with
  the proud declaration, "We, the daughters of those Patriots who have
  appeared for the public interest, do now with pleasure engage with
  them in denying ourselves the drinking of foreign tea." Even the
  children felt the thrill of revolt and joined in patriotic
  demonstrations--and a year or two later the entire graduating class
  at Harvard, to encourage home manufactures, took their degrees in
  homespun.


  NOTE 50.

  The cut-paper pictures referred to are the ones which are reproduced
  in this book, and which are still preserved. Anna's father finally
  received them. Mrs. Deming and other members of the Winslow family
  seem to have excelled in this art, and are remembered as usually
  bringing paper and scissors when at a tea-drinking, and assiduously
  cutting these pictures with great skill and swiftness and with
  apparently but slight attention to the work. This form of decorative
  art was very fashionable in colonial days, and was taught under the
  ambitious title of Papyrotamia.


  NOTE 51.

  The "biziness of making flowers" was a thriving one in Boston. We
  read frequently in newspapers of the day such notices as that of
  Anne Dacray, of Pudding Lane, in the _Boston Evening Post_, of 1769,
  who advertises that she "makes and sells Head-flowers: Ladies may be
  supplied with single buds for trimming Stomachers or sticking in the
  Hair." Advertisements of teachers in the art of flower-making also
  are frequent. I note one from the _Boston Gazette_, of October 19,
  1767:--

  "To the young Ladies of Boston. Elizabeth Courtney as several Ladies
  has signified of having a desire to learn that most ingenious art of
  Painting on Gauze & Catgut, proposes to open a School, and that her
  business may be a public good, designs to teach the making of all
  sorts of French Trimmings, Flowers, and Feather Muffs and Tippets.
  And as these Arts above mentioned (the Flowers excepted) are
  entirely unknown on the Continent, she flatters herself to meet with
  all due encouragement; and more so, as every Lady may have a power
  of serving herself of what she is now obliged to send to England
  for, as the whole process is attended with little or no expence. The
  Conditions are Five Dollars at entrance; to be confin'd to no
  particular hours or time: And if they apply Constant may be Compleat
  in six weeks. And when she has fifty subscribers school will be
  opened, &c, &c."


  NOTE 52.

  This was James Lovell, the famous Boston schoolmaster, orator, and
  patriot. He was born in Boston October 31, 1737. He graduated at
  Harvard in 1756, then became a Latin School usher. He married Miss
  Helen Sheaffe, older sister of the "two Miss Sheafs" named herein;
  and their daughter married Henry Loring, of Brookline. He was a
  famous patriot: he delivered the oration in 1771 commemorative of
  the Boston Massacre. He was imprisoned by the British as a spy on
  the evidence of letters found on General Warren's dead body after
  the battle of Bunker Hill. He died in Windham, Maine, July 14, 1814.
  A full account of his life and writings is given in Loring's
  _Hundred Boston Orators_.


  NOTE 53.

  Nothing seems more revolting to our modern notions of decency than
  the inhuman custom of punishing criminals in the open streets. From
  the earliest days of the colonies the greatest publicity was given
  to the crime, to its punishment, and to the criminal. Anna shows, in
  her acquaintance with the vices of Bet Smith, a painful familiarity
  with evil unknown in any well-bred child of to-day. Samuel Breck
  wrote thus of the Boston of 1771:--

  "The large whipping-post painted red stood conspicuously and
  prominently in the most public street in the town. It was placed in
  State Street directly under the windows of a great writing school
  which I frequented, and from them the scholars were indulged in the
  spectacle of all kinds of punishment suited to harden their hearts
  and brutalize their feelings. Here women were taken in a huge cage,
  in which they were dragged on wheels from prison, and tied to the
  post with bare backs on which thirty or forty lashes were bestowed
  among the screams of the culprit and the uproar of the mob. A little
  further in the street was to be seen the pillory with three or four
  fellows fastened by the head and hands, and standing for an hour in
  that helpless posture, exposed to gross and cruel jeers from the
  multitude, who pelted them incessantly with rotten eggs and every
  repulsive kind of garbage that could be collected."

  There was a pillory in State Street in Boston as late as 1803, and
  men stood in it for the crime of sinking a vessel at sea and
  defrauding the underwriters. In 1771 the pillory was in constant use
  in Newport.


  NOTE 54.

  In 1770 British troops were quartered in Boston, to the intense
  annoyance and indignation of Boston inhabitants. Disturbances
  between citizens and soldiers were frequent, and many quarrels
  arose. On the night of March 5 in that year the disturbance became
  so great that the troops, at that time under command of Captain
  Preston, fired upon the unarmed citizens in King (now State) street,
  causing the death of Crispus Attucks, a colored man, Samuel Gray and
  James Caldwell, who died on the spot, and mortally wounding Patrick
  Carr and Samuel Maverick. At the burial of these slaughtered men the
  greatest concourse ever known in the colonies flocked to the grave
  in the Granary Burying Ground. All traffic ceased. The stores and
  manufactories were closed. The bells were tolled in all the
  neighboring towns.

  Daniel Webster said, that from the moment the blood of these men
  stained the pavements of Boston streets, we may date the severance
  of the colony from the British empire.

  The citizens demanded the removal of the troops, and the request was
  complied with. For many years the anniversary of this day was a
  solemn holiday in Boston, and religious and patriotic services were
  publicly held.


  NOTE 55.

  Mather Byles was born March 15, 1707; died July 5, 1788. He was
  ordained pastor of the Hollis Street Congregational Church, of
  Boston, in 1733. He was a staunch Loyalist till the end of his days,
  as were his daughters, who lived till 1837. His chief fame does not
  rest on his name as a clergyman or an author, but as an inveterate
  and unmerciful jester.


  NOTE 56.

  Henry Green, the brother of Anna's mother, was born June 2, 1738. He
  was a Latin School boy, was in business in Nova Scotia, and died in
  1774.


  NOTE 57.

  This stove was a foot-stove,--a small metal box, usually of sheet
  tin or iron, enclosed in a wooden frame or standing on little legs,
  and with a handle or bail for comfortable carriage. In it were
  placed hot coals from a glowing wood fire, and from it came a
  welcome warmth to make endurable the freezing floors of the
  otherwise unwarmed meeting-house. Foot-stoves were much used in the
  Old South. In the records of the church, under date of January 16,
  1771, may be read:--

  "Whereas, danger is apprehended from the stoves that are frequently
  left in the meeting-house after the publick worship is over; Voted
  that the Saxton make diligent search on the Lords Day evening and in
  the evening after a Lecture, to see if any stoves are left in the
  house, and that if he find any there he take them to his house; and
  it is expected that the owners of such stoves make reasonable
  satisfaction to the Saxton for his trouble before they take them
  away."

  The Old South did not have a stove set in the church for heating
  till 1783.


  NOTE 58.

  The first anniversary of the Boston Massacre was celebrated
  throughout the city, and a mass-meeting was held at the Old South
  Church, where James Lovell made a stirring address. See Notes 52 and
  54.


  NOTE 59.

  The Queen's night-cap was a very large full cap with plaited
  ruffles, which is made familiar to us through the portraits of
  Martha Washington.


  NOTE 60.

  "Old Mrs. Sallisbury" was Mrs. Nicholas Salisbury, who was married
  in 1729, and was mother of Rebecca Salisbury, who became Mrs. Daniel
  Waldo, and of Samuel Salisbury, who married Elizabeth Sewall. See
  Note 73.


  NOTE 61.

  Mrs. John Avery. Her husband was Secretary of the Commonwealth and
  nephew of John Deming, who in his will left his house to John Avery,
  Jr.


  NOTE 62.

  A baby hutt was a booby-hutch, a clumsy, ill-contrived covered
  carriage. The word is still used in some parts of England, and a
  curious survival of it in New England is the word booby-hut applied
  to a hooded sleigh; and booby to the body of a hackney coach set on
  runners. Mr. Howells uses the word booby in the latter
  signification, and it may be heard frequently in eastern
  Massachusetts, particularly in Boston.


  NOTE 63.

  Peggy Phillips was Margaret Phillips, daughter of William and
  Margaret Wendell Phillips. She was born May 26, 1762, married Judge
  Samuel Cooper, and died February 19, 1844. She was aunt of Wendell
  Phillips.


  NOTE 64.

  This "droll figure" may have been a drawing, or a dressed doll,
  or "baby," as such were called--a doll that displayed in careful
  miniature the reigning modes of the English court. In the _New
  England Weekly Journal_, of July 2, 1733, appears this notice:--

  "To be seen at Mrs. Hannah Teatts Mantua Maker at the Head of Summer
  Street Boston a Baby drest after the Newest Fashion of Mantuas and
  Night Gowns & everything belonging to a dress. Latily arrived on
  Capt. White from London, any Ladies that desire it may either come
  or send, she will be ready to wait on 'em if they come to the House
  it is Five Shilling, & if she waits on 'em it is Seven Shilling."

  These models of fashion were employed until this century.


  NOTE 65.

  We can have a very exact notion of the books imported and printed
  for and read by children at that time, from the advertisements in
  the papers. In the _Boston Gazette and Country Journal_, of January
  20, 1772, the booksellers, Cox and Berry, have this notice:--

  The following Little Books for the Instruction & Amusement of all
  good Boys and Girls.

    The Brother Gift or the Naughty Girl Reformed.
    The Sister Gift, or the Naughty Boy Reformed.
    Hobby Horse or Christian Companion.
    Robin Good-Fellow, A Fairy Tale.
    Puzzling Cap, A Collection of Riddles.
    The Cries of London as exhibited in the Streets.
    Royal Guide or Early Introduction to Reading English.
    Mr Winloves Collection of Stories.
     "      "   Moral Lectures.
    History of Tom Jones         abridg'd from the works of
       "     " Joseph Andrews      H. Fielding.
       "     " Pamela            abridg'd from the works of
       "     " Grandison           S. Richardson, Esq.
       "     " Clarissa


  NOTE 66.

  General John Winslow was but a distant kinsman of Anna's, for he was
  descended from Edward Winslow. He was born May 27, 1702; died April
  17, 1774. He was a soldier and jurist, but his most prominent
  position (though now of painful notoriety) was as commander of that
  tragic disgrace in American history, the expedition against the
  Acadians. It is told in extenuation of his action that before the
  annihilation and dispersion of that unfortunate community he
  addressed them, saying that his duty was "very disagreeable to his
  natural make and temper as it must be grievous to them," but that he
  must obey orders,--and of course what he said was true.


  NOTE 67.

  The exercises attending this election of counsellors must indeed
  have been an impressive sight. The Governor, attended by a troop of
  horse, rode from the Province House to Cambridge, where religious
  services were held. An Election Sermon was preached. Volleys and
  salutes were fired at the Battery and Castle. A protest was made in
  the public press, as on the previous year, against holding this
  election in Cambridge instead of in the "Town House in Boston, the
  accustomed Ancient Place," and also directly to the Governor, which
  was answered by him in the newspapers; and at this election a most
  significant event occurred--John Hancock declined to accept a seat
  among the counsellors, to which he had been elected. The
  newspapers--the _Massachusetts Spy_ and the _Boston Gazette and
  Country Journal_--commented on his action thus:--

  "Mr Hancocks declining a seat in the Council Board is very
  satisfactory to the Friends of Liberty among his constituents. This
  Gentleman has stood five years successively and as often Negativ'd.
  Whatever may have been the Motive of his being approbated at last
  his own Determination now shows that he had rather be a
  Representative of the People since he has had so repeatedly their
  Election and Confidence."


  NOTE 68.

  Boston had two election days. On Artillery Election the Ancient and
  Honorable Artillery had a dress parade on the Common. The new
  officers were chosen and received their new commissions from the new
  Governor. No negroes were then allowed on the Common. The other day
  was called "Nigger Lection," because the blacks were permitted to
  throng the Common and buy gingerbread and drink beer, as did their
  betters at Artillery Election.


  NOTE 69.

  Col. Thomas Marshall was a Revolutionary officer. He commanded the
  Tenth Massachusetts Regiment at Valley Forge. He was Captain of the
  Ancient and Honorable Artillery from 1763 to 1767, and at one time
  commanded Castle Island, now Fort Independence. He was one of the
  Selectmen of Boston at the time when the town was invested by troops
  under Washington. He died at Weston, Mass., on November 18, 1800.


  NOTE 70.

  A night gown was not in those days a garment for wear when sleeping,
  but resembled what we now call a tea-gown. The night attire was
  called a rail. Both men and women wore in public loose robes which
  they called night gowns. Men often wore these gowns in their
  offices.


  NOTE 71.

  Many Boston people agreed with Anna in her estimate of Rev. Samuel
  Stillman. He was called to the First Baptist Church in 1765, and
  soon became one of Boston's most popular and sensational preachers.
  Crowds thronged his obscure little church at the North End, and he
  took an active part in Revolutionary politics. Many were pleased
  with his patriotism who did not agree with him in doctrine. In the
  curious poem on Boston Ministers, already quoted, we read:--

    Last in my list is a Baptist,
      A real saint, I wot.
    Though named Stillman much noise he can
      Make when in pulpit got.
    The multitude, both grave and rude,
      As drove by wind and tide,
    After him hie, when he doth try
      To gain them to his side.


  NOTE 72.

  Mr. and Mrs. Hooper were "King" Hooper and his wife of Marblehead.
  He was so called on account of his magnificent style of living. He
  was one of the Harvard Class of 1763; was a refugee in 1775, and
  died insolvent in 1790. The beautiful mansion which he built at
  Danvers, Mass., is still standing in perfect condition, and is the
  home of Francis Peabody, Esq. It is one of the finest examples of
  eighteenth century architecture in New England.


  NOTE 73.

  This "Miss Becca" was Rebecca Salisbury, born April 7, 1731, died
  September 25, 1811. She was a fine, high-spirited young woman, and
  upon being taunted by a rejected lover with,

    "The proverb old--you know it well,
    That women dying maids, lead apes in hell,"

  (a belief referred to in _Taming of the Shrew_, Act II. Scene 1),
  she made this clever rhyming answer:--

    "Lead apes in hell--tis no such thing;
      The story's told to fool us.
    But better there to hold a string,
      Than here let monkeys lead us."

  She married Daniel Waldo May 3, 1757. The "very pretty Misses" were
  their daughters; Elizabeth, born November 24, 1765, died unmarried
  in Worcester, August 28, 1845; and Martha (who in this diary is
  called Patty), born September 14, 1761, died November 25, 1828. She
  married Levi Lincoln, Lieutenant-Governor of Massachusetts, and
  became the mother of Levi Lincoln, Governor of Massachusetts, Enoch
  Lincoln, Governor of Maine, and Col. John Lincoln.


  NOTE 74.

  The fashion of the roll was of much importance in those days. A roll
  frequently weighed fourteen ounces. We can well believe such a heavy
  mass made poor Anna's head "ach and itch like anything." That same
  year the _Boston Gazette_ had a laughable account of an accident to
  a young woman on Boston streets. She was knocked down by a runaway,
  and her headdress received the most serious damage. The outer
  covering of hair was thrust aside, and cotton, tow, and false hair
  were disgorged to the delight of jeering boys, who kicked the
  various stuffings around the street. A Salem hair-dresser advertised
  that he would "attend to the polite construction of rolls to raise
  ladies heads to any pitch desired." The Abbé Robin, traveling
  through Boston a few years later, found the hair of ladies' heads
  "raised and supported upon rolls to an extravagant height."