Immediately after, a small boat was dropped into the water and manned
by four stout seamen, into which two officers rapidly descended,--one
in the uniform of a soldier, and the other in naval attire.  When they
reached the wharf at the foot of High Street, they found themselves
confronted by an excited, shouting mass of anxious men, eager to hear
the news they were without doubt bringing.

"It's Lieutenant Seymour!" cried one.

"Yes, he went off in the Ranger about two weeks ago," answered another.

"So he did.  I wonder where the Ranger is now?"

"Who is the one next to him?" said a third.

"That's the young Continental from General Washington's staff, who went
with them," answered a fourth voice.

"Back, gentlemen, back!"

"Way for the general commanding the town!"

"Here, men, don't crowd this way on the honorable committee of
Congress!" cried one and another, as a stout, burly, red-faced, honest,
genial-looking man, whose uniform of a general officer could not
disguise his plain farmer-like appearance, attended by two or three
staff-officers and followed by several white-wigged gentlemen of great
dignity, the rich attire and the evident respect in which they were
held proclaiming them the committee of Congress, slowly forced their
way through the crowd.

"Now, sir," cried the general officer to the two men who had stepped
out on the wharf, "what ship is that?  We are prepared for good news,
seeing those two flags, and the Lord knows we need it."

"That is the transport Mellish, sir; a prize of the American
Continental ship Ranger, Captain John Paul Jones."

"Hurrah! hurrah!" cried the crowd, which had eagerly pressed near to
hear the news.

"Good, good!" replied the general.  "I congratulate you.  How is the
Ranger?"

"We left her about one hundred leagues off Cape Sable about a week ago;
she had just sunk the British sloop of war Juno, twenty-two guns, after
a night action of about forty minutes.  We left the Ranger bound for
France, and apparently not much injured."

"What! what!  God bless me, young men, you don't mean it!  Sunk her,
did you say, and in forty minutes!  Gentlemen, gentlemen, do you hear
that?  Three cheers for Captain John Paul Jones!"

Just then one of the committee of Congress, and evidently its
chairman,--a man whose probity and honor shone out from his open
pleasant face,--interrupted,--

"But tell me, young sir,--Lieutenant Seymour of the navy, is it not?
Ah, I thought so.  What is her lading?  Is it the transport we have
hoped for?"

"Yes, sir.  Lieutenant Talbot here has her bills of lading and her
manifest also."

"Where is it, Mr. Talbot?" interrupted the officer; "let me see it,
sir.  I am General Putnam, in command of the city."

The general took the paper in his eagerness, but as he had neglected to
bring his glasses with him, he was unable to read it.

"Here, here," he cried impatiently, handing it back, "read it yourself,
or, better, tell us quickly what it is."

"Two thousand stand of arms, twenty field-pieces, powder, shot, and
other munitions of war, ten thousand suits of winter clothes, blankets,
shoes, Colonel Seaton and three officers and fifty men of the Seaforth
Highlanders and their baggage, all _en route_ for Quebec," said Talbot,
promptly.

The crowd was one seething mass of excitement.  Robert Morris turned
about, and lifting his hat from his head waved it high in the air amid
frantic cheers.  Putnam and his officers and the other gentlemen of the
committee of Congress seized the hands of the two young officers in
hearty congratulation.

"But there is something still more to tell," cried Mr. Morris; "your
ship, her battered and dismantled condition, the rents in the
sails--you were chased?"

"Yes, sir," replied Seymour, "and nearly recaptured.  We escaped,
however, through a narrow channel extending across George's Shoal off
Cape Cod, with which I was familiar; and the English ship, pursuing
recklessly, ran upon the shoal in a gale of wind and was wrecked, lost
with all on board."

"Is it possible, sir, is it possible?  Did you find out the name of the
ship?"

"Yes, sir; one of our seamen who had served aboard her recognized her.
She was the Radnor, thirty-six guns."

"That's the ship that Lord Dunmore is reported to have returned to
Europe in," said Mr. Clymer, another member of the committee.  A
shudder passed over the two young men at this confirmation of their
misfortunes.  Seymour continued with great gravity,--

"We have reason to believe that some one else in whom you have deeper
interest than in Lord Dunmore was on board of her,--Colonel Wilton, one
of our commissioners to France, and his daughter also.  They must have
perished with the rest."

There was a moment of silence, as the full extent of this calamity was
made known to the multitude, and then a clergyman was seen pushing his
way nearer to them.

"What!  Mr. Seymour!  How do you do, sir?  Did I understand you to say
that all the company of that English ship perished?"

"Yes, Dr. White."

"And Colonel Wilton and his daughter also?"

"Alas, yes, sir."

"I fear that it is as our young friend says," added Robert Morris,
gloomily.  "I remember they were to go with Dunmore."

"Oh, Mr. Morris, our poor friends!  Shocking, shocking, dreadful!"
ejaculated the saintly-looking man; "these are the horrors of war;" and
then turning to the multitude, he said: "Gentlemen, people, and
friends, it is Christmas eve.  We have our usual services at Christ
Church in a short time.  Shall we not then return thanks to the Giver
of all victory for this signal manifestation of His Providence at this
dark hour, and at the same time pray for our bereaved friends, and also
for the widows and orphans of those of our enemies who have been so
suddenly brought before their Maker?  I do earnestly invite you all to
God's house in His name."

The chime of old Christ Church ringing from the steeple near by seemed
to second, in musical tones, the good man's invitation, as he turned
and walked away, followed by a number of the citizens of the town.
General Putnam, however, engaged Talbot in conversation about the
disposition of the stores, while Robert Morris continued his inquiries
as to the details of the cruise with Seymour.  The perilous situation
of the shattered American army was outlined to both of them, and Talbot
received orders, or permission rather, to report the capture of the
transport to General Washington the next day.  Seymour asked permission
to accompany him, which was readily granted.

"If you do not get a captain's commission for this, Mr. Talbot,"
continued Putnam, as they bade him good-night, "I shall be much
disappointed."

"And if you do not find a captain's commission also waiting for you on
your return here, Lieutenant Seymour, I shall also be much surprised,"
added Robert Morris.

"Give my regards to his excellency, and wish him a merry Christmas from
me, and tell him that he has our best hopes for success in his new
enterprise.  I will detach six hundred men from Philadelphia,
to-morrow, to make a diversion in his behalf," said the general.

"Yes," continued Robert Morris, "and I shall be obliged, Lieutenant
Seymour, if you will call at my house before you start, and get a small
bag of money which I shall give you to hand to General Washington, with
my compliments.  Tell him it is all I can raise at present, and that I
am ashamed to send him so pitiable a sum; but if he will call upon me
again, I shall, I trust, do better next time."

Bidding each other adieu, the four gentlemen separated, General Putnam
to arrange for the distribution and forwarding of the supplies to the
troops at once; Robert Morris to send a report to the Congress, which
had retreated to Baltimore upon the approach of Howe and Cornwallis
through the Jerseys; and Seymour and Talbot back to the ship to make
necessary arrangements for their departure.

Seymour shortly afterward turned the command of the Mellish over to the
officer Mr. Morris designated as his successor; and Talbot delivered
his schedule to the officer appointed by General Putnam to receive it.
Refusing the many pressing invitations to stay and dine, or partake of
the other bounteous hospitality of the townspeople, the young men
passed the night quietly with Seymour's aunt, his only relative, and at
four o'clock on Christmas morning, accompanied by Bentley and Talbot,
they set forth upon their long cold ride to Washington's camp,--a ride
which was to extend very much farther, however, and be fraught with
greater consequences than any of them dreamed of, as they set forth
with sad hearts upon their journey.




CHAPTER XX

_A Winter Camp_

About half after one o'clock in the afternoon of Wednesday, December
25th, being Christmas day, and very cold, four tired horsemen, on jaded
steeds, rode up to a plain stone farmhouse standing at the junction of
two common country roads, both of which led to the Delaware River, a
mile or so away.  In the clearing back of the house a few wretched
tents indicated a bivouac.  Some shivering horses were picketed under a
rude shelter, formed by interlacing branches between the trunks of a
little grove of thickly growing trees which had been left standing as a
wind-break.  Bright fires blazed in front of the tents, and the men who
occupied them were enjoying an unusually hearty meal.  The faded
uniforms of the men were tattered and torn; some of the soldiers were
almost barefoot, wearing wretched apologies for shoes, which had been
supplemented when practicable by bits of cloth tied about the soles of
the feet.  The men themselves were gaunt and haggard.  Privation,
exposure, and hard fighting had left a bitter mark upon them.  Hunger
and cold and wounds had wrestled with them, and they bore the indelible
imprint of the awful conflict upon their faces.  It was greatly to
their credit that, like their leader, they had not yet despaired.  A
movement of some sort was evidently in preparation; arms were being
looked to carefully, haversacks and pockets were being filled with the
rude fare of which they had been thankful to partake as a Christmas
dinner; ammunition was being prepared for transportation; those who had
them were wrapping the remains of tattered blankets about them, under
the straps of their guns or other equipments; and the fortunate
possessors of the ragged adjuncts to shoes were putting final touches
to them, with a futile hope that they would last beyond the first mile
or two of the march; others were saddling and rubbing down the horses.

A welcome contribution had been made to their fare in a huge steaming
bowl of hot punch, which had been sent from the farmhouse, and of which
they had eagerly partaken.

"What's up now, I wonder?" said one ragged veteran to another.

"Don't know--don't care--couldn't anything be worse than this," was the
reply.

"We 've marched and fought and got beaten, and marched and fought and
got beaten again, and retreated and retreated until there is nothing
left of us.  Look at us," he continued, "half naked, half starved, and
we 're the best of the lot, the select force, the picked men, the
head-quarters guard!" he went on in bitter sarcasm.

"Yes, that 's so," replied the other, laughing; then, sadly, "Those
poor fellows by the river are worse off than we are, though.  What
would n't they give for some of that punch?  My soul, wasn't it good!"
he continued, smacking his lips in recollection.

"Where are we going, sergeant?" asked another.

"Don't know; the command is, 'Three days' rations and light marching
order.'"

"Well, we're all of the last, anyway.  Look at me!  No stockings,
leggings torn, no shirt; and you'd scarcely call this thing on my back
a coat, would you?  What could be lighter?  So comfortable, too, in
this pleasant summer weather!"

"Oh, shut up, old man; you 're better off than I am, anyway; you've got
rags to help your shoes out, and just look at mine," said another,
sticking out a gaunt leg with a tattered shoe on the foot, every toe of
which was plainly visible through the torn and worn openings.  "And
just look at this," he went on, bringing his foot down hard on the
snow-covered, frost-bound soil, making an imprint which was edged with
blood from his wounded, bruised, unprotected feet.  "That's my
sign-manual; and it 's not hard to duplicate in the army yonder,
either."

"That's true; and to think that the cause of liberty's got down so low
that we are its only dependence.  And they call us the grand army!"

"Well, as you say," went on another, recklessly, "we can't get into
anything worse, so hurrah for the next move, say I."

"Three days' rations and light marching order, meaning, I suppose, that
we are to leave our heavy overcoats and blankets and foot stoves and
such other luxuries behind; that rather indicates that we are going to
do something besides retreat; and I should like to get a whack at those
mercenary Dutchmen before I freeze or starve," was the reply.

"Bully for you!"

"I'm with you, old man."

"I, too."

"And I," came from the group of undaunted men surrounding the speaker.

"And to think," said another, "of its being Christmas day, and all
those little children at home--oh, well," turning away and wiping his
eyes, "marching and fighting may make us forget, boys.  I wouldn't mind
suffering for liberty, if we could only do something, have something to
show for it but a bloody trail and a story of defeat.  I 'm tired of
it," he continued desperately.  "I 'd fight the whole British army if
they would only let me get a chance at them."

"We're all with you there, man, and I guess this time we get a chance,"
replied one of the speakers, amid a chorus of approval which showed the
spirit of the men.

While the men were talking among themselves thus, the four riders on
the tired horses had ridden up to the farmhouse.  A soldier dressed no
better than the rest stood before the door.

"Halt!  Who are you?" he cried, presenting his musket.

"Friends.  Officers from Philadelphia, with messages for his
excellency," replied the foremost.  "Don't you recognize me, my man?"

"Why, it's Lieutenant Talbot!  Pass in, sir, and these other gentlemen
with you," answered the soldier, saluting.  "It's glad the general will
be to see you."

Without further preliminaries the young man opened the door and
entered, followed by his three companions.  A cheerful fire of logs was
blazing and crackling in the wide fireplace in the long low room.  On
the table before it stood a great bowl of steaming punch, and several
officers were sitting or standing about the room in various positions.
The uniforms of all save that of one of them were scarcely less worn
and faded, if not quite so tattered, than were those of the escort; the
same grim enemies had left the same grim marks upon them as upon the
soldiers.  The only well-dressed person in the room was a bright-eyed
young man, a mere boy, just nineteen, wearing the brilliant uniform of
an officer of the French army.  He was tall and thin, red-haired, with
a long nose and retreating forehead; his bright eyes and animated
manner expressed the interest he felt in a conversation carried on in
the French language with his nearest neighbor, another young man
scarcely a year his senior.  The contrast between the new and gay
French uniform of the one and the faded Continental dress of the other
was not less startling than that suggested by the difference in their
size.  The American officer was a small, a very small man; but, in
spite of his insignificant stature, the whole impression of the man was
striking, and even imposing.  In contrast to the other, his face was
very handsome, the head finely shaped, the features clear-cut and
regular; he had a decisive mouth, bespeaking resolution and firmness,
and two piercing eyes out of which looked a will as hard and imperious
as ever dwelt in mortal man.

In front of the fire were two older men, each in the uniform of a
general officer, one of thirty-five or six years of age, the other
perhaps ten years older.  The younger of the two, a full-faced,
intelligent, active, commanding sort of man, whose appearance indicated
confidence in himself, and the light of whose alert blue eyes told of
dashing brilliancy in action and prompt decision in perilous moments,
which made him one of those who succeed, would have been more noticed
had not his personality been so overshadowed by that of the officer who
was speaking to him.  The latter was possessed of a figure so tall that
it dwarfed every other in the room: he was massively moulded, but well
proportioned, with enormous hands and feet, and long, powerful limbs,
which indicated great physical force, and having withal an erect and
noble carriage, easy and graceful in appearance, which would have
immediately attracted attention anywhere, even if his face had not been
more striking than his figure.  He had a most noble head, well
proportioned, and set upon a beautiful neck, with the brow broad and
high, the nose large and strong and slightly aquiline; his large mouth,
even in repose, was set in a firm, tense, straight line, with the lips
so tightly closed from the pressure of the massive jaws as to present
an appearance almost painful, the expression of it bespeaking
indomitable resolution and unbending determination; his eyes were a
grayish blue, steel-colored in fact, set wide apart, and deep in their
sockets under heavy eyebrows.  He wore his plentiful chestnut hair
brushed back from his forehead, and tied with a black ribbon in a queue
without powder, as was the custom in the army at this juncture,--a
fashion of necessity, by the way; and his ruddy face was burned by sun
and wind and exposure, and slightly, though not unpleasantly, marked
with the smallpox.

There was in his whole aspect evidence of such strength and force and
power, such human passion kept in control by relentless will, such
attributes of command, that none looked upon him without awe; and the
idlest jester, the lowest and most insubordinate soldier, subsided into
silence before that noble personality, realizing the ineffable dignity
of the man.  The grandeur of that cause which perhaps even he scarcely
realized while he sustained it, looked out from his solemn eyes and was
seen in the gravity of his bearing.  His was the battle of the people
of the future, and God had marked him deeply for His own.  And yet it
was a human man, too, and none of the immortal gods standing there.  On
occasion his laugh rang as loudly, or his heart beat as quickly as that
of the most careless boy among his soldiers.  He was fond of the good
things of life too,--loving good wine, fair women, a well-told story, a
good jest, pleasant society, and delighting in struggle and contest as
well.  He preserved habitually the just balance of his strong nature by
the exercise of an unusual self-control, and he rarely allowed himself
to step beyond that mean of true propriety, so well called the happy,
except at long intervals through a violent outbreak of his passionate
temper, rendered more terrible and blasting from its very infrequency.
And this was the man upon whom was laid the burden of the war of the
Revolution, and to whom, under God, were due the mighty results of that
epoch-making contest.  Seldom, if ever, do we see men of such rare
qualities that when they leave their appointed places no other can be
found to fill them; but if such a one ever did live, this was he.




CHAPTER XXI

_The Boatswain Tells the Story_

One or two other men were writing at a table, and another stalwart
officer of rank was sitting by the fire reading.  None of the four men
coming into the room had seen the general before, except Talbot.  As
the door opened, his excellency glanced up inquiringly, and,
recognizing the first figure, stepped forward quickly, extending his
hand, all the other officers rising and drawing near at the same time.

"What, Talbot!  I trust you bring good news, sir?"

"I do, sir," said the young officer, saluting.

"The transport?" said the general, in great anxiety.

"Captured, sir."

"Her lading?"

"Two thousand muskets, twenty field-pieces, powder, shot, intrenching
tools, other munitions of war; ten thousand suits of winter clothes,
blankets, and shoes; and four officers and fifty soldiers; all bound
for Quebec, where the British army is assembling."

"Now Almighty God be praised!" exclaimed the general, with deep
feeling.  "From whence do you come now?"

"From Philadelphia, sir."

"Ah!  You thought best to take your prize there instead of Boston.  It
was a risk, was it not?  But now that you are there, it is better for
us here.  Who are your companions, sir?  Pray present them to me."

"Lieutenant Seymour, sir, of the navy, who brought in the prize."

"Sir, I congratulate you.  I am glad to see you."

"And this is Philip Wilton, a midshipman.  I think you know him,
general."

"Certainly I do; the son of my old friend the commissioner, Colonel
Wilton of Virginia, now unhappily a prisoner.  You are very welcome, my
boy.  And who is this other man, Talbot?"

"William Bentley, sir, bosun of the Ranger, at your honor's service,"
answered the seaman himself.

"Well, my man," said the general, smiling, "if the Ranger has many like
you in her crew, she must show a formidable lot of men.  I am glad to
see you all.  These are my staff, gentlemen, the members of my family,
to whom I present you.  General Greene, General Knox; and these two
boys here are Captain Alexander Hamilton and the Marquis de La Fayette,
a volunteer from France, who comes to serve our country without money
or without price, for love of liberty.  This is Major Harrison, this
Captain Laurens, this Captain Morris of the Philadelphia troop, our
only cavalry; they serve like the marquis, for love of liberty.  I know
not how I could dispense with them."  The gentlemen mentioned bowed
ceremoniously, and some of them shook hands with the new-comers.

"Billy," continued Washington, turning to his black servant, "I wish
you to get something to eat for these gentlemen.  It's only bread and
meat that we can offer you, I am sorry to say; we are not living in a
very luxurious style at present,--on rather short rations, on the
contrary.  But meanwhile you will take a glass of this excellent punch
with us, and we will drink to a merry Christmas.  Fill your glasses,
gentlemen all.  Your news is the first good news we have had for so
long that we have almost forgot what good news is.  It is certainly
very pleasant for us, eh, gentlemen?  Now give us some of the details
of the capture of the transport.  How was it?  You, Mr. Seymour, are
the sailor of the party; do you tell us about it."

Then, in that rude farmhouse among the hills on that bitter winter day,
Seymour told the story of the sighting of the convoy, and the ruse by
which the capture of the two ships had been effected, at which General
Washington laughed heartily.  Then he described in a graphic seamanlike
way the wonderful night action; the capture of the Juno by the heroic
captain of the Ranger, the successful escape of that ship from the
frigate, and the sinking of the Juno.  He was interrupted from time to
time by exclamations and deep gasps of excitement from the officers
crowding about him; even Billy bringing the dinner put it down
unheeded, and listened with his eyes glistening.  And then Seymour
delivered Jones's message to General Washington.

"Wonderful man! wonderful man!" he said.  "We shall hear of him, I
think, in the English Channel; and the English also, which is more to
the point.  But your own ship--had you an eventless passage, Mr.
Seymour?  And, gentlemen, you look as solemn as if you were the bearers
of bad news instead of good tidings, or had been retreating with us for
the past six months.  Thank goodness, that's about over tonight.  Fill
your glasses, gentlemen.  'T is Christmas day.  Now for your own story.
Did you meet an enemy's ship?"

"We did, sir.--Talbot, you tell the story."

"No, no, I cannot; 't is your part, Seymour."

Here, in the presence of friends, and friends who knew and loved
Colonel Wilton and his daughter, neither of the young men felt equal to
the tale.  Each day brought home to them their bitter sorrow more
powerfully than before, and each hour but deepened the anguish in their
hearts.

"Why, what is this?  What has happened?  The transport is safe, you
said," continued the general, in some anxiety.  "What is it?"

"I can tell, if your honor pleases, sir," said the deep voice of
Bentley.

"Speak, man, speak."

"It happened this way, sir: we were off Cape Cod, heading northwest by
west for Boston, about a week ago, close hauled on the starboard tack
in a half gale of wind.  Your honor knows what the starboard tack is?"

"Yes, yes, certainly; go on."

"When about three bells in the afternoon watch,--your honor knows what
three bells--Ay, ay, sir," continued the seaman, noting the general's
impatient nod.  "Well, sir, we spied a large sail coming down on us
fast; we ran off free, she following.  Pretty soon we made her out a
frigate, a heavy frigate of thirty-six guns, and a fast one too, for
she rapidly overhauled us.  We cracked on sail, even setting the
topmast stunsail, till it blew away.  Then we cut away bulwarks and
rails, flattened the sails by jiggers on the sheets and halliards until
they set like boards, pumped her out, cast adrift the boats, cut away
anchors, but it was n't any use; she kept a-gaining on us.  By and by
we came to George's Shoal extending about three leagues across our
course to the southeast of Cape Cod.  There is a pass through the
shoal; Lieutenant Seymour knows it, we surveyed it this last summer.
We brought the ship to on the wind on the same tack again, near the
shoal, and ran for the mouth of the pass.  The frigate edged off to run
us down.  Lieutenant Talbot broke out a field-piece from the hold and
mounted it as a stern-chaser, and used it too--"

"Good! well done!" said the general, nodding approvingly.  "Go on."

"We came to the mouth of the pass.  The frigate fired a broadside.  One
shot carried away the mizzen topgallant mast; another sent a shower of
splinters inboard, killing the man at the wheel.  The ship falls off
and enters the pass.  I seize the helm.  Mr. Seymour conned us through.
The frigate chased madly after us.  She sees the breakers; she can't
follow us, draws too much water; she makes an effort to back off.  It
is too late; she strikes.  The wind rises to a heavy gale.  We see her
go to pieces, and never a soul left to tell the story, never a plank of
her that hangs together.  She's gone, and we go free.  That's all, your
honor, and may God have mercy on their souls, say I," added the solemn
voice of the boatswain in the silence.

"A frightful catastrophe, indeed, and a terrible one!  I do not wonder
at your sadness.  But, young gentlemen, do not take it so to heart.  It
is the fate of war, and war is always frightful."

"Did you find out the name of the ship, boatswain?" asked General
Greene.

"Yes, your honor; the Radnor, thirty-six."

"Could no one have been saved?" queried General Knox.

"No one, sir.  No boat could have lived in that sea a moment.  We could
n't put back, could do no good if we had, and so we came on to
Philadelphia, and that's all."

"No, general," cried Seymour; "it's not all.  We will tell the general
the whole story, Talbot.  You remember, sir, the raid on the Wilton
place and the capture of the colonel and his daughter?"  The general
nodded.  "Well, sir, before the Ranger sailed, I received a note from
Miss Wilton saying they were to be sent to England in the Radnor."

"You received the note?  I thought she was Mr. Talbot's betrothed, Mr.
Seymour!"

"I thought so too, general; but it seems that we are both wrong.
Lieutenant Seymour captured her during his visit there with Colonel
Wilton," said Talbot, with a faint smile.

"I am very sorry for you, Talbot, and you are a fortunate man, Mr.
Seymour.  But go on; we are all friends here.  Did you say they were to
go on the Radnor?"

"Yes, sir.  The pursuing frigate was recognized by one of my men who
had been pressed and flogged while on her, as the Radnor, the ship on
which they were.  I heard the man say so just as we neared the reef.
To go through the pass was to lead the English ship to destruction and
cause the death of those we--of the colonel, sir," continued Seymour,
in some confusion.  "To refrain from attempting the pass was to lose
the ship and all it meant for our cause.  I could not decide.  I say
frankly I could not condemn those I--our friends to death, and I could
not lose the ship either.  This old man knew it all.  He has known me
from a child.  He spoke out boldly, and laid my duty before me, and
pleaded with me--"

"He did not need it, your honor.  No, sir; he would have done it
anyway," interrupted Bentley.

The general took the hand of the embarrassed old boatswain and shook it
warmly; then, fixing his glowing eyes upon the two young men, said,--

"Continue, Mr. Seymour."

"I know not what I might have done, but the old seaman's appeal to my
honor decided me.  I went aft with horror in my heart, but resolved to
do my duty.  On my way there I took out of my pocket the little note
received from Miss Wilton; a gust of wind blew it to the hand of Mr.
Talbot.  It was only a line.  As he picked it up, he read it
involuntarily.  We had some words.  I drew on him, sir.  It was my
fault."

"No, no, general, the fault was mine!" interrupted Talbot.  "I said it
was my letter, refused to give it up, insulted him.  He would have
arrested me.  Bentley and Philip interfered.  I taunted him, advanced
to strike him.  He had to draw or be dishonored."

"Nay, general, but the fault was mine.  I was the captain of the ship;
the safety of the ship depended on me."

"Go on, go on, Mr. Seymour," said the general; "this dispute does honor
to you both."

"The rest happened as has been told you.  One of the splinters struck
Mr. Talbot's sword and swept it into the sea; the note went with it,
and then the frigate was wrecked, and Colonel Wilton and his daughter,
with all the rest, lost."

It was very still in the room.

"My poor friend, my poor friend," murmured the general, "and that
charming girl.  Without a moment's warning!  Young gentlemen," taking
each of the young men by the hand, "I honor you.  You have deserved
well of our country,--for the frankness with which one of you admits
his fault, for it was a fault, and takes the blame upon himself, and
for the heroic resolution by which the other sacrifices his love for
his duty.  Laurens, make out a captain's commission for Mr. Talbot.
Hamilton, I wish you would write out a general order declaring the
capture of the transport and her lading, and the sinking of the Juno
and the wreck of the English frigate; it will hearten the men for our
enterprise to-night.  As for you, Mr. Seymour, I shall use what little
influence I may be able to exert to get you a ship at once; meantime,
as we contemplate attacking the enemy at last, I shall be glad to offer
you a position as volunteer on my staff for a few days, if your duties
will permit.  And to you, Philip, let me be a father indeed--my poor
boy!  As for you, boatswain, what can I do for you?"

"Nothing, your honor, nothing, sir.  You have shaken me by the hand,
and that's enough."  The old man hesitated, and then, seeing only
kindness in the general's face, for the old sailor attracted and
pleased him, he went on softly: "Ay, love's a mighty thing, your honor;
we knows it, we old men.  And love of woman's strong, they say, but
these boys have shown us that something else is stronger."

"And what is that, pray, my friend?"

"Love of country, sir," said Bentley, in the silence.




CHAPTER XXII

_Washington--a Man with Human Passions_

Half an hour later, after the four travellers had taken some
refreshment, hasty steps were heard outside the door, followed by the
sentry's hail.

"Ah!" said the general, looking up eagerly from the book he had been
reading, "perhaps that is Mr. Martin with news from the enemy."  Then
laying aside his book, he rose to his feet to meet the new-comer, who
proved to be the man he had expected.  The young man stood at attention
and saluted, while the general addressed him sharply,--

"Well, sir, what have you learned?"

The young officer appeared extremely embarrassed.  "I--well, the fact
is, sir, nothing at all," he stammered.

"Nothing!" said the general, loudly, with rising heat, "nothing, sir!
Did you not cross the river as I directed you?"

"No, sir.  That is, I tried to, but there was so much floating ice, and
it was so difficult to manage a boat that I thought it would be hardly
worth while to attempt it, sir.  In fact, the crossing is impracticable
for troops," he went on more confidently; but his face changed as he
looked up at his infuriated superior.  The general was a picture of
wrath; the lines in his forehead standing out plainly, his mouth shut
more tightly and grimly than ever.  It was evident that he was
furiously angry, and his face had in it something terrible from his
rage.  The young officer stood before him now, white and frightened to
death.

"I saw him this way at Kip's Landing," whispered Hamilton to Seymour.
"Look! he has lost control of himself completely, there will be an
explosion sure."

The general struggled for a moment, and then broke away.

"Impracticable, sir! impracticable!" he roared out in a voice of
thunder.  "How dare you say what this army can or can not do!  And what
do you mean by not crossing the river and ascertaining the facts I
desire to know!"  The next moment he stepped forward and, seizing a
heavy leaden inkstand from the table near him, threw it with all his
force full at the man, crying fiercely,--

"Damnation, sir!  Be off and send me a _man_."

The officer dodged the missile, which struck the wall with a crash,
saluted, and ran out of the door as if his life depended on it; feeling
in his heart that he would face any danger rather than brave another
storm of wrath like that he had just sustained.  The general continued
to pace up and down the room restlessly for a few moments, until he
recovered his composure.

"I depended upon that information, and I must have it," he
soliloquized.  "If that man does not bring it back to us before we
cross the river, I 'll have him cashiered.  Shall I send another man?
No, I 'll give him another chance."

Seymour picked up the book the general had been reading.  It was the
Bible, and open at the twenty-second chapter of the Book of Joshua.
His eye fell full upon the twenty-second verse, which was marked.  "The
Lord God of gods, the Lord God of gods, he knoweth, and Israel he shall
know; if; _it be_ in rebellion, or if in transgression against the
Lord, (save us not this day.)"

Just then the little daughter of Keith, the owner of the farmhouse at
which they were staying, entered the room.  As the little miss came up
fearlessly to the general, he stopped and smiled down at her.

"Father and mother wish to know if you will want supper to-night, sir?"

"No, my little maid," he replied; "not here, at any rate.  And which do
you like the better now, the Redcoats or the Continentals?"

"The Redcoats, sir, they have such pretty clothes," said the nascent
woman.

"Ah, my dear," he replied blithely, catching her up in his arms and
kissing her the while, "they look better, but they don't fight.  The
ragged fellows are the boys for fighting."

"Singular man!" mused Seymour, contrasting the outbreak of wrath at the
recalcitrant officer, the open Bible he had been reading, and the last
merry, tender greeting to the child.  But his musings were interrupted
by the general himself, speaking.

"General Greene, you would better ride over to the landing and place
the different brigades; take Hamilton with you, and perhaps General
Knox will go also to look out for the artillery.  The brigades were to
start at three o'clock for McConkey's Ford, and the nearest of them
should be there now.  We shall move in two divisions after we leave
Birmingham on the other side.  I wish you to command the first one,
which will comprise the brigades of Sterling, Mercer, and De Fermoy,
with Hand's riflemen and Hausegger's Germans and Forest's battery.  I
shall accompany your column.  General Sullivan will take the second
division, with Sargeant's and St. Clair's brigades, and Glover's
Marblehead men, and Stark's New Hampshire riflemen.  The two columns
will divide at Birmingham.  You will take the east, or inland road, and
Sullivan that by the river.  Have you that order I spoke of for the
troops, Mr. Hamilton?  If so, you will give a copy of it to General
Greene, who will publish it to the troops as soon as they arrive.
Captain Morris, I think you would better go also.  You will muster your
troop; the men will have returned from carrying my orders to the
different brigades, and can be assembled once more.  I desire you to
attend my person to-night as our only cavalry.  Talbot, you would
better go with General Greene; you also, marquis, so that you can be
with your friend Captain Hamilton.  The rest of us will follow you
shortly."

The officers designated bowed, and in a few moments were on the road.
The officers left at the headquarters were speedily busy with their
necessary duties, and Seymour and his two companions, one of whom, the
boatswain, was most unfamiliar with and uncomfortable upon a horse,
were able to get a couple of hours of needed rest before starting out
upon what they felt would be an arduous journey.  About half after six
o'clock the signal to mount was given, and the whole party, led by the
general himself, and followed by the ragged guard, was soon upon the
road.

It was intensely cold, and the night bade fair to be the severest of
the winter.  The sky was cloudless, however, and there was a bright
moon.




CHAPTER XXIII

_Lieutenant Martin's Lesson_

As they rode along slowly, the general explained his plans.  General
Howe had pursued him relentlessly through the Jerseys, until he had
crossed into Pennsylvania, only escaping further pursuit and certain
defeat because he had had the forethought to seize every boat upon the
Delaware and its tributaries for miles in every direction, and bring
them with his army to the west bank of the river, so that Howe was
unable to cross.  The English general had threatened, however, to wait
until the river was frozen and then cross on the ice, and after
brushing aside the miserable remains of Washington's army, march on to
Philadelphia and establish himself in the rebel capital.  Making that
most serious of mistakes for a military man of despising his opponents,
Howe had scattered his army, for convenience in quartering, in various
small detachments along the river.  The small American army,
supplemented by the Pennsylvania militia, had been placed opposite the
different fords from Yardley to New Hope, to hold the enemy in check in
case an attempt should be made to force a crossing.

The fortunes of the country were at the lowest ebb.  But there was to
be a speedy reversal of conditions, and the world was to learn how
dangerous a man was leading the Continental troops.  Washington, to
whom a retreat was as hateful as it had been necessary, had long
meditated an attack whenever any chance whatever of success might
present itself.  The necessity for a change was apparent, not merely
for the material result which would flow from a victory, but for the
moral effect as well.  The fancied security of the enemy, their exposed
positions, disconnected from each other, and the contempt they felt for
his own troops, were large factors in determining him to strike then;
but another factor had still more weight, and that was the fact that
the time of the enlistment of nearly the whole of his own army expired
with the end of the year, and whatever was to be done must be done
quickly.  He therefore conceived the daring and brilliant design of
suddenly collecting his scattered forces, crossing the river, and
falling upon his unsuspecting enemy at Trenton, where a small brigade
of Hessians, under Colonel Rahl, was stationed.

It would be a piece of unparalleled audacity.  To turn, as it were,
just before the dissolution of his army, and cross a wide and deep
river full of ice, in the dead of winter, and strike, like the hammer
of Thor, upon his unwary foe, rudely disturbing his complacent dreams,
was a conception of exceeding brilliancy, and it at once stamped
Washington as a military genius of the first order.  And with such an
army to make such an attempt!  Said one of the officers of the period
in his memoirs: "An army without cavalry, partially provided with
artillery, deficient in transportation for the little they had to
carry; without tents, tools, or camp equipage,--without magazines of
any kind; half clothed, badly armed, debilitated by disease,
disheartened by misfortune."  But their leader was a Lion, and the Lion
was at last at bay!  There was another factor which contributed greatly
to the efficiency of the army, and that was the high quality and
overwhelming number of the American officers.

Orders had been given to the brigades and troops mentioned to
concentrate at McConkey's Ferry, about nine miles above Trenton.
Another division under Ewing was to cross a mile below Trenton and
seize the bridge and fords across the Assunpink, to check the retreat
of the enemy and co-operate with the main attack.

Cadwalader's Pennsylvania militia under Gates were to cross at Bristol
or below Burlington, and attack Von Donop at that point, while Putnam,
in conjunction with him, was to make a diversion from Philadelphia.
The movements were to be simultaneous, and the result it was hoped
would accord with the effort.  The main column, and the one upon which
the most dependence was to be placed, was that which Washington himself
was to accompany, which was composed of veteran Continentals, to the
number of twenty-four hundred, with eighteen pieces of artillery.

All this was briefly explained by the general to Seymour and the staff,
while they rode slowly along the frozen road.  About eight o'clock they
arrived at the ford, near which the troops who had arrived before them
now stood shivering on the high ground by the river.  A few fires were
burning in the ravines back of the banks, around which the men took
turns in warming themselves, as they munched their frugal fare from the
haversacks.  A large number of boats had been collected for their
transportation, but the river itself was in a most unpromising
condition, full of great cakes of ice which the swift current kept
churning and grinding against each other.

The general surveyed the scene in silence, as his staff and the general
officers gathered about him.

"There is something moving in the river, general," suddenly said
Seymour, pointing, his practised eye detecting a dark object among the
cakes of ice.  "It is a boat, sir!"

"Ah," replied the general, "you have sharp eyes.  Where is it?"

"There, sir, coming nearer every minute; there is a man in it."

"I see now.  So there is.  Who can it be?"

"Probably it is Lieutenant Martin," remarked General Greene, quietly.
"You know you sent him back."

"Oh, so I did," replied the general, nodding sternly at the
recollection.  Meanwhile the man in the boat was skilfully making his
way between the great cakes of ice, which threatened every moment to
crush his frail skiff.  He rapidly drew near until he finally jumped
ashore, and, having tied his boat, hastened up to where the general sat
on his horse.  He stopped.

"I have been across, general," he said, saluting.

"So I perceive, sir.  How did you get across?"

"When I left you, sir, this afternoon," went on the young man, gravely,
"I was in such a hurry that I did not wait for anything.  I swam it,
sir, with my horse."

"Swam it!"

"Yes, sir."

"Very well done, indeed!  Was it cold?"

"Not very, sir.  At least I was too excited to feel it, and a good hard
gallop on the other side soon warmed me up."

"Where did your ride take you?"

"Almost to Trenton, sir."

"And what is the situation there?"

"Very confident, the guard very negligent, the men carousing in the
houses.  I examined both roads, and neither of them is well picketed.
I should think a surprise would not be very difficult, sir."

"Humph!  Where's your horse?"

"He fell dead on the other side just as I got back.  I found that leaky
skiff, and came over to report, sir."

"You have done well, Mr. Martin, very well indeed!  I think you must
have found that man I sent you for!" continued the general, smiling
grimly, while the young soldier blushed with pleasure.  "Meanwhile we
must get you another horse.  Who has a spare one?"

"May it please your honor," spoke out Bentley, who had attached himself
to Seymour, "he can have mine.  I am as much at sea on him as you would
be on the royal yard, begging your honor's pardon, and I 'll feel
better carrying a gun or pulling an oar with the men there than here."

The general laughed.

"There 's your horse, Mr. Martin.  Where do you belong, sir?"

"To Colonel Stark's regiment, sir."

"Good!  Keep at it as you have begun and you will meet with a better
reception when you call upon me again.  Now God grant that fortune may
favor us.  Gentlemen, if the brigades are all up, we will undertake the
crossing.  It looks dangerous, but it can be done--it must be done.
Who will lead us?"

"I will, sir, with your permission, with my Marblehead fishermen," said
Colonel Glover, stepping out.

"Ah, gentlemen, this is our marine regiment.  Go on, sir!  You shall
have the right of way across the river.  I think none will dispute it
with you.  Mr. Seymour, as a seaman, perhaps you can render efficient
service, and your boatswain will find here more opportunities for his
peculiar talents than in carrying a musket.  General Greene, will you
and your staff go over with the first boat to make proper disposition
of the brigades as they arrive?  I shall come over after the first
division has passed.  Then General Sullivan, and lastly our friend
General Knox with his artillery.  I expect we shall have to wait for
him.  Well, we cannot dispense with either him or the guns."

"You won't have to wait any longer than is absolutely necessary to get
the guns and horses over, general."

"I know that, Knox, I know that.  Now, gentlemen, forward! and may God
bless you!"

In a few moments the terrible passage began.




CHAPTER XXIV

_Crossing the Delaware_

The men, divided into small squads, marched down to the boats,--large
unwieldy scows, which had been hauled up against the shore,--and each
boat was speedily filled to its utmost capacity.  The most experienced
seized the oars; three or four Marblehead fishermen armed with long
poles took their stations forward and aft along the upper side of the
boat, with one to steer and one to command; and then, seizing a
favorable opportunity, the boat was pushed off from the shore, and
threading its way in and out between the enormous ice-cakes grinding
down upon her, the difficult and dangerous passage began.  Should the
heavily laden boat be overturned, very few of its occupants would be
able to reach the shore.  Once on the other side, the fishermen took
the boat back, and the weary process was gone over again.  Fortunately
it was yet bright moonlight, though ominous clouds were banking up in
the northeast, and everything could be clearly seen; each boat was
perfectly visible all the way across to the eager watchers on the
shore, and a sigh of relief went up after each fortunate passage.  In
this labor Seymour and Bentley, and in a less degree Philip Wilton,
aided Colonel Glover's men; Seymour having the helm of one boat
continuously, Bentley that of another.

About half-past nine it was reported to General Washington that all of
the first division had crossed, and the boat was now ready for him
according to his orders.  The largest and best boat had been selected
for the commander-in-chief, one sufficiently capacious to receive his
horses and those of his staff who accompanied him.  Seymour was to
steer the boat; Bentley stood in the bow; Colonel Glover stationed
himself amidships, with three or four of his trustiest men, to
superintend the crossing, and all the oars were manned by the hardy
fishermen instead of the soldiers.  The general dismounted and walked
toward the boat, leading his horse.  Just as he was about to enter, an
officer on a panting steed rode up rapidly, and saluted.

"General Washington?"

"Yes, sir."

"A letter, sir!"

"What a time is this to hand me letters!"

"Your excellency, I have been charged to do so by General Gates."

"By General Gates!  Where is he?"

"I left him this morning in Philadelphia, sir."

"What was he doing there?"

"I understood him that he was on his way to Congress."

"On his way to Congress!" said the general earnestly, with much
surprise and disgust in his tone.  And then, after a pause, he broke
the seal and read the letter, frowning; after which he crumpled the
paper up in his hand, and then turned again to the officer.  "How did
you find us, sir?"

"I followed the bloody footprints of the men on the snow, sir."

"Poor fellows!  Did you learn anything of General Ewing or General
Cadwalader?"

"No, sir."

"And General Putnam?"

"He bade me say that there were symptoms of an insurrection in the
city, and he felt obliged to stay there.  He has detached six hundred
of the Pennsylvania militia, however, under Colonel Griffin, to advance
toward Bordentown."

"'T is well, sir.  Do you remain to participate in our attack?"

"Yes, sir, I belong to General St. Clair's brigade."

"You will find it over there; it has not yet crossed.  Now, gentlemen,
let us get aboard."

The general stepped forward in the boat, where Bentley, an enormous
pole in his hands, was stationed, and the remainder of the party soon
embarked.  The order was given to shove off.  The usual difficulties
and the usual fortune attended the passage of the boat with its
precious freight, until it neared the east bank, when one of the
largest cakes that had passed swiftly floated down upon it.

"Pull, men, pull hard!" cried Colonel Glover, as he saw its huge bulk
alongside.  "Head the boat up the stream, Mr. Seymour.  Forward,
there--be ready to push off with your poles."  As the result of these
prompt manoeuvres, the oncoming mass of ice, which was too large to be
avoided, instead of crashing into them amidships and sinking the boat,
struck them a quartering blow on the bow, and commenced to grind along
the sides of the boat, which heeled so far over that the water began to
trickle in through the oar-locks on the other side.

"Steady, men," said Glover, calmly.  "Sit still, for your lives."

Bentley had thrown his pole over on the ice-cake promptly, and was now
bearing down upon it with all the strength of his powerful arms.  But
the task was beyond him; the ice and the boat clung together, and the
ice was reinforced by several other cakes which its checked motion
permitted to close with it.  The vast mass crashed against the side of
the boat; the oar of the first rower was broken short off at the
oar-lock; if the others went the situation of the helpless boat would
be, indeed, hopeless.  The general himself came to the rescue.
Promptly divining the situation, he stepped forward to Bentley's side,
and threw his own immense strength upon the pole.  Great beads of sweat
stood out on Bentley's bronzed forehead as he renewed his efforts; the
stout hickory sapling bent and crackled beneath the pressure of the two
men, but held on, and the boat slowly but steadily began to swing clear
of the ice.  These two Homeric men held it off by sheer strength, until
the boat was in freewater, and the men, who had sat like statues in
their places, could once more use their oars.  The general stepped back
into his place, cool and calm as usual, and entirely unruffled by his
great exertions.  Bentley wiped the sweat from his face, and turned and
looked back at him in admiration.

"Friend Bentley," he said quietly, "you are a man of mighty thews and
sinews.  Had it not been for your powerful arms, I fear we would have
had a ducking--or worse."

"Lord love you, your honor," said the astonished tailor, "I 've met my
match!  It was your arm that saved us.  I was almost done for.  I never
saw such strength as that, though when I was younger I would have done
better.  What a man you would be for reefing topsails in a gale o'
wind, your honor, sir!" he continued, thrusting his pole vigorously
into a small and impertinent cake of ice in the way.  The general was
proud of his great strength, and not ill pleased at the genuine and
hearty admiration of this genuine and hearty man.

A few moments later they stepped ashore, and a mighty cheer went up
from the men who had crowded upon the banks, at the safety of their
beloved general.  Greene met him at the landing, and the two men
clasped hands.  The general immediately mounted his powerful white
horse, and stationed himself on a little hillock to watch the landing
of the rest of the men, engaging General Greene in a low conversation
the while.

"Do you know, Greene, that Gates has refused my entreaty to stop one
day at Bristol, and take command of Reed's and Cadwalader's troops and
help us in the attack!  I did not positively order him to do so; only
requested him to delay his journey by a day or two.  I can't understand
his action.  A letter was handed me just before we crossed by
Wilkinson, telling me that he had gone on to Congress."

"To Congress!  What wants he there?  Oh, general, it seems as if you
had to fight two campaigns,--one against the enemy, and the other
against secret, nay open, attempts to minimize your authority and check
your plans."

"It seems so, Greene; but with a just cause to sustain, and the
blessing of God to help our efforts, we cannot ultimately fail, though,
indeed, it may be better that I give place to another man, more able to
save the country," went on the general, solemnly.

"Forbid it, Heaven!" cried Greene, passionately.  "We, at least, in the
army, know to whom has been committed this work; ay, and who has done
it, and will do it, too!  We will stand by you to the last.  Could you
not feel in the cheers of those frozen men, when you landed, the love
they bear you?"

"Yes, I know that you are with me, and they too.  'T is that alone that
gives me heart.  Did you publish the orders about the capture of the
transport?"

"Yes, sir, and it put new heart in the men, I could see.  I wish we had
the supplies, the clothing especially, now.  It grows colder every
moment."

"Ay, and darker, too; I think we shall have snow again before we get
through with the night.  I wonder how the others down the river have
got along.  But who comes here?" continued the general, as two men
walked hastily up to him and saluted.

"Well, sir?" he said to the first.

"Message from General Ewing, sir."

"Did he get across?"

"No, sir, the ice was so heavy he bade me say he deemed it useless to
try it."

"One piece removed from the game, General Greene," said Washington,
smiling bitterly.  "Now your news, sir?" to the other.

"General Cadwalader got a part of his men across, but the ice banks so
against the east side that not a single horse or piece of artillery
could be landed, so he bade me say he has recrossed with his men, sir."

"And there's the other piece gone, too!  Now, what is to be done?"

General Sullivan, having crossed with the last of his division, at this
moment rode up.

"The troops are all across, general," he said.

"Well done!  What time is it, some one?"

"Half after eleven, sir," answered a voice.

"Very well, indeed!  We have now only to wait for the guns.  But,
gentlemen, I have just heard that Ewing made no attempt to cross, and
that Cadwalader, having tried it, failed.  He could get his men over,
but no horses and guns, on account of the ice on the bank, and
therefore he returned, and we are here alone.  What, think you, is to
be done now?"

There was a moment's silence.

"Perhaps we would better recross and try it again on a more favorable
night," finally said De Fermoy, in his broken accents.

"Yes, yes, that might be well," said one or two others, simultaneously.
The most of them, however, said nothing.  The general waited a moment,
looking about him.

"Gentlemen, it is too late to retreat.  I promised myself I would not
return without a fight, and I intend to keep that promise.  We will
carry out the plan ourselves, as much of it at least as we can.  I
trust Putnam got Griffin off, and that his skirmishers may draw out Von
Donop.  But be that as it may, we will have a dash at Trenton, and try
to bag the game, and get away before the enemy can fall upon us in
force.  General Greene, you, of course have sent out pickets?"

"Yes, sir, the first men who crossed over, a mile up the road, on the
hill yonder."

"Good!  Ha, what was that?  Snow, as I live, and the moon 's gone, too!
How dark it has grown!  I think you might allow the men to light fires
in those hollows, and let them move about a little; they will freeze to
death standing still--I wonder they don't, anyway.  How unfortunate is
this snow!"

"Beg pardon, your excellency?" said the first of the two messengers.

"What is it, man?  Speak out!"

"Can we stay here and take part in your attack, sir?"

"Certainly you may.  Fall in with the men there.  Where are your
horses?"

"We left them on the other side, sir."

"Well, they will have to stay there for this time, and you 'll have to
go on foot with the rest."

"Thank you, sir," said the men, eagerly, darting off in the darkness.

"That's a proper spirit, isn't it?  Well, to your stations, gentlemen!
We have nothing to do now but wait.  Don't allow the men to lie down or
to sleep, on any account."

And wait they did, for four long hours, the general sitting motionless
and silent on his horse, wrapped in his heavy cloak, unheeding, alike,
the whirling snow or the cutting sleet of the storm, which grew fiercer
every moment.  He strained his eyes out into the blackness of the river
from time to time, or looked anxiously at the troops, clustered about
the fires, or tramping restlessly up and down in their places to ward
off the deadly attack of the awful winter night, while some of them
sought shelter, behind trees and hillocks, from the fury of the storm.
Filled with his own pregnant thoughts, and speaking to no one, he
waited, and no man ventured to break his silence.  At half after three
General Knox, whose resolute will and iron strength had been exerted to
the full, and whose mighty voice had been heard from time to time above
the shriek of the fierce wind, was able to report that he had got all
the artillery over without the loss of a man, a horse, or a gun, and
was ready to proceed.  The men were hastily assembled, and, leaving a
strong detail to guard the boats, at four o'clock in the morning the
long and awful march to Trenton was begun, the general and his staff,
escorted by the Philadelphia City Troop, in the lead.  The storm was at
its height.  All hopes of a night attack and surprise had necessarily
to be abandoned.  Still the general pressed on, determined to abide the
issue, and make the attack as soon as he reached the enemy.  It was the
last effort of liberty, conceived in desperation and born in the throes
of hunger and cold!  What would the bringing forth be?




CHAPTER XXV

_Trenton--The Lion Strikes_

The route, for the first mile and a half, lay up a steep hill, where
the men were much exposed and suffered terribly; after that, for three
miles or so, it wound in and out between the hills, and through forests
of ash and black oak, which afforded some little shelter.  The storm
raged with unabated fury, and the progress of the little army was very
slow.  The men were in good spirits, however, and they cheerfully
toiled on over the roads covered with deep drifts, bearing as best they
might the driving tempest.  It was six in the morning when they reached
the little village of Birmingham, where the two columns divided:
General Greene's column, accompanied by Washington, taking the longer
or inland road, called the Pennington road, which entered the town from
the northeast; while Sullivan's column followed the lower road, which
entered the town from the west, by way of a bridge over the Assunpink
Creek.  As Greene had a long detour to make, Sullivan had orders to
wait where the cross-road from Rowland's Ferry intersected his line of
march, until the first column had time to effect the longer circuit, so
that the two attacks might be delivered together.  General Washington
himself rode in front of the first column.  It was still frightfully
cold.

About daybreak the general spied an officer on horseback toiling
through the snowdrifts toward him.  As the horseman drew nearer, he
recognized young Martin.

"What is it now, sir?"

"General Sullivan says that the storm has rendered many of his muskets
useless, by wetting the priming and powder.  He wishes to know what is
to be done, sir?"

"Return instantly, and tell him he must use the bayonet!  When he hears
the firing, he is to advance and charge immediately.  The town must be
taken, and I intend to take it."

"Very good, sir," said the young man, saluting.

"Can you get through the snow in time?"

"Yes, sir," he replied promptly.  "I can get through anything, if your
excellency will give the order."

The general smiled approvingly.  It was evident that young man's first
lesson had been a good one; his emphasis, he was glad to see, had not
been misapplied.

When Martin rejoined Sullivan's column, which had been halted at the
cross-roads, the men who had witnessed his departure were eagerly
waiting his return.  As he repeated the general's reply, they began
slipping the bayonets over the muzzles of their guns without orders.
So eager were they to advance, that Sullivan had difficulty in
restraining them until the signal was given.  Such was their temper and
spirit that, in the excitement of the moment, they recked little of the
freezing cold and the hardships of their terrible march.  The
retreating army was at last on the offensive, they were about to attack
now, and no attack is so dangerous as that delivered by men from whom
the compelling necessity of retreat has been suddenly removed.

It was about eight o'clock in the morning when they came in sight of
the town.  The village of Trenton then contained about one hundred
houses, mostly frame, scattered along both sides of two long streets,
and chiefly located on the west bank of the Assunpink, which here bent
sharply to the north before it flowed into the Delaware.  The Assunpink
was fordable in places at low water, but it was spanned by a
substantial stone bridge, which gave on the road followed by Sullivan,
at the west end of the village.  Washington came down from the north,
and entered the village from the other side.  About half a mile from
the edge of the town, the column led by him came abreast of an old man,
chopping wood in a farm-yard by the roadside.

"Which is the way to the Hessian picket?" said the general.

"I don't know," replied the man, sullenly.

"You may tell," said Captain Forest, riding near the general, at the
head of his battery, "for this is General Washington."

The man's expression altered at once.

"God bless and prosper you!" he cried eagerly, raising his hands to
heaven.  "There!  The picket is in that house yonder, and the sentry
stands near that tree."

The intense cold and heavy snow had driven the twenty-five men, who
composed the advance picket, to shelter, and they were huddled together
in one of the rude huts which served as a guard-house.  The snow
deadened the sound of the American advance, and the careless sentry did
not perceive them.  No warning was given until the lieutenant in
command of the guard stepped out of the house by chance, and gave the
alarm in great surprise.  The picket rushed out, and the men lined up
in the road in front of the column, the thick snow preventing them from
forming a correct idea of the approaching force.  The advance guard of
the Continentals, led by Captain William A. Washington and Lieutenant
James Monroe, instantly swept down upon them.  After a scattered volley
which hurt no one, they fled precipitately back toward the village,
giving the alarm and rallying on the main guard, posted nearer the
centre of the town, which had been speedily drawn up, to the number of
seventy-five men.  Meanwhile Sullivan's men, with Stark at the head,
had routed the pickets on the other road in the same gallant style.
This picket was composed of about fifty Hessian chasseurs, and twenty
English light dragoons, under command of Lieutenant Grothausen of the
chasseurs.  They all fled so precipitately that they did not stop to
alarm the brigade which they had been stationed to protect, but rapidly
galloped down the road, and, crossing the bridge over the Assunpink,
made good their escape toward Bordentown.  Grave suspicions of
cowardice attached thereafter to their commanding officer.  Had Ewing
performed his part in the plan, the bridge would have been held, and
they would have been captured with the rest.  Stark's men, followed by
the rest of Sullivan's division, were now pushed on rapidly for the
town, and the cheers of the New England men were distinctly heard by
Washington and his men on the main road.  The main guard on the upper
road, almost as completely surprised as the other by the dashing
onslaught of the Americans, made another futile attempt at resistance
to Greene's column, but they soon fell back in great disorder upon the
main body.

It was broad daylight now, and the violence of the storm had somewhat
abated.  In the town, where the firing had been heard, the drums of the
three regiments were rapidly beating the assembly.  Colonel Rahl was in
bed, sleeping off the effects of his previous night's indulgences, when
he heard the commotion.  Jumping from the bed and running rapidly to
the window, still undressed, he thrust out his head and asked the
acting brigade adjutant, Biel,--who was hurriedly galloping past,--what
it was all about.  There was a total misapprehension on all sides, even
at this hour, as to the serious nature of the attack; so the confused
colonel, satisfied with Biel's surmise that it was a raid, ordered him
to take a company and go to the assistance of the main guard, in the
supposition that it was only a skirmishing party, and never dreaming of
a general attack.  Nevertheless he then dressed rapidly, and, running
down to the street, mounted his horse, which had been brought around.
The three regiments which comprised his brigade and command were
already forming; they were the regiment Rahl, the regiment Von
Lossburg, and the regiment Von Knyphausen.  At this moment the advance
party and the main guard came running through the streets in great
confusion, crying that the whole rebel army was down upon them.  The
regiment Rahl and the regiment Von Lossburg at once began retreating to
an apple orchard back of the town; firing ineffectively in their
excitement, as they ran, from behind the houses, at the head of the
column, which had now appeared in the street; while the regiment Von
Knyphausen, under the command of Major Von Dechow, the second in
command of the brigade, separated from the two others and made for the
bridge over the Assunpink.

King and Queen streets run together at the east end of the town.  There
Washington stationed himself, on the left of Forest's battery, which
was immediately unlimbered and opened up a hot fire.  The general's
position was much exposed, and after his horse had been wounded, his
officers repeatedly requested him to fall back to a safer point, which
he peremptorily refused to do.  The joy of battle sparkled in his eyes;
he had instinctively chosen that position on the field from whence he
could best see and direct the conflict, and nothing but a successful
charge of the enemy upon them could have moved him to retire.

A few of the cooler-headed men among the Hessians had rallied some of
the Lossburg regiment, and two guns had been run out into the street
and pointed up toward the place where Washington stood, to form a
battery, which might, could it have been served, have held the American
army in check until such time as the startled Germans could recover
their wits and make a stand.  General Washington pointed them out to
the officer of the advance guard, which had already done such good
service, with a wave of his sword.  The little handful of men, led by
Captain Washington and Lieutenant Monroe, charged down upon the guns,
which the party had not had time to load.  A scattering volley received
them.  Captain Washington and Monroe and one of the men were wounded,
another fell dead; the men hesitated.  Talbot sprang to the head of the
column, in obedience to the general's nod, and they rallied, advanced
on the run, and the guns were immediately captured.

Meanwhile the fire of Stark's riflemen could be heard at the other end
of the town.  St. Clair's brigade held the bridge; the regiment Von
Knyphausen lost a few precious moments endeavoring to extricate its
guns, which had become mired in the morass near the bridge, and then
charged upon St. Clair.  But it was too late; Von Dechow was seriously
wounded, and when the regiment saw itself taken in the flank by
Sargeant's brigade, it retired in disorder, though some few men escaped
by the fords.

At this juncture Rahl re-formed his scattered troops in the apple
orchard.  He seems to have had an idea of retreating toward Princeton
at first, with the two regiments still under his command; at any rate,
he also lost precious moments by hesitation.  It was even then too late
to effect a successful retreat, for Washington, foreseeing the
possibility, had promptly sent Hand's Pennsylvania riflemen along the
Pennington road back of the town to check any move in that direction.
As fast as the other brigades of Greene's column came up, they were
sent down through the streets of the town, until Stirling, in the lead,
joined Sullivan's men.  Rahl's brigade was practically surrounded,
though he did not know it.  The commander completely lost his head,
though he was a courageous man, brave to rashness, and a veteran
soldier who had hitherto distinguished himself in this and many other
wars.  The town was full of plunder gathered by the troops, the
Hessians having been looting the country for weeks; and he could not
abandon it without a struggle.  The idea of flying from a band of
ragged rebels whom he had scouted, was intolerable.  He had been, he
now felt, more than culpable in neglecting many warnings of attack, and
had lamentably failed in his duty as a soldier, in refraining from
taking the commonest precautions against surprise.  He had refused to
heed the urgent representations of Von Dechow, and other of his high
officers.  Now his honor was at stake; so he rashly made up his mind to
charge.

"We will retake the town.  All who are my grenadiers--forward!" he
cried intrepidly.

The men, with fixed bayonets, advanced bravely, and he led them
gallantly forward, sword in hand.  The Americans fired a volley;
Forest's battery, which enfiladed them, poured in a deadly fire.  Rahl
in the advance, upon his horse, received a fatal wound and fell to the
ground.  The Continentals, cheering madly, charged forward with fixed
bayonets.  The Hessians  stopped--hesitated--wavered--their chief was
gone--the battle was lost--they broke and fled!  Disregarding the
commands and appeals of their officers, they turned quickly to the
right, and ran off into the face of Hand's riflemen, who received them
with another volley.  Many of them fell.  A body of Virginia troops led
by Talbot now gained their left flank, the Philadelphia City Troop
encircled their rear.  The helpless men stopped, completely bewildered,
huddled together in a confused mass.  Washington, seeing imperfectly,
and thinking they were forming again, ordered the guns from Forest's
battery, which had been loaded with canister, to be discharged upon
them at once.

"Sir, they have struck!" cried Seymour the keen-eyed, preventing the
men from firing.

"Struck!" cried the general, in surprise.

"Yes, sir; their colors are down."

"So they are," said Washington, clasping his hands and raising his eyes
to heaven; then, putting spurs to his horse, he galloped over toward
the men.  The firing had ceased in every direction, and the day was his
own; the three regiments were surrendering at discretion, two to him
and the other to Lord Stirling.  As Major Wilkinson galloped up from
the lower division for instructions, Colonel Rahl, pale and bleeding,
and supported by two sergeants, presented his sword, which Washington
courteously declined to receive.  The general then gave orders that
every care and assistance should be afforded the unfortunate soldier,
who died the next day in a room in Potts' Tavern.

"This is indeed a glorious day for our country," said the general to
Seymour.

It was in fact the turning-point in the history of the nation.  The
captives numbered nearly one thousand men, with twelve hundred stand of
arms, six field-pieces, twelve drums, and four colors, including the
gorgeous banner of the Anspachers, the Von Lossburg regiment.

Of the Continentals, only two were killed and four wounded, while
upward of one hundred of the Hessians were killed and wounded, among
the killed being Rahl and Von Dechow, the first and second in command.
The whole of this brilliant affair scarcely occupied an hour.

As none of the other divisions had got across, it was scarcely safe for
Washington to remain on the east side of the river in the presence of
the vastly superior forces of the enemy, which would be concentrated
upon him without delay.  So that, after giving the men a much needed
rest, securing their booty, and burying the dead, the evening found the
little army, with its prisoners, retracing its steps toward the ford
and its former camping-ground.

But with what different feelings the hungry, worn-out, tattered mass of
men marched along in the bitter night!  The contrast between the
well-clothed and well-fed Hessians and their captors was surprising,
but not less striking than that between their going out and coming in.
Little recked the frozen men of the hardships of the way.  They had
shown the world that they possessed other capabilities than facility in
retreating, and no American army, however small or feeble, would ever
again be despised by any foe.

The return passage was made without incident, save that just on the
crest of the hills leading down to the Ford, the general, who was in
advance again, noticed a suspicious-looking, snow-covered mound by the
roadside.  Riding up to it, one of his aids dismounted and uncovered
the body of a man, a Continental soldier, frozen to death.  The cold
weapon was grasped tightly in the colder hand.  A little farther on
there was another body asleep in the snow,--another soldier!  The last
was that man of the headquarters guard who had spoken of his little
children at home on Christmas day.  They would wait a long time before
they saw him again.  He had been willing to fight the whole English
army!  Ah, well, a sterner foe than any who marched beneath the red
flag of Great Britain had grappled with him, and he had been
defeated,--but he had won his freedom!

For forty hours now that little band of men had marched and fought, and
when it reached its camp at midnight the whole army was exhausted.  The
only man among them all who preserved his even calmness, and was
apparently unaffected by the hardships of the day, was the commander
himself,--the iron man.  Late into the night he dictated and wrote
letters and orders, to be despatched in every direction in the morning.
The successful issue of his daring adventure entailed yet further
responsibilities, and the campaign was only just begun.  As for
himself, the world now knew him for a soldier.  And a withered old man
in the palace of the Sans Souci in Berlin, who had himself known
victories and defeats, who had himself stood at bay, facing a world in
arms so successfully that men called him "The Great," called this and
the subsequent campaign the finest military exploit of the age!




CHAPTER XXVI

_My Lord Cornwallis_

And so the departure of my Lord Cornwallis was necessarily deferred.
The packet upon which he had engaged passage, and which had actually
received his baggage, sailed without him.  It would be some days before
he would grace the court of St. James with his handsome person, and a
long time would elapse before he would once more rejoice in the sight
of his beloved hills; when he next returned it would not be with the
laurels of a conqueror either!  He was to try conclusions once and
again with the gentleman he had so assiduously pursued through the
Jerseys; and this time, ay, and in the end too, the honors were to be
with his antagonist.  The Star and Order of the Bath, which his
gracious and generous Britannic majesty had sent over to the new
Caesar, General Howe, with so much laudation and so many words of
congratulation, was to have a little of its lustre diminished, and was
destined to appear not quite so glorious as it had after Long Island;
in fact, it was soon to be seen that it was only a pyrotechnic star
after all, and not in the order of heaven!  Both of these gentlemen
were to learn that an army--almost any kind of an army--is always
dangerous until it is wiped out; and it is not to be considered as
wiped out as long as it has any coherent existence at all, even if the
coherent existence only depends upon the iron will of one man,--which
is another way of saying the game is never won until it is ended.

There was mounting in hot haste in New York, and couriers and orders
streamed over the frozen roads, and Lord Cornwallis himself galloped at
full speed for Princeton.  The calculations of a certain number of his
majesty's faithful troops were to be rudely disturbed, and the
comfortable quarters in which they had ensconced themselves were to be
vacated forthwith.  Concentration, aggregation, synthesis, were the
words; and this time the reassembled army was not to disintegrate into
winter quarters until this pestilent Mr. Washington was attended to,
and attended to so effectually that they could enjoy the enforced
hospitality of the surly but substantial Jerseymen through the long
winter nights undisturbed.  For his part, Mr. Washington, having tasted
success, the first real brilliant offensive success of the campaign,
was quite willing to be attended to.  In fact, in a manner which in
another sex might be called coquettish, he seemed to court attention.
Having successfully attacked with his frost-bitten ragged regiments a
detachment, he was now to demonstrate to the world that not even the
presence of an army could stop him.

Things were not quiet on the Pennsylvania side of the river either;
there were such comings and goings in Newtown as that staid and
conservative village had never before seen.  Our two friends, the
sad-hearted, were both busily employed.  Talbot had galloped over the
familiar road, and had electrified the good people of Philadelphia with
his news, and then had hastened on to Baltimore to reassure the spirits
of the frightened Congress.  Honest Robert Morris was trotting around
from door to door upon New Year's morning, hat in hand, begging for
dollars to assist his friend George Washington, and the cause of
liberty, and the suffering army; and Seymour, become as it were a
soldier, and with Philip for esquire, was waiting to take what he could
get, be the amount ever so little, back to General Washington.  The
sailor had been granted a further leave of absence by the naval
committee, at the general's urgent request, and was glad to learn that
he should soon have command of the promised ship of war, which was even
then making ready in the Delaware.  Honest Bentley--beloved of the
soldiery in spite of his genuinely expressed contempt for land
warriors--was lending what aid he could in keeping up the spirits of
the men, and in other material ways in the camp.  Some of the clothing,
some of the guns from the Mellish, some of the material captured from
the Hessians had gone into the hands and over the backs and upon the
feet of the men.  But the clothed and the naked were equally happy, for
had they not done something at last?  Ay! they had given assurance that
they were men to be reckoned with.

Fired by the example set them by the Continentals, the Pennsylvania
militia, under Cadwalader and Ewing and Mifflin, had at last crossed
the Delaware and joined Griffin's men.  Washington had followed them,
and the twenty-ninth of December found him established in new
headquarters at Trenton.  A number of mounds in the fields, covered
with snow, some bitter recollections and sad stories of plunder,
robbery, rapine, and worse, told with gnashing teeth or breaking heart
by the firesides, were all that remained of their strange antagonists
in the town.  But the little town and the little valley were to be once
more the scene of war.  The great game was to be played again, and the
little creek of the Assunpink was to run red under its ice and between
its banks.

On the twenty-ninth, Washington's troops began to cross the river
again.  Two parties of light dragoons were sent on in advance under
Colonel Reed, assisted by parties of Pennsylvania riflemen despatched
by Cadwalader.  They clung tenaciously to the flanks of Von Donop.
That unfortunate commander had been led away from his camp at
Burlington in pursuit of Griffin's gallant six hundred.  When he
returned, unsuccessful, the news from Trenton had so alarmed him that
he fled precipitately, abandoning his heavy baggage and some of his
artillery.  It was a work of joy for the pursued to pursue, a reversal
of conditions which put the heavy German veterans at a strange
disadvantage compared with their alert and active pursuers.  They had
marched through that country with a high hand, plundering and abusing
its inhabitants in a frightful way, and they were now being made to
experience the hatred they themselves had enkindled.  The country
people rose against them, and cut them off without mercy.

It took two days to get the troops across, on account of the ice in the
river.  And now came another difficulty.  The time of the major part of
the Americans had expired on the last day of the year, but Washington
had them paraded and had ridden up and addressed them in a brilliant,
soldier-like fashion, and they had to a man volunteered to remain with
him for six weeks longer, or as much more time as was necessary to
enable him to complete his campaign before he went into winter
quarters.  He was at last able to pay them their long deferred salary
out of the fifty thousand dollars sent him by Robert Morris, which
Seymour and Talbot that day had brought him; and for their future
reward he cheerfully pledged his own vast estate, an example of
self-sacrifice which Greene, Stark, Talbot, Seymour, and others of the
officers who possessed property, at once emulated.  The men were put in
good spirits by a promise of ten dollars' bounty also, and they were
ready and eager for a fight.

Reed, attended by six young gentlemen of the Philadelphia Troop, had
been sent out to reconnoitre.  Up toward Princeton they had surprised a
British outpost composed of a sergeant and twelve dragoons; the
sergeant escaped, but the twelve dragoons, panic-stricken, were
captured after a short resistance; and Reed and his gallant young
cavaliers returned in triumph to headquarters.  Valuable information
was gained from this party.  Cornwallis had joined Grant at Princeton,
and with seven or eight thousand men was assembling wagons and
transportation, preparing for a dash on Trenton.  Confirmation of this
not unexpected news came by a student from the college, who had escaped
to Cadwalader and been sent up to General Washington.  The situation of
Washington was now critical, but he took prompt measures to relieve it.
Cadwalader from the Crosswicks, and Mifflin from Bordentown, with
thirty-six hundred men, were ordered forward at once.  They promptly
obeyed orders, and by another desperate night march reached Trenton on
the morning of the first day of the year.

There was heavy skirmishing all day on the second.  Cornwallis,
advancing in hot haste from Princeton with eight thousand men, was
checked, and lost precious time, by a hot rifle fire from the wood on
the banks of the Shabbakong Creek, near the road he followed in his
advance.  The skirmishers under Greene, seconded by Hand, after doing
gallant service and covering themselves with glory by delaying the
advance for several hours, giving Washington ample time to withdraw his
army across the Assunpink and post it in a strong defensive position,
had retired in good order beyond the American line.  In the skirmish
Lieutenant Von Grothausen, he who had galloped away with the dragoons
at Trenton and had been under suspicion of cowardice ever since, had
somewhat redeemed his reputation in that he had boldly ridden down upon
the riflemen, and had been killed.  It was late in the evening when the
advance parties crossed the bridge over the creek and sought safety
behind the lines.  Indefatigable General Knox had concentrated thirty
pieces of cannon at the bridge--"A very pretty battery," he called it.

It was dusk when the eager Americans saw the head of the British army
coming through the streets.  They remained silent while the enemy
formed, and advanced to attack the bridge and the fords in heavy
columns at the same time.  The men came on in a solid mass for the
bridge head, cheering gallantly.  They were met by Knox's artillery and
a steady fire from the riflemen.  Three times they crashed on that
bridge like a mighty wave, and three times like a wave broken they fell
back before an awful storm of fire.  General Washington himself,
sitting on his white horse, gave the orders at the bridge, and the
brave enemy were repulsed.  The position was too strong to be taken by
direct assault without great loss; besides, it was not vital after
all--so reasoned Cornwallis.  The British soldiery were weary, they had
marched all day at a hot pace and were exhausted.  They had not lived
in a chronic state of exhaustion for so long that they never gave it a
thought; they were not used to it, as were the Continentals, and when
the British were tired they had to rest.  They would be in better
spirit on the morrow.  The creek was fordable in a dozen places, but
Cornwallis resisted the importunities of some of his officers, who
wished to ford it and attack at once; he sent urgent messengers off to
Princeton to bring up the two thousand men left there with Von Donop,
and to hurry up Leslie with the rear guard, six miles away; when they
arrived they could turn the right flank of the Americans, and it would
be all up with them then.  He thought he had Washington at such a
disadvantage that he could not escape, though the small advantage of
position might enable him to make a desperate resistance, even with his
inferior forces.

"We will wait," he said to Erskine, "until Von Donop comes up, and
Leslie, and then we 'll bag the 'old fox' in the morning!"

So, after brisk firing on both sides until night closed down, the
camp-fires were lighted on both sides of the creek; and the British
officer went to sleep, calmly confident that he had held the winning
cards, and all that was necessary was that the hand should be played
out in the morning, to enable him to take the game again.  He did
indeed hold the higher cards, but the "old fox" showed himself the
better player.

On the other side of the creek, in the house of good Mistress
Dagworthy, anxious hearts were debating.  General Washington had
summoned a council of war, which expressed the usual diversity of
opinion on all subjects, except an unwillingness to fight, upon which,
like every other council of war, it was agreed.  Indeed the odds were
fearful!  Ten thousand seasoned, well-equipped, well-trained, veteran
troops, ably led, and smarting with the late defeat and the check of
the day against five thousand or six thousand wretchedly provided
soldiers, three-fifths of whom were raw militiamen, who had never heard
a shot fired in anger!

Not even a leader like Washington, and officers to second him like
Greene, Sullivan, Knox, St. Clair, Stephen, Stirling, Cadwalader,
Sargeant, Mercer, Mifflin, Reed, Stark, Hand, Glover, and the others,
could overcome such a disparity and inequality.

Cornwallis had only to outflank them, crumple them up, roll them back
on the impassable Delaware, and then--God help them all!

There was no disguising the critical nature of their situation, and the
army had never before been in so desperate a position.  It needed no
great skill to see the danger now to be faced, but the mistake of
Cornwallis gave them a brief respite, of which they promptly availed
themselves.  Washington was not a man before whom it was ever safe to
indulge in mistakes, and the more difficult his position, the more
dangerous he became.  Trial, danger, hazard, seemed to bring out all of
the most remarkable qualities of the man in the highest degree.
Nothing alarmed him, nothing dismayed him, nothing daunted him; the
hotter the conflict, the more pressing the danger, the cooler he
became.  No man on earth was ever more ready and quick to avail himself
of time and opportunity, once he had determined upon a course of
action.  This campaign was the most signal illustration, among many
others, which his wonderful career affords.  Action, prompt, bold,
decisive, was as the breath of life to him; but before coming to a
decision, contrary to the custom of great commanders generally, he
usually called a council of war, which, on account of his excessive
modesty, he sometimes allowed to overrule his own better judgment, to
the great detriment of the cause.  Alone he was superb!  Given equal
resources, the world has not seen a general with whom he could not
successfully be matched.  In this particular juncture, fortunately for
the country, he insisted upon having his own way.

There were apparently but three alternatives before the council.  The
first was a retreat with all speed down the river, leaving the heavy
baggage and artillery, and then crossing at Philadelphia if they could
get there in time.  But this would be to abandon the whole colony of
New Jersey, to lose the results of the whole campaign, and leave the
enemy in fine position to begin again in the spring; and if this were
the end, they might better have stayed on the west side of the river.
Besides, successes were vital and must be had.  Another retreat meant
disintegration and ruin, in spite of the lucky stroke at Trenton.  The
second alternative was a battle where they stood, and that meant total
defeat,--a thing not to be considered a moment.  The army must win or
die; and as dying could do no good, it had to win.  A brilliant idea,
however, had occurred to the commander-in-chief, the man of brilliant
ideas.  He communicated it to the council, where it instantly found
adherents, and objectors, too.  It was the third alternative.  A
circuitous road called the Quaker road, recently surveyed and just
made, led in a roundabout way from the rear of the camp toward the
Princeton road, which it entered two miles from that town.
Washington's plan was to steal silently away in the night by this road,
leaving bright fires burning to deceive the confident enemy, and press
with all speed toward Princeton, strike Cornwallis' rear-guard there at
daybreak with overwhelming force, crush it before that general could
retrace his steps, and then make a dash for the British supplies at New
Brunswick.  If it were not practicable to reach that point, Washington
could take a position on the hills above Morristown, on the flank of
the British, and, by threatening their communications, force the
superior army to retreat and abandon the field, or else attack the
Americans in their intrenchments in the hills, with a probable result
even more disastrous to the attacking party than at Bunker Hill.  It
was a conception as simple and beautiful as it was bold, brilliant, and
practicable.

But now the objectors began; it had been snowing, sleeting, and raining
for several days; the roads were impassable, they had no bottom.
Objections were made on all sides: the artillery could not possibly be
moved, no horses could pull the wagons through the mud, the troops
could not march in it.  But Washington, with true instincts, held to
his carefully devised plan with an unusual resolution.  Arguing,
explaining, suggesting, convincing, persuading, the hours slipped away,
until at ten o'clock at night there came a sudden change in the
weather, perceptible even to those in the house.  Washington ran
eagerly to the door and opened it.  Followed by the general officers,
he stepped out into the night.  It was dark and cloudy, no moon or
stars even, and growing colder every moment under the rising northeast
wind.

"Gentlemen," he cried gayly, "Providence has decided for us.  The wind
has shifted.  The army will move in two hours."

At the time specified by the commander, the muddy roads were frozen
hard.  The heavy baggage was sent down to Burlington, and a strong
party of active men was left to keep bright fires burning, and charged
to show themselves as much as possible and make a great commotion by
throwing up fortifications and loud talking, with instructions to slip
away and join the main body early next day as best they could.  At one
o'clock in the morning the astonished army started out upon their
adventurous journey,--another long cold night march.  The untravelled
roads were as smooth and hard as iron.  With muffled wheels they
succeeded in stealing away undetected.




CHAPTER XXVII

_The Lion Turns Fox_

The Quaker road led southeast from Trenton until it reached the village
of Sandtown, where it turned to the northwest again, and it was not
until that point was reached that the surprised soldiers realized the
daring nature of the manoeuvre, and the character of that night march,
which they had at first considered another hopeless retreat.  It was
astonishing, then, with what spirit and zeal the soldiers tramped
silently over the frozen roads; the raw, green militia vied with the
veterans, in the fortitude with which they sustained the dreadful
fatigue of the severe march.  The long distance to be traversed, on
account of the detour to be made, rendered it necessary that the men be
moved at the highest possible speed.  The road itself being a new one,
lately cleared, the stumps and roots of trees not yet grubbed up, made
it difficult to transport the artillery and the wagons: but the tired
men cheerfully assisted the tired horses, and the little army made
great progress.  The morning of Friday, January the 5th, dawned clear
and cold, with the ground covered with hoar frost.  About sunrise the
army, with Washington again in the lead, reached the bridge over Stony
Brook about three miles from the village of Princeton.  Leading the
main body across the bridge, they struck off from the main highway
through a by-road which was concealed by a grove of trees in the lower
ground, and afforded a short cut to the town.

General Mercer was an old friend and comrade of the commander-in-chief;
he had been a companion of Prince Charles Edward in his romantic
invasion of England in '45, a member of Braddock's unfortunate
expedition, and wounded when that general's army was annihilated; and
sometime commander of Fort Du Quesne, after its capture by General
Forbes.  He was detailed, with a small advance party comprising the
remnants of Smallwood's Marylanders, Haslet's Delawareans, and
Fleming's Virginians, and a small body of young men from the first
families of Philadelphia, to the total number of three hundred, to
continue up the road along the brook until he reached the main road,
where he was to try and hold the bridge in order to intercept fugitives
from Princeton, or check any retrograde movement of the troops which
might have advanced toward Trenton.  The little band had proceeded but
a short distance on their way, when they unexpectedly came in sight of
a column of the enemy.

It was the advance of the British, a part of Von Donop's leading
brigade, _en route_ for Trenton to assist Cornwallis in bagging the
"old fox" according to orders,--the Seventeenth Regiment, under Colonel
Mawhood.  Mercer's troops being screened by the wood, their character
was not visible to Mawhood, who conjectured that they must be a body of
fugitives from the front.  Under this impression, and never dreaming of
the true situation, Mawhood promptly deployed his regiment and moved
off to the left to intercept Mercer, at the same time despatching
messengers to bring up the other two regiments, the Fortieth and
Fifty-fifth, which had not yet left Princeton.  Both parties rushed for
a little rising ground on the edge of a cleared field, near the house
of a peaceful Quaker named Clark.  The Americans were nearer the goal
than their opponents, and reached it first.  Hastily deploying his
column, Mercer sought shelter behind a hedge fence which crowned the
eminence, and immediately opened up a destructive fire from his
riflemen, which temporarily checked the advancing enemy.  The British,
excellently led, returned the fire with great spirit, and with such
good effect that, after a few volleys, Mercer's horse was wounded in
the leg and his rider thrown violently to the ground, Talbot's was
killed under him, and several of the officers and men fell,--among them
the brave Colonel Haslet, who was mortally wounded.  In the confusion
thus unfortunately caused, the Americans could hear sharp commands of
the English officers, then the rattling of steel on the gun-barrels,
and the next moment the red-coated men broke out of the smoke and,
unchecked by a scattering fire from the Americans, gallantly rushed up
at them with fixed bayonets.  There were unfortunately no bayonets in
this small brigade of the Continental army.  A few of the men clubbed
their muskets resolutely as the two lines met, and made a stout
resistance; but the on-coming British would not be denied, and, as the
charge was pressed home, the Americans wavered, broke, and fell back in
some disorder before the vigorous onslaught of the veteran troops.
Mercer, filled with shame, strove in vain to rally his men.  Disdaining
himself to retreat, and gallantly calling upon them to advance, he
threw himself upon the advancing British line, sword in hand, followed
by his officers, and for a brief space there was an exciting mêlée on
the hill.  A blow from the butt end of a musket felled the general to
the ground.  Talbot sprang to his side, and swept the bayonet away from
his heart by a blow of his sword delivered with a quick movement of his
powerful arm.  Mercer profited by the moment's respite to leap to his
feet.

"Thank you, my lad," he said.

"Do you get to the rear and rally the men, general," cried Talbot,
firing a pistol at short range into the midst of the crowding enemy.
"I 'll hold these men in play."  But the fighting blood of the old
Scotchman was up, and for answer he struck boldly at the man opposite
him.

"Surrender, you damned rebels!" cried an officer near them.

"Never!" replied Mercer, cutting down the man with whom he was engaged,
while Talbot did the like to the one next him.  With a roar of rage the
British sprang on the two men.  In a trice one of the bayonets got past
Mercer's guard and grazed his arm, another buried itself in his bosom,
a third struck him in the breast.  The old man struck out weakly,
dropped his sword and fell, pierced by a dozen wounds, but still
breathing.  Talbot, who was as yet unharmed, though covered with blood
and dust, his hat gone, stepped across his body.

He might have retreated, being young and active; but that was not the
custom of his family, neither would he abandon the body of his brave
commander; besides, every moment of delay was precious.  Surely they
would be reinforced and rallied; he knew the promptness of Washington
too well to doubt it for a moment; and, last of all, what was life
without Kate?  One glance he cast to the bright sky, flushed with the
first rays of the rising sun, and then he stood on guard.  The young
man's eyes were burning with the intoxication of the fight, and his
soul filled with great resolve; but his sword-play was as cool and as
rapid as it had been in the Salle des Armes at Paris, where few could
be found to master him.  The little group of British paused a moment in
admiration of his courage.

"One at a time, gentlemen," he cried, smiling, and warding off a
vicious bayonet thrust.  "Are there none here who will cross swords
with me, for the honor of their flag?"

The young lieutenant in command of that part of the line promptly
sprang forward and engaged; the two blades rang fiercely together, and
grated along each other a moment later.  The men stepped back.  But the
brave lieutenant had met his match, and, with set lips and iron arm,
Talbot drove home his blade in the other's heart.  Ere he could recover
himself or withdraw his sword, he was beaten to his knees by a blow
from a gun-barrel; the blood ran down over his face.

"Surrender! surrender!" they cried to him, "and we will spare your
life."

For answer his hand sought his remaining pistol.  The first one of his
opponents fell dead with a bullet through his heart, and the next
moment the deadly steel of a bayonet was buried in Talbot's throat.

"Kate--Kate!" he cried in agony, the blood bubbling from his lips, and
then another bayonet found his gallant heart; and he sank down on his
face, at the foot of the dying officer, his lips kissing the soil of
that country in defence of whose liberties he had fallen.

As was customary with his family, he had died on the field, grimly
facing fearful odds to the last.  The last of his line, he had made a
good ending, not unworthy his distinguished ancestry; for none of the
proud and gallant race had ever died in the service of a better cause,
be it that of king or Parliament, than this young soldier who had just
laid down his life for love of his country!

The slight check afforded by the interposition of the Americans was
over.  The British were sweeping everything before them, when Colonel
Mawhood, the cool-headed officer, who had been sitting on a little
brown pony, with a small switch in his hand, directing the combat,
became aware of a large body of men coming up on his right flank
through the wood.  With the readiness of a practised soldier, he
instantly stopped the advance of his men, wheeled them about, brought
up his guns, and prepared to open fire.  The American officers had time
to mark with admiration the skill with which the manoeuvre was
effected, and the beautiful precision with which the men carried out
their orders.  Then the force, a large body of Pennsylvania militia
which Washington had despatched at the first sound of firing in the
direction of Mercer, broke out of the wood, and advanced rapidly.  The
muskets of the redcoats were quickly brought to the shoulder, and at
the word of command the British line was suddenly tipped with fire and
then covered with smoke.  Many of the militia fell at this volley
delivered at close range; some of the fallen lay still and motionless,
while others groaned with pain; the raw troops fired hastily into the
smoke, then hesitated and stopped uncertainly as the volley was
repeated.  It was another critical moment, and the hour brought the man.

Washington himself had most opportunely arrived on the field in advance
of the troops, attended by Seymour.  One glance showed him Mercer's
broken retreating column and the hesitating Pennsylvania militia!
Everything was at stake.  It was not a time for strategic manoeuvres
now, but for men--nay, there were men there as good as ever fought--but
for a man then.  Providentially one was at hand.  Putting spurs to his
gallant white horse, he rode down the line in front of the Pennsylvania
militia, waving his hat and cheering them on.

"An old-fashioned Virginia fox-hunt, gentlemen!" he cried gayly, giving
the view halloo!  Galloping forward under the fire of the British
battery, he called to Mercer's shattered men.  They halted and faced
about; the Seventh Virginia broke through the wood on the flank of the
British; Hitchcock's New Englanders came up on the run with fixed
bayonets; Moulder's Philadelphia battery opened fire from the hill on
the opposing guns.

The fire of a warrior had now supplanted the coolness of a general.
Dashing boldly forward, reckless of the storm of bullets, to within
thirty yards of the British line, and smiling with stern pleasure in
the crisis which seemed to develop and bring out every fibre of his
deep nature, he called upon his men to come on.  Recovering themselves,
they responded with the utmost gallantry.  Mawhood was surrounded and
outnumbered, his victory suddenly changed to defeat; but, excellent
soldier that he was, he fought on with desperate resolution, and the
conflict was exceedingly hot.  Washington was in the thick of it.
Seymour, who had followed him closely until the general broke away in
the smoke to lead the charge, lost sight of him for a moment, enveloped
as he was in the dust and smoke of the battle.  When he saw him emerge
from the cloud, waving his sword, and beheld the enemy giving way on
every side, he spurred up to him.

"Thank God!" he said; "your excellency is safe."

"Away! away! my dear Seymour," he cried, "and bring up the troops.  The
day is our own!"

To the day of his death Seymour never lost the splendid impression of
that heroic figure, the ruddy face streaked with smoke and dust, the
eyes blazing with the joy of battle, the excitement of the charge, the
mighty sweep of the mighty arm!  Mawhood's men were, indeed, routed in
every direction; most of them laid down their arms.  A small party
only, under that intrepid leader, succeeded in forcing its way through
the American ranks with the bayonet, and ran at full speed toward
Trenton under the stimulus of a hot pursuit.

Meanwhile the Fifty-fifth Regiment had been vigorously attacked by St.
Clair's brigade, and, after a short action, those who could get away
were in full retreat towards New Brunswick.  The last regiment, the
Fortieth, had not been able to get into action at all; a part of it
fled in a panic, with the remains of the Fifty-fifth, towards New
Brunswick, hotly pursued by Washington with the Philadelphia City Troop
and what cavalry he could muster, and the rest took refuge in the
college building in Princeton, from which they were dislodged by
artillery and compelled to surrender.  The British loss was about five
hundred in killed and wounded and prisoners, the American less than one
hundred; but among the latter were many valuable officers,--Colonels
Haslet and Potter, Major Morris, Captains Shippen, Fleming, Talbot,
Neal, and General Mercer.

After following the retiring and demoralized British for a few miles,
Washington determined to abandon the pursuit.  The men were exhausted
by their long and fatiguing marches, and were in no condition to make
the long march to New Brunswick; most of them were still ill equipped
and entirely unfitted for the fatigue and exposure of a further winter
campaign,--even those iron men must have rest at last.  The flying
British must have informed Leslie's troops, six miles away, of the
situation; they would soon be upon them, and they might expect
Cornwallis with his whole force at any time.  He drew off his troops,
therefore, and, leaving a strong party to break down the bridge over
Stony Brook and impede the advance of the English as much as possible,
he pushed on towards Pluckamin and Morristown, officers and men
thoroughly satisfied with their brilliant achievements.

Early in the morning the pickets of Cornwallis' army discovered that
something was wrong in the American camp; the guard had been withdrawn,
the fires had been allowed to die away, and the place was as still as
death.  A few adventurous spirits, cautiously crossing the bridge,
found that the guns mounted in front of it were only "quakers," and
that the whole camp was empty,--the army had decamped silently, and
stolen away before their eyes!  My Lord Cornwallis, rudely disturbed
from those rosy dreams of conquest with which a mocking spirit had
beguiled his slumber, would not credit the first report of his
astonished officers; but investigation showed him that the "old fox"
was gone, and he would not be bagged that morning--nor on any other
morning, either!  But where had he gone?  For a time the perplexed and
chagrined commander could not ascertain.

The Americans had vanished--disappeared--leaving absolutely no trace
behind them, and it was not until he heard the heavy booming of cannon
from the northeast, borne upon the frosty air of the cold morning about
sunrise, that he divined the brilliant plan of his wily antagonist and
discovered his whereabouts.  He had been outfought, outmanoeuvred,
outflanked, and outgeneralled!  The disgusted British were sent back
over the familiar road to Princeton, now in hotter haste than before.
His rear-guard menaced, perhaps overwhelmed, his stores and supplies in
danger, Cornwallis pushed on for life this time.  The English officer
conceived a healthy respect for Washington at this juncture which did
not leave him thereafter.

The short distance between Trenton and Princeton on the direct road was
passed in a remarkably short time by the now thoroughly aroused and
anxious British.  A little party under command of Seymour and Kelly,
which had been assiduously engaged in breaking down the bridge over
Stony Brook, was observed and driven away by two field-pieces, which
had been halted and unlimbered on a commanding hill, and which opened
fire while the troops advanced on a run; but the damage had been done,
and the bridge was already impassable.  After a futile attempt to
repair it, in which much time was lost, the indefatigable earl sent his
troops through the icy water of the turbulent stream, which rose
breast-high upon the eager men, and the hasty pursuit was once more
resumed.  A mile or so beyond the bridge the whole army was brought to
a stand by a sudden discharge from a heavy gun, which did some
execution; it was mounted in a breastwork some distance ahead.  The
army was halted, men were sent ahead to reconnoitre, and a strong
column deployed to storm what was supposed to be a heavy battery.  When
the storming party reached the works, there was no one there!  A lone
thirty-two-pounder, too unwieldy to accompany the rapid march of the
Americans, had been left behind, and Philip Wilton had volunteered to
remain, after Seymour's party had passed, and further delay the British
by firing it at their army as soon as they came in range.  These delays
had given Washington so much of a start that Cornwallis, despairing of
ever overtaking him, finally gave up the pursuit, and pushed on in
great anxiety to New Brunswick, to save, if possible, his magazines,
which he had the satisfaction in the end of finding intact.

To complete this brief _résumé_ of one of the remarkable campaigns of
history, Washington strongly fortified himself on Cornwallis' flank at
Morristown, menacing each of the three depots held by the British
outside New York; Putnam advanced from Philadelphia to Trenton, with
the militia; and Heath moved down to the highlands of the Hudson.  The
country people of New Jersey rose and cut off scattered detachments of
the British in every direction, until the whole of the field was
eventually abandoned by them, except Amboy, Newark, and New Brunswick.
The world witnessed the singular spectacle of a large, well-appointed
army of veteran soldiery, under able leaders, shut up in practically
one spot, New York and a few near-by villages, and held there
inexorably by a phantom army which never was more than half the size of
that it held in check!  The results of the six months' campaign were to
be seen in the possession of the city of New York by the British army.
That army, which had won, practically, all the battles in which it had
engaged, which had followed the Americans through six months of
disastrous defeat and retreat, and had overrun two colonies, now had
nothing to show for all its efforts but the ground upon which it stood!
And this was the result of the genius, the courage, the audacity of one
man,--George Washington!  The world was astounded, and he took an
assured place thenceforward among the first soldiers of that or any age.

Even the English themselves could not withhold their admiration.  The
gallant and brave Cornwallis, a soldier of no mean ability himself, and
well able to estimate what could be done with a small and feeble force,
never forgot his surprise at the Assunpink; and when he congratulated
Washington, at the surrender of Yorktown years after, upon the
brilliant combination which had resulted in the capture of the army, he
added these words: "But, after all, your excellency's achievements in
the Jerseys were such that nothing could surpass them!"  And the witty
and wise old cynic, Mr. Horace Walpole, with his usual discrimination,
wrote to a friend, Sir Horace Mann, when he heard of the affair at
Trenton, the night march to Princeton, and the successful attack there:
"Washington, the dictator, has shown himself both a Fabius and a
Camillus.  His march through our lines is allowed to have been a
prodigy of generalship!"




CHAPTER XXVIII

_The British Play "Taps"_

The day after the battle Washington sent his nephew, Major Lewis, under
protection of a flag of truce, to attend upon the wounded General
Mercer; the exigency of his pursuit of the flying British and their
subsequent pursuit of him having precluded him from giving to his old
friend that personal attention which would have so accorded with his
kindly heart and the long affection in which he had held the old
Scotchman.  Seymour received permission to accompany Lewis, in order to
ascertain if possible what had become of Talbot.

The men of Mercer's command reported that they had seen the two
officers dismounted and fighting bravely, after having refused to
retreat.  The two young officers were very melancholy as they rode
along the familiar road.  Lewis belonged to a Virginia regiment, and
had known both Mercer and Talbot well, and in fact all the officers who
had been killed.  The officers of that little army were like a band of
brothers, and after every battle there was a general mourning for the
loss of many friends.  The casualties among the officers in the sharp
engagement had been unusually severe, and entirely disproportioned to
the total loss; the bulk of the loss had fallen upon Mercer's brigade.

They found the general in Clark's farmhouse, near the field of battle,
lingering in great pain, and slowly dying from a number of ferocious
bayonet wounds.  He was attended by his aid, Major Armstrong, and the
celebrated Dr. Benjamin Rush came especially from Philadelphia to give
the dying hero the benefit of his skill and services.  He had been
treated with the greatest respect by the enemy, for Cornwallis was
always quick to recognize and respect a gallant soldier.  The kindly
Quakers had spared neither time nor trouble to lighten his dying hours,
and the women of the household nursed him with gentle and assiduous
care.  He passed away ten days after the battle, leaving to his
descendants the untarnished name of a gallant soldier and gentleman,
who never faltered in the pursuit of his high ideals of duty.  Brief as
had been his career as a general in the Revolution, his memory is still
cherished by a grateful posterity, as one of the first heroes of that
mighty struggle for liberty.

Details of the British were already marching toward the field of action
to engage in the melancholy work of burying the dead, when Seymour,
under Major Armstrong's guidance, went over the ground in a search for
Talbot.  He had no difficulty in finding the place where his friend had
fallen.  The field had not been disturbed by any one.  A bloody frozen
mass of ice and snow had shown where Mercer had fallen, and across the
place where his feet had been lay the body of Talbot.  In front of him
lay the lieutenant with whom he had fought, the sword still buried in
his breast; farther away were the two men that the general and he had
cut down in the first onslaught, and at his feet was the corpse of the
man he had last shot, his stiffened hands still tightly clasping his
gun.  Around on the field were the bodies of many others who had
fallen.  Some of the Americans had been literally pinned to the earth
by the fierce bayonet thrusts they had received in the charge; some of
the British had been frightfully mangled and mashed by blows from the
clubbed rifles of the Americans before they had retreated.  Off to the
right a long line of motionless bodies marked where the Pennsylvania
militia had advanced and halted; there in the centre, lying in heaps,
were the reminders of the fiercest spot of the little conflict, where
Moulder's battery had been served with such good effect; here was the
place where Washington had led the charge.

In one brief quarter of an hour nearly three hundred men had given up
their lives, on this little farm, and there they lay attesting in mute
silence their fidelity to their principles, warm red coat and tattered
blue coat side by side, peace between them at last; indifferent each to
the severities of nature or the passions of men; unheeding alike the
ambitions of kings, the obstinacy of parliaments, or the desire of
liberty on the part of peoples.  Some were lying calmly, as if their
last moments had been as peaceful as when little children they laid
themselves down to sleep; others twisted and contorted with looks of
horror and anguish fixed upon their mournful faces, which bespoke
agonies attending the departure of life like to the travail pains with
which it had been ushered into existence.  Seymour with a sad heart
stooped and turned over the body of his friend, lifting his face once
more to that heaven he had gazed upon so bravely a few hours since--for
it was morning again, but oh, how different!  The face was covered with
blood from the wound in the forehead, by which he had been beaten down.
Sadly, tenderly, gratefully, remembering an hour when Talbot had knelt
by his side and performed a similar service, he endeavored to wipe the
lurid stains from off his marble brow.  Then a thought came to him.
Taking from his breast Katharine's handkerchief, which had never left
him, he moistened it in the snow, and finding an unstained place where
her dainty hand had embroidered her initials "K. W.," he carefully
wiped clean the white face of his dead friend.  There was a little
smile upon Talbot's lips, and a look of peace and calm upon his face,
which Seymour had not seen him wear since the sinking of the frigate.
His right hand, whiter than the lace which drooped over it, was pressed
against his heart, evidently as the result of his last conscious
movement.  Seymour bent down and lifted it up gently; there was
something beneath it inside his waistcoat.  The young sailor reverently
inserted his hand and drew it forth.  It was a plain gold locket.
Touching the spring, it opened, and there were pictured the faces of
the two women Talbot had loved,--on the one side the mother, stately,
proud, handsome, resolute, the image of the man himself; on the other,
the brown eyes and the fair hair and the red lips of beautiful
Katharine Wilton.  There was a letter too in the pocket.  The bayonet
thrust which had reached his heart had gone through it, and it, and the
locket also, was stained with blood.  The letter was addressed to
Seymour; wondering, he broke the seal and read it.  It was a brief
note, written in camp the night of the march.  It would seem that
Talbot had a presentiment that he might die in the coming conflict;
indeed the letter plainly showed that he meant to seek death, to court
it in the field.  His mother was to be told that he had done his duty,
and had not failed in sustaining the traditions of his honorable house;
and the honest soldierly little note ended with these words,--


_As for you, my dear Seymour, would that fate had been kinder to you!
Were Katharine alive, I would crave your permission to say these words
to her: 'I love you, Kate,--I've always loved you--but the better man
has won you.'  My best love to the old mother.  Won't you take it to
her?  And good-by, and God bless you!----Hilary Talbot._


The brilliance went out of the sunshine, the brightness faded out of
the morning, and Seymour stood there with the tears running down his
cheeks,--not ashamed to weep for his friend.  And yet the man was with
Kate, he thought, and happy,--he could almost envy him his quiet sleep.
The course of his thoughts was rudely broken by the approach of a party
of horsemen, who rode up to where he stood.  Their leader, a bold
handsome young man, of distinguished appearance, in the brilliant dress
of a British general officer, reined in his steed close by him, and
addressed him.

"How now, sir!  Weeping?  Tears do not become a soldier!"

"Ah, sir," said Seymour, saluting, and pointing down to Talbot's body
at the same time, "not even when one mourns the death of a friend?"

"Your friend, sir?" replied the general officer, courteously,
uncovering and looking down at the bodies with interest; his practised
eye immediately taking in the details of the little conflict.

"He did not go to his death alone," he said meaningly.  "'Fore Gad,
sir, here has been a pretty fight!  Your name and rank, sir?"

"Lieutenant John Seymour, of the American Continental navy, volunteer
aid on his excellency General Washington's staff."

"And what do you here?  Are you a prisoner?"

"No, sir, I came with Major Lewis to visit General Mercer, and to look
for my friend, under cover of a flag of truce."

"Ha!  How is General Mercer?"

"Frightfully wounded; he cannot live very long now."

"He was a gallant fellow, so I am told, sir, and fought the father of
his majesty in the '45."

"Yes," said Seymour, simply; "this is where he fell."

The general looked curiously about him.

"And who was your dead friend?" he continued.

"Captain Hilary Talbot, of Virginia, of General Washington's staff."

"What!  Not Talbot of Fairview Hall on the Potomac?" said one of the
officers.

"The same, sir."

"Gad, my lord, Madam Talbot's a red-hot Tory!  She swears by the king.
I 've been entertained at the house,--not when the young man was there,
but while he was away,--and a fine place it is.  Well, here 's a house
divided truly!"

"Is it indeed so, Mr. Seymour?"

The young man nodded affirmatively.

"What were you proposing to do with the body?"

"Bury it near here, sir, in the cemetery on the hill by the college.
We have no means of transporting it hence."

"Well, you shall do so, and we will bury him like a soldier.  I
remember the family now, in England, very well.  Don't they call them
the Loyal Talbots?  Yes, I thought so.  He was a rebel, and so far
false to his creed, but a gentleman nevertheless, and a brave one too.
Look at the fight he made here, gentlemen!  Damme, he shall have an
escort of the king's own troops, and Lord Cornwallis himself and his
staff for his chief mourners! eh, Erskine?" said the gallant earl,
turning to the officer who rode near him.

"How will that suit you, Mr. Seymour?  You can tell that to his poor
old mother too, when you see her once again.  Some of you bring up a
company of troops and get a gun carriage,--there's an abandoned one of
Mawhood's over there,--and we 'll take him up properly.  Have you a
horse, sir?  Ah, that's well, and bring a Prayer Book if you can find
one,--I doubt if there be any in my staff.  I presume the man was a
Churchman, and he shall have prayers too.  We have no coffin for him,
either; but stay--here 's my own cloak, a proper shroud for a soldier,
surely that will do nicely; and now let us go on, gentlemen."

In a short time the martial cortége reached the little Presbyterian
cemetery.  The young man wrapped in the general's cloak was soon laid
away in the shallow grave, which had hastily been made ready for him.
Seymour, attended by the two other American officers, Armstrong and
Lewis, after cutting off a lock of Talbot's dark hair for his mother,
read the burial service out of the young soldier's own little Prayer
Book, which he had found in the pocket of his coat; as the earth was
put upon him, Cornwallis and his officers stood about reverently
uncovered, while the sailor read with faltering lips the old familiar
words, which for twenty centuries have whispered of comfort to the
heart-broken children of men, and illumined the dark future by an
eternal hope--nay, rather, fixed assurance--of life everlasting.

There was one tender-hearted woman there too, one of the sweet-faced
daughters of the kindly Quaker, Miss Clark.  She had taken time to
twine a hasty wreath from the fragrant ever-verdant pine; when the
little mound of earth was finished, softly she laid it down, breathing
a prayer for the mother in far-off Virginia as she did so.

Then they all drew back while the well-trained soldiers fired the last
three volleys, and the drummers beat the last call.  'T was the same
simple ending which closes the career of all soldiers, of whatever
degree, when they come to occupy those narrow quarters, where earthly
considerations of rank and station are forgot.

"Sir, I beg to thank you for this distinguished courtesy," said
Seymour, with deep feeling, extending his hand to the knightly Briton.

"Do not mention it, sir, I beg of you," replied Cornwallis, shaking his
hand warmly.  "You will do the same for one of us, I am sure, should
occasion ever demand a like service at your hands.  I will see that
your other men and officers are properly buried.  Do you return now?"

"Immediately, my lord."

"Pray present my compliments to Mr.--nay, General--Washington," said
the generous commander, "and congratulate him upon his brilliant
campaign.  Ay, and tell him we look forward eagerly to trying
conclusions with him again.  Good-by, sir.  Come, gentlemen," he cried,
raising his hat gracefully as he mounted his horse and rode away,
followed by his staff.




CHAPTER XXIX

_The Last of the Talbots_

It was with a sinking heart that Seymour rode up the hill toward Fairview
Hall a few days later.  There had been a light fall of snow during the
preceding night, and the brilliant sun of the early morning had not yet
gained sufficient strength to melt it away.  There was a softening touch
therefore about the familiar scene, and Seymour, who had never viewed it
in the glory of its summer, thought he had never known it to look so
beautiful.  Heartily greeted as he passed on by the various servants of
the family, with whom he was a great favorite, he finally drew rein and
dismounted before the great flight of steps which led up to the terrace
upon which the house stood.  His arrival had not been unnoticed, and
Madam Talbot was standing in the doorway to greet him.  He noticed that
she looked paler and thinner and older, but she held herself as erect and
carried herself as proudly as she had always done.  Grief and
disappointment and broken hope might change and destroy the natural
tissues and fibres of her being, but they could not alter her iron will.
Tossing the bridle to one of the attendant servants, Seymour, hat in
hand, walked slowly up the steps and across the grass plat, and stepped
upon the porch.  She watched him in silence, with a frightful sinking of
the heart; the gravity of his demeanor and the pallor of his face, in
which she seemed to detect a shade of pity which her pride resented,
apprised her that whatever news he had brought would be ill for her to
hear, but her rigid face and composed manner gave no indication of the
deadly conflict within.  Seymour bowed low to her, and she returned his
salute with a sweeping courtesy, old-fashioned and graceful.

"Lieutenant Seymour is very welcome to Fairview Hall, though I trust it
be not the compelling necessity of a wound which makes him seek our
hospitality again," she said, faintly smiling.

"Oh, madam," said Seymour, softly, yet in utter desperation as to how to
begin, "unfortunately it is not to be cured of wounds, but to inflict
them that this time I am come.  I--I am sorry--that I have to tell you
that--I--" he continued with great hesitation.

"You are a bearer of ill tidings, I perceive," she continued gravely.
"Speak your message, sir.  Whatever it may be, I trust the God I serve to
give me strength to bear it.  Is it--is it--Hilary?" she went on, with
just a suggestion of a break in her even, carefully modulated tones.

"Yes, dear madam.  He--he--"

"Stop!  I had almost forgotten my duty.  Tell me first of the armies of
my king.  The king first of all with our house, you know."

Poor Seymour! he must overwhelm her with bad news in every field of her
affection.  For a moment he almost wished the results had been the other
way.  The perspiration stood out upon his forehead in spite of the
coldness, and he felt he would rather charge a battery than face this
terrible old woman who put the armies of a king--and such a king
too--before the fate of her only son!  And yet he knew that what he had
to tell her would break down even her iron will, and reaching the
mother's heart beating warm within her in spite of her assumed coldness
and self-repression, would probably give her a death-blow.  He felt
literally like a murderer before her, but he had to answer.  Talbot's own
letter, General Washington's command, and the promptings of his own
affection had made him an actor in this pathetic drama.  He had no choice
but to proceed.  The truth must be told.  Nerving himself to the
inevitable, he replied to her question,--

"The armies of the king have been defeated and forced to retire.  General
Washington has outmanoeuvred and outfought them; they are now shut up in
New York again.  The Jerseys are free, and we have taken upward of two
thousand prisoners, and many are killed and wounded among them,--on both
sides, in truth," he added.

"The worst news first," she replied.  "One knows not why these things are
so.  It seems the God of Justice slumbers when subjects rebel against
their rightful kings!  But I have faith, sir.  The right will win in the
end--must win."

"So be it," he said, accepting the implied challenge, but adding nothing
further.  He would wait to be questioned now, and this strange woman
should have the story in the way that pleased her best.  As for her she
could not trust herself to speak.  Never before had her trembling body,
her beating heart escaped from the domination of her resolute will.
Never before had her mobile lips refused to formulate the commands of her
active brain.  She fought her battle out in silence, and finally turned
toward him once more.

"There was something else you said, I think.  My--my son?"  Her voice
sank to a whisper; in spite of herself one hand went to her heart.  Ah,
mother, mother, this was indeed thy king!  "Is--is he wounded?--My God,
sir!  Not dead?"

His open hand which he had extended to her held two little objects.  What
were they?  The bright sunlight was reflected from one of them, the
locket she had given him.  There was a dark discoloration on one side of
it which she had never seen before.  The other was his Prayer Book.  O
God--prayer!  Was there then a God, that such things could happen?  Where
was He that day?  She had given that book to him when he was yet a child.
"Dead,"--she whispered,--"dead," shrinking back and staring at him.

"Would God I had died in his place, dear madam!" he said with infinite
pity.

"How--how was it?" she went on, dry-eyed, in agony, moistening her
cracking lips.

"Fighting like a hero over the body of General Mercer at Princeton.  His
men retreated and left them--"

"The rebel cowards," she interrupted.

"Nay, not cowards, but perhaps less brave than he.  The British charged
with their bayonets; our men had not that weapon, they fell back."

"Were you there, sir?"

"Surely not!  Should I be here now if I had been there then, madam?" he
replied proudly.

"True, true! you at least are a gentleman.  Forgive the question."

"General Mercer and some of his officers sprang at the line.  I had it
from his own lips.  Some one cut the general down; Hilary interposed, and
enabled him to rise to his feet; they were attacked, fought bravely
until--until--they died."

Stricken to the death at least, but determined to die as the rest had
died, fighting, she drew herself up resolutely, and lifted her hand to
that pitiless heaven above her.  "So--be--it--unto--all--the--enemies--"
When had he heard her say that before, he wondered in horror.  She
stopped, her face went whiter before him, the light went out of it.

"Oh, my son, my son--O God, my son, my son--Oh, give him back, my son--my
son!"  She reeled and fell against him, moaning and beating the air with
her little feeble hands.  The break had come at last; she was no longer a
Talbot, but a woman.  With infinite pity and infinite care he half led,
half carried her into the house, and then, after being bidden not to
summon assistance, he sank down on his knees by her side, where she lay
on the sofa in the parlor, crushed, broken, feeble, helpless, old.  With
many interruptions he told her the sad story.  He laid the long dark lock
of hair he had cut from her son's head in her hand.  There was a letter
from George Washington which he read to her, in which, after many tender
words of consolation, he spoke of Talbot as "one who would have done
honor to any country."  He told her of that military funeral, the kind
words of Cornwallis, the guard of honor, the soldiers of the king, and
then he put Talbot's own letter to him before her, and she must be told
of the loss of the frigate.  Kate dead too, and Colonel Wilton.  Alas,
poor friends!  But all her plans and hopes were gone; what mattered
it--what mattered anything now!

"Oh, what a load must those unrighteous men bear before God who have
inaugurated this wicked war!" she cried; but no echo of her reproach was
heard in the houses of Parliament in London, or whispered in the
antechamber of the king, to whom, assuredly, they belonged.

And by and by he left her.  It wrung his heart so to do, but the call of
duty was stronger than her need.  His ship was ready, or would be in a
short time, and he had snatched a few days from his pressing work to
fulfil this task.  His presence was absolutely necessary on the vessel,
and he must go.  Saying nay to her piteous plea that he should stay, and
most reluctantly refusing her proffers of hospitality, after leaving with
her the letters and the pictures, he left the room.  But in the doorway
he looked back at her.  The tears had come at last.  Moved by a sudden
impulse, he ran back and knelt down by her, and took her old face between
his hands and kissed her.

"Good-by, dear madam," he whispered; "would it had been I!"

She laid her thin hands upon his head.

"Good-by," she whispered; "God bless you.  Oh, my boy--my boy!"  She
turned her face to the wall in bitterness, and so he fled.

On the brow of the hill one could see, if he were keen-eyed, the Wilton
place.  There was the boat-house.  There she had said she loved him.  He
struck spurs to his horse and galloped madly away.  Was there nothing but
grief and sorrow, then, under the sun?

The lawyer and the doctor and the minister were with Madam Talbot all
that day, but it was little they could do.  She added a codicil to her
will with the lawyer, submissively took the medicine the doctor left her,
and listened quietly to the prayers of the priest.  In the morning they
found her whiter, stiller, calmer than ever.  She had gone to meet her
son in that new country where none rebel against the King!




BOOK IV

A DEATH GRAPPLE ON THE DEEP



CHAPTER XXX

_A Sailor's Opinion of the Land_

It was a delightful morning in February.  The Continental ship
Randolph, a tight little thirty-two-gun frigate, the first to get to
sea of those ordered by Congress in 1775, was just leaving the
beautiful harbor of Charleston, South Carolina, by way of the main ship
channel, on her maiden cruise, under the command of Captain John
Seymour Seymour, late first lieutenant of the Ranger.  This was the
second departure she had taken from that port.  Forced by severe
damages, incurred in an encounter with a heavy gale shortly after
leaving Philadelphia, to put into that harbor for needed repairs to the
new and unsettled vessel, she had put to sea again after a short
interval, and in one week had taken six valuable prizes, one of them,
an armed vessel of twenty guns, after a short action.  After this brief
and brilliant excursion she had put back to Charleston to dispose of
her prizes, re-collect her prize crews, and land her prisoners.

There was another motive, however, for the sudden return.  From one of
the prizes it had been learned that the English thirty-two-gun frigate
Carrysford, the twenty-gun sloop Perseus, the sixteen-gun sloop
Hinchinbrook, with several privateers, had been cruising off the coast
together, and the commander of the Randolph was most anxious to get the
help of some of the South Carolina State cruisers to go in search of
the British ships.  The indefatigable Governor Rutledge, when the news
had been communicated to him, had worked assiduously to provide the
State ships, and the young captain of the Randolph speedily found
himself at the head of a little fleet of war vessels outward bound.

The departure of the squadron, the Randolph in the lead, the rest
following, and all under full sail, made a pretty picture to the
enthusiastic Carolinians, who watched them from the islands and
fortifications in the harbor, and from a number of small boats which
accompanied the war ships a short distance on their voyage.  Besides
Seymour's own vessel, there were the eighteen-gun ship General
Moultrie, the two sixteen-gun ships Notre Dame and Polly, and the
fourteen-gun brig Fair American; the last commanded by a certain
master, Philip Wilton.  They made officers of very young men in those
days, and mere boys often occupied positions of trust and
responsibility apparently far beyond their years,--even Seymour
himself, though now a commodore or flag officer by courtesy, was very
young for the position; and Governor Rutledge, moved by a warm
friendship of long standing for old Colonel Wilton, and upon Seymour's
own urgent recommendation, had intrusted the smallest vessel to young
Captain Philip.  We shall see how he showed himself worthy of the trust
reposed in him in spite of his tender years.

All of these ships were converted merchantmen, hastily fitted out,
poorly adapted for any warlike purpose, and, with the exception of the
Fair American, exceedingly slow and unwieldy; but the heart of the
young commander filled with pride as he surveyed the little squadron,
which followed in his wake, looking handsome enough under full sail.
It was a great trust and responsibility reposed in his skill and
experience; doubtless it was the only fleet the country had assembled,
or could assemble, at that time; the ships were certainly not as he
would have desired them, but they were the best that could be got
together; and manned and officered by devoted men, they could at least
fight ships of their own size when the time came, and he trusted to be
able to give a good account of the enemy, should they be so fortunate
as to fall in with them.  As for his own vessel, as his practised and
critical eye surveyed the graceful proportions of the new and
well-appointed ship, Seymour felt entirely satisfied with her.  He
regarded with pleasant appreciation the decks white as constant
holy-stoning could make them, the long rows of grim black guns
thrusting out their formidable muzzles on either side, and the lofty
spars covered with clouds of new and snowy canvas.  Everything was as
neat and trim, and as ready, as ardor, experience, and ability, coupled
with a generous expenditure from his own purse, could make them.  He
was satisfied with his officers and crew too.  Seymour's reputation,
his recent association with Paul Jones, the romantic story of his last
successful cruise, the esteem in which he was held by Washington, and
his own charming personality had conspired to render him a great
favorite, and he had had the pick of Philadelphia's hardy seamen and
gallant officers ere he sailed away.  The three hundred and odd seamen
and marines who comprised the crew were as fit and capable a body of
men as ever trod the deck of a ship.  Constant exercise and careful
instruction, and drill and target practice, had made them exceedingly
able in all the necessary manoeuvres, and in the handling of the guns.

Forward on the forecastle old Bentley was planted, surrounded by such
of the older and more experienced petty officers and men as he
permitted to associate with him on terms of more or less familiarity.
Not only the position he occupied, that of boatswain of the frigate,
gave him a vast importance with the men, but his age and experience,
his long association with the captain, as well as some almost
incredible tales of his familiar companionship with certain men of
awe-inspiring name and great renown, with various mighty feats of arms
in recent campaigns, vaguely current, conduced to make him the monarch
of the forecastle, and the arbiter of the various discussions and
arguments among the men, who rarely ventured to dispute the dictum of
their oracle.

"Well, here we are pointing out again, thank the Lord!" he said to his
particular friend and crony among the crew, the carpenter, Richard
Spicer, a battered old shell-back, like himself.  "There is only one
place from which I like to see the land, Richard!"

"And where is that, bosun?"

"Over the stern, as now, mate, when we 're going free with a fair wind,
and leaving it fast behind.  I feel safer then.  A time since and I
felt as if I never wanted to see it again from any place.  To think of
me, a decent God-fearing, seafaring man, at my time of life, turning
soldier!"  It is not in the power of written language to express the
peculiar intonation of contempt which the old man laid upon that
inoffensive word, "soldier."  No one venturing to interrupt him, after
staring at his particular aversion for a few moments, he went on more
mildly, and in a reflective tone,--

"Not but what I have seen some decent soldiers--a few.  There was old
Blodgett, and young Mr. Talbot, ay, and General Washington too!  Now
there 's a man for you, ship-mates.  Lord, what a sailorman he would
have made!  They tell me he had a midshipman's warrant offered him when
he was a lad once, and actually refused it--refused it! preferred to be
a soldier, and what a chance he lost!  Might have been an admiral by
now!"

"I 've heard tell as how 't was his mother that prevented him from
goin' to sea--when he was ready an' willin' an' waitin' to get aboard,"
returned one of the men.

"May be, may be.  The result's the same.  You never can tell what
women, and 'specially mothers, will do.  They 're necessary, of course,
leastways it's generally believed we all had 'em, though I remember
none myself, nor Captain Seymour neither, and he 's a pretty good sort
of a man--let alone me--but they've no place aboard ship.  Now look
what this one did,--spoiled a man that had the makin's of a first-class
sailor in him, and turned him into a soldier!"

"But where would we be in this country of ours now, bosun, if it were
not for the soldiers?  No, no, don't be too hard on this man, Captain
Washington; he 's done his duty, and is doing it very well, too, so I
'm told, accordin' to your own account, matey," replied the old
carpenter; "and soldiers is good too--in their places, that is, of
course," he went on deprecatingly.  "There are two kinds of men, as I
take it, William, to do the fightin' in this world, sailormen and
soldiermen; each has a place, a station to fill, and something to do,
and one can't do t' other's work.  Look at that there blasted marine,
aft there in the gangway, for instance; he's a good man, I make no
manner o' doubt, and he has got his place on this barkey, even if he is
only a kind of a soldier and no sailorman at all."

"Now I asks you, Chips, what particular good are soldiers, anyway,
leaving marines out of the question, for they do live on ships," said
the old sailorman.  "What can they do that we can't?  They can fight,
and fight hard--I 've seen 'em, but so can we," he continued, extending
his brawny arm; "and they can march, too,--I've seen their bloody
footmarks in the snow; but there were sailormen there that kept right
alongside of 'em and did all that they could do.  Oh, I forgot one
thing--they can ride horses, that's one thing I could never learn at
all!  You 'd ought to seen me on one of the land-lubberly brutes.  A
horse has no place on shipboard, no more than a woman, and I 've no use
for either of 'em.  But if this country would spend all its money
buying ships, and man 'em with real first-class sailormen, why, d'ye
see, King George's men could never land on our shores at all.  We 'd
keep 'em off, and then there'd be no use for the soldiers; they could
all go a-farming.  No, give me ships every time, they always win.  I
know what I am talking about; I have been on the shore for a month at a
time until I thought I would turn into mud itself.  No, 't is not even
a fit place to be buried in; 'earth to earth' won't do for me when I
die; I just want to be dropped overboard--there."

"There is one time ships didn't win," said the carpenter, persisting in
the argument, and pointing aft to the low mounds of sand backed by the
rudely interlaced palmetto logs, behind which the gallant Moultrie had
fought Barker's fleet six months before, until the ships had been
driven off in defeat.

"Those were British ships, man," said the old sailor, with contempt.
"I meant Americans, of course; it makes all the difference in the
world.  But as for land--I hate it.  It's only good to grow vegetables,
and soft tack, and fresh water, and tar, and timber, and breed children
to make sailormen out of--why, it's a sort of a cook's galley, a
kitchen they call it there, for the sea at best!  Give me the sight of
blue water, and let me have the solid feel of the deck beneath my feet;
no unsteady earth for me!"

"Well, that's my own opinion, too, bo.  But, after all, that's all that
ships is good for, anyway; just to sail from land to land and take
people and things from place to place.  The sea's between like."

"You look at it the wrong way, mate.  Certain of us men have sense
enough to live on the sea, and keep away from land, except for water
and provision.  We go from sea to sea, and land 's between."

"And what would you do for a country if we had no land?  You 're always
talking about lovin' your country, bosun."

"Ay, that I do," said the old man.  "I look upon a country, that is a
land country, as a kind of necessary evil.  My country 's this ship,
and yon flag, what it means and stands for.  It means liberty, free
waters, no interference with peaceful traders on the high seas,
following their rightful pursuits, by British ships-of-war.  Every man
that has ever been aboard of one of those floating hells knows what
liberty is not, well enough.  No taxing of us by a Parliament on t'
other side of the world, neither.  No king but the captain.  Freedom!
So free that the lubberliest landsman on shore has a right to govern
himself--if he can--subject to discipline and the commands of his
superior officer, of course; and, besides, it's like a man's wife; if
he's got to have one, he may beat her and abuse her, perhaps, but
nobody else shall.  No!  Land's a pretty poor sort of a thing in
general, but that aft there is the best there is going, and it 's our
own.  We 'll die for it, yes, for love of it, if it comes to that, even
if we do hate it, on general principles mind, you understand."

There was evidently a trace of Irish blood in the old sailor, it would
seem, and so saying, with a wave of his hand, which brushed aside
further argument, he turned abruptly on his heel and walked aft.  In
spite of all his words, which only reflected the usual opinion of
sailors, in those days at least, he yielded to no man in patriotism and
devotion to the cause of liberty and the land that gave him birth.  And
no man in all Washington's army had done better service, marched more
cheerfully, or fought harder than this veteran seaman.  The men on the
forecastle generally agreed with him in his propositions, but the
obstinate old carpenter, with the characteristic tenacity of the
ancient tar, maintained the discussion forward, until the sharp voice
of the officer of the deck sent all hands to the braces.  The ship was
brought to the wind on the starboard tack, a manoeuvre which was
followed in succession by the other vessels of the squadron, which had
been previously directed to keep, though still within signal, at long
distances from each other during the day, closing up at night, in order
to spread a broad clew and give greater chance of meeting the enemy.

The young captain paced the quarter-deck alone--no man is ever so much
alone among his fellows as the commander of a ship--a prey to his own
sad thoughts.  Those who had known him the gayest of gay young sailors
in Philadelphia were at a loss to account for the change which had come
over him.  He had become the gravest of the grave, his cheery laugh was
heard no more, and the baffled young belles of Charleston had voted him
a confirmed woman-hater; though his melancholy, handsome face, graceful
person, distinguished bearing, and high station might have enabled him
to pick and choose where he would.  But there was room in his heart for
no more passions.  Even his love of country and liberty had degenerated
into a slow, cold hate for the British, and a desperate resolve to do
his duty, and make his animosity tell when he struck.  A dangerous man
under whom to sail, gentleman of the Randolph, and a dangerous man to
meet, as well.  He could not forget Kate, and, except in the
distraction of a combat, life was a mere mechanical routine for him.
But because he had been well trained he went through it well--biding
his time.




CHAPTER XXXI

_Seymour's Desperate Resolution_

Six rather uneventful days passed by, during which prizes to the number
of five fell to the lot of the squadron, one loaded with military
stores, and another with provisions of great value.  The lively little
Fair American, being far to windward of the fleet, had also a smart
action with a heavily armed British privateer, which struck her flag
before the others could get within range, and was found to be loaded
with valuable portable goods, the siftings of a long and successful
cruise.  Young Wilton had manoeuvred and fought his ship well, and had
been publicly complimented in general orders by Seymour for skill and
gallantry.  The fleet had been exercised in signals and in various
simple evolutions, the weather was most pleasant, the men in excellent
spirits, and all that was necessary to complete their happiness was the
appearance of the looked-for squadron of the enemy.  The eager lookouts
swept the seas unweariedly, but in vain, until early in the afternoon
of the sixth day, the fleet being in Longitude 58 degrees 18 minutes
West, Latitude 14 degrees 30 minutes North, about forty leagues east of
Martinique, heading due west on the starboard tack, it was reported to
Seymour, who was reading in the cabin, that the Fair American, again
far in the lead and somewhat to windward, had signalled a large sail
ahead.  A short time should make her visible, if the vessels continued
on the present course, and, after having called his fleet about him by
signal, Seymour stood on for a nearer look at the stranger.  An hour
later she was visible from the deck of the Randolph, a very large ship,
evidently a man-of-war under easy sail.  The careful watchers could
count three tiers of guns through the glass, which proclaimed her a
ship of the line.  From her motions, and the way she rose before them,
she was evidently a very speedy ship, capable of outsailing every
vessel of Seymour's little fleet without difficulty, except possibly
the brig Fair American.  It would be madness for the squadron of
converted and lightly armed merchantmen to attack a heavy ship of that
class,--all who got near enough to do so would probably be sunk or
captured; yet the approaching vessel must be delayed or checked, or the
result would be equally serious to the fleet.  Seymour at once formed a
desperate resolution.  Signalling to the four State cruisers and the
six prizes to tack to the northeast, escape if possible, and afterward
make the best of their way back to Charleston, he himself stood on with
the little Randolph to engage the mighty stranger.  At first the older
seamen could scarce believe their eyes.  Was it possible that Captain
Seymour, in a small thirty-two-gun frigate, was about to engage
deliberately and wilfully in a combat with a ship of the line, a
seventy-four!--the difference in the number of guns giving no
indication of the difference in the offensive qualities of the two
ships, which might better be shown by a ratio of four or five to one in
favor of the ship of the line.  It was like matching a bull terrier
against a mastiff.  The men half suspected some wily manoeuvre which
they could not divine; but as the moments fled away and they saw the
rest of the fleet and the prizes slipping rapidly away to the
northeast, the Fair American lagging unaccountably behind the rest of
the fleet, while they still held their even course, they began to
comprehend that they were to fight to save the fleet, and Seymour meant
to sacrifice them deliberately, if necessary, in the hope of so
crippling the enemy that his other little cruisers, and the prizes,
might escape.  They were not daunted, however--your true Jack is a
reckless fellow--by the daring and desperate nature of the plan; quite
the contrary!

In a few moments the familiar tones of Bentley's powerful voice,
seconded by the cheery calls of his mates, rang through the frigate,--

"All hands clear ship for action--Ahoy!"

The piercing whistling of the pipes which followed was soon drowned by
the steady and stirring roll of the drums, accompanied by the shrill
notes of the fifes, beating to quarters.  The old call, which has been
the prelude to every action on the sea, ushering in with the same
dreadful note of preparation every naval conflict for twice two hundred
years, went rolling along the decks.  At the first tap of the drum the
men sprang, with the eagerness of unleashed hounds before the quarry,
to their several stations.

In an instant the orderly ship was a babel of apparently hopeless
confusion; the men running hastily to and fro about their various
duties, the sharp commands of the officers, the shrill piping of the
whistles, and the deep voices of the gun captains and the boatswain's
mates, made the usually quiet deck a pandemonium.  Some of the seamen
stowed the hammocks on the rail to serve as a guard against shot and
splinters, others triced up stout netting fore and aft, as a protection
against boarders.  The light and agile sail-trimmers rove extra slings
on the yards, and put stoppers on the more important rigging, and
tightened and strengthened the boats' gripes.  The cabin bulkheads were
unceremoniously knocked down and stowed away, giving a clean sweep fore
and aft the decks.  The pumps were rigged and tried, and hose led along
the deck.  Arm chests were broken out and opened, and cutlasses and
pistols distributed, and the racks filled with boarding-pikes.
Division tubs filled with water were placed beside the guns, and the
decks sanded lest they should grow slippery with blood.  The magazine,
surrounded by a wetted woollen screen to prevent fire, was opened, and
grape and solid shot broken out and piled in the racks about the
hatchways near the guns, the heavy sea lashings of which were cast
loose by the different crews, after which they were loaded and run out
and temporarily secured, the slow matches having been carefully
examined and lighted.  The oldest quartermasters took their places near
the helm, and others, assisted by a small body of men, manned the
relieving tackles below, to be used in case, as frequently happened,
the wheel should be shot away.  The officers, many of whom put on
boarding caps of light steel with dropped cheek pieces, and covered
with fur, fastened on their arms, looked to the priming of their
pistols, and then hastened to their various stations.

Most of the watch officers, under the direction of the first lieutenant
or executive officer, were to take charge of the different gun
divisions in the batteries; though one of them remained aft near the
captain, to look after the spars and rigging, command the
sail-trimmers, and see that any order of the captain touching the
moving of the ship was promptly carried out.  The surgeon and his mates
went below into the gloomy cockpit, spreading out the foreboding array
of ghastly instruments and appliances, ready for the many demands
certain to be made upon them.  Some of the ubiquitous midshipmen
commanded little groups of expert riflemen in the tops, which were well
provided with hand grenades; others assisted the division lieutenants;
and several were detailed as aids to the commanding officer.  The
little company of marines, under its own officers, was drawn up on the
quarter-deck to keep down the fire of the enemy's small-arm men, and be
ready to repel boarders, or head an attack, if the ships should come in
contact.  In that case grapnels, strong iron hooks securely fastened to
the ends of stout ropes or slender iron chains, were provided at
convenient intervals along the bulwarks, ready for catching and lashing
the two ships together.

The men, their other duties performed, gradually settled down at the
guns, or about the masts, or in the tops, in their several stations,
many of them naked to the waist, and their deep voices could be heard
answering to their names as they were mustered by the officers.  In an
incredibly short time the whole was done, and the impressive quiet was
broken only by the excited voice of the first lieutenant, Nason--a
young officer, and this his first serious battle--reporting to the
gloomy captain that the ship was clear and ready for action.

Seymour had of course taken personal charge of the deck himself.  Oh,
he thought, after scanning closely the approaching ship with great
care, if he had only a ship of the line under his command, instead of
this little frigate, how gladly would he have entered the coming
conflict!  Or if his own small vessel had been, instead, one of those
heavy frigates which afterward did so much to uphold the glory of
American arms, and exhibit the skill and audacity of American seamen,
in their subsequent conflict with Great Britain, he might have had a
better chance; but none realized more entirely than he did himself the
utter hopelessness of the undertaking which was before him.  At the
same time he was determined to carry it through, seeing, as few others
could, the absolute necessity for the sacrifice, if he were to effect
the escape of his fleet.  Calling the men aft, he spoke briefly to
them, pointing out the necessity for the conflict, and the nobility of
this sacrifice.  He entreated them, in a few brave, manly, thrilling
words, to stand by him to the last, for the love of their country and
the honor of their flag.  As for him, he declared it to be his fixed
purpose never to give up the ship, but to sink alongside rather,
trusting before that happened, however, so to damage his mighty
antagonist as to compel her to relinquish the pursuit.  The men, filled
with the desire for battle, and inspired by his heroic words, were
nerved up to the point where they would cheerfully have attacked not
one line-of-battle ship but a whole fleet!  They answered him with
frantic cheers, swearing and vowing that they would stand by him to the
bitter end; and then, everything having been done that could be done,
in perfect silence the taut frigate boldly approached her massive enemy.




CHAPTER XXXII

_The Prisoners on the Yarmouth_

It is usually not difficult for an individual to define the conditions
of happiness.  If I only had so and so, or if I only were so and so,
and the thing is done.  Each successive state, however, suggests one
more happy, and each gratified wish leads to another desire more
imperative.  Miss Katharine Wilton, however, did not confine her
conditions to units.  There were in her case three requisites for
happiness,--perfect happiness,--and could they have been satisfied, in
all probability she would have come as near to the wished-for state as
poor humanity on this earth ever does come to that beatific condition.
She certainly thought so, and with characteristic boldness had not
refrained from communicating her thoughts to her father.

The astonishing feature of the situation was that he was inclined to
agree with her.  There was nothing astonishing in itself in his
agreement with her, for he usually did agree with her, but in that her
conditions were really his own.  For it is rare, blessedly so, that two
people feel that they require the same thing to complete the joy of
life, and when they parallel on three points 't is most remarkable.
Even two lovers require each other--very different things, I am sure.
Stop!  I am not so sure about the third proviso with the colonel.  I
say the third, because Miss Wilton put it number three, though perhaps
it was like a woman's postscript, which somehow suggests the paraphrase
of a familiar bit of Scripture,--the last, not will be, but should be,
first!

Here are the requisites.  One: The flag floating gracefully from the
peak of the spanker gaff above them, in the light air of the sunny
afternoon, should be the stars and stripes, instead of the red cross of
St. George!  Two: The prow of the ship should be turned to the wooded
shores of Virginia, and the Old Dominion should be her destination
instead of the chalk cliffs of England!  Three: that a certain
handsome, fair, blue-eyed, gallant sailor, who answered to the name of
John Seymour, should be by her side instead of another, even though
that other were one who had once saved her life, and to whose care and
kindness and forethought she was much indebted.  Her present attendant
was certainly a gentleman; and to an unprejudiced eye--which hers
certainly was not--quite as handsome and distinguished and gallant as
was his favored rival, and boasting one advantage over the other in
that he bore a titled name--not such a desideratum among American girls
at that time, however, as it was afterwards destined to become; and in
a girl of the stamp of Miss Katharine Wilton, possibly no advantage at
all.

But, could the heart of that fair damsel be known, all talk of
advantage or disadvantage, or this or that compensating factor, was
absolutely idle!  She was not a girl who did things by halves; and the
feeling which had prompted her to give herself to the young sailor,
though of sudden origin, had grown and grown during the days of absence
and confinement, till, in depth and intensity, it matched his own.  She
was not now so sure that, among the other objects of her adoration, he
would have to take the second place; that, in case of division, her
heart would lead her to think first of her country.  Insensibly had his
image supplanted every other, and with all the passionate devotion of
her generous southern nature she loved him.

Lord Desborough had ample opportunity for ascertaining this fact.  He
had seen her risk her life for Seymour's own.  He could never forget
the glorious picture she made standing across the prostrate form of
that young man, pistol in hand, keeping the mob at bay, never wavering,
never faltering, clear-eyed, supreme.  He would be almost willing to
die to have her do the like for him.  He could still hear the echo of
that bitter cry,--"Seymour!  Seymour!"--which rang through the house
when they had dragged her away.  These things were not pleasant
reminiscences, but, like most other unpleasant memories, they would not
down.  In spite of all this, however, he had allowed himself--nay, his
permission he vowed had not been asked--to fall violently in love with
this little colonial maiden, and a country maiden at that!  Not being
psychologically inclined, he had never attempted to analyze her charm
or to explain his sensations.  Realizing the fact, and being young and
therefore hopeful, he had not allowed himself to despair.  Really, he
had some claims upon her.  Had he not interfered, she would have been
murdered that night in the dining-room.  He had earned the gratitude
then and there of her father, and of herself as well; and he had earned
more of it too when he had shot dead a certain brutal marauding
blackguard by the name of Johnson, at the first convenient opportunity,
having received incidentally, in return for his message of death, a
bullet in his own breast to remind him that there are always two
persons and two chances in a duel.  A part of the debt of the Wiltons
had been paid by the assiduous and solicitous care with which
they--Katharine chiefly, of course--had nursed him through the long and
dangerous illness consequent upon his wound.  It was his interest which
had prevented further ill treatment of them by the brutal and tyrannous
Dunmore, and, had Katharine so elected, would have secured her freedom.
She had, however, to Desborough's great delight, chosen to accompany
her father to England, where he was to be sent as a prisoner of high
political consequence.

After waiting many weary days at the camp of the fugitive and deposed
governor at Gwynn's Island, they had been separated from Desborough,
and unceremoniously hustled on board the frigate Radnor, which was
under orders for England.  They had stopped long enough at Norfolk to
witness Dunmore's savage and vindictive action in bombarding and
burning that helpless town; and from that point Katharine had been
enabled to send her letter to Seymour, through a friendly American spy,
just before taking departure for their long voyage across the seas.
The orders of the Radnor had been changed at the last moment, however,
and she had been directed to go in pursuit of Jones and the Ranger,
which it was currently reported had got to sea from the Delaware Bay,
bound for Canada and the Newfoundland coast.  No vessel being ready for
England at that time, the two prisoners had been transferred,
fortunately for them, to a small ship bound to the naval station at
Barbadoes; and thence, after another weary dreary wait, had been sent
on board his Britannic majesty's ship Yarmouth, Captain John Vincent,
bound home for England.  The first lieutenant of this ship happened to
be a certain Patrick Michael Philip O'Neal Drummond, Lord Desborough,
son and heir to the Earl of Desmond!  He congratulated himself most
heartily upon his good fortune.

Providence had, then, thrown a lover again at Katharine's feet.  Not
that there was anything unusual in that.  She might not regard it in a
providential light, however; but he, at least did so, and he had
intended to improve the shining hours of what would be a long cruise,
in the close association permitted by the confined limits of the ship,
to make a final desperate effort to win the heart which had hitherto so
entirely eluded him that he could not flatter himself that he had made
the least impression upon it.  His success during the first three or
four days of the cruise had not been brilliant.  She had been
unaffectedly glad to see him apparently, and gentle and kind in her
reception,--too kind, he thought, with the circumspection of a
lover,--but that was all.  To add to his trials, he soon found himself
not without rivals nearer at home than Seymour.  Judging by present
results, Washington, if he had a few regiments of Katharines, could
carry consternation to the whole British army!  For the captors had,
apparently, taken the oath of allegiance to the captured, and the whole
ship's company, from that gruff old sailor Captain Vincent down through
all the other officers to the impudent and important little midshipman,
were her devoted slaves.  Even Jack forward, usually entirely
unresponsive to the doings aft on the quarterdeck, put on an extra
flourish or so, and damning his eyes, after the manner of the
unsophisticated sailorman, gazed appreciatively upon her beauty,
envying those fortunate mortals privileged to radiate about her person.
Vincent might be the captain, but Katharine was certainly the queen of
the ship.  Colonel Wilton, too, shone, not altogether by reflected
lustre either; and the considerate officers had done everything
possible to make him forget that he was a prisoner.


Early one afternoon in the beginning of February, the Yarmouth, being
under all plain sail with the wind two or three points abaft the beam,
was bowling along under a fresh breeze about a day's sail east of
Martinique.  The weather was perfect, and because of the low latitude,
in spite of the winter season, there was no touch of sharpness in the
air, which was warm and delightful.  All the necessary drills and
exercises having been concluded earlier in the day, the whole ship's
company was enjoying a period of unusual relaxation and idleness.  The
men at the wheel, the lookouts kept constantly at the mastheads, the
marines doing sentry duty, with the midshipmen of the watch and the
officer of the deck busily pacing to and fro, were the only people, out
of the six hundred and odd men who made up the ship's complement, who
presented any appearance of activity whatever.  The men of the watch on
and the watch off, dinner being over, were sitting or lounging about in
all sorts of easy attitudes,--some of them busy with their needles;
others overhauling their clothes-bags, to which they had been given
access that afternoon; others grouped about some more brilliant
story-teller than the rest, eagerly drinking in the multifarious
details of some exciting personal experience, or romantic adventure, or
never-ending story of shipwreck or battle, or mystery--technically,
yarns!  Colonel Wilton was standing aft with Captain Vincent in the
shadow of the spanker.  Miss Wilton, with Chloe, her black maid, behind
her chair, was sitting near the break of the poop-deck, looking
forward, surrounded by several lieutenants; Desborough being at her
right hand, of course, feeling and looking unusually gloomy and morose.
One or two of the oldest and boldest midshipmen were also lingering on
the outskirts of the group, as near to their divinity as they dared
come in the presence of their superior officers.  The conversation
happening to turn, as it frequently did, upon the subject of the
present war between England and the colonies engaged in rebellion
against the paternal power, was unusually animated.




CHAPTER XXXIII

_Two Proposals_

"Oh, you know, Miss Wilton, if the colonies--" began one of the
officers, vehemently.

"Pardon me, Mr. Hollins, that is hardly the correct term.  The _late_
colonies would be better," interrupted Katharine, with much spirit.

"Oh, well, you know, I am merely anticipating, of course; we 'll have
them back fast enough, after while.  Now, if they--"

"Pardon me again, sir, but that is another contention I can hardly
admit.  You 'll never have them back,--never, never!"

"Oh, come, Miss Wilton," said another, "you surely do not think the
colonies--oh, well, the late colonies, if you will insist upon it--can
maintain a fight with the power of Great Britain, for any length of
time!  Why, madam, the English spirit--"

"Well, sir, what else have we but the English spirit?  What other blood
runs in our veins, pray?  Just as you love and prize your liberty, so
too do we, and we will not be dominated and ruled over, even by our
brothers.  No, no, Mr. Beauchamp, or you, either, Mr. Hollins; it is no
use.  We are just as determined as you are; and there is but one way to
win back the colonies, as you call them, to their allegiance."

"And how is that, pray?"

"Why, by depopulating them, overwhelming them, killing the people, and
wasting the land.  Only a war of extermination will serve your purpose."

"Well," said Hollins, doggedly, "if they must have it, they must--let
it be extermination!  The authority of the king and the power of
Parliament must be upheld at all hazards."

"Ah, that is easy enough to say," replied Katharine, "but three
millions of English-speaking liberty-loving people are not to be
blotted out by a wave of the hand; they are not so easily exterminated,
as you will find.  Besides, it is easy to speak in general terms; but
thousands and thousands are young and helpless, or old and
feeble,--grandsires or women or children,--how about them?  As long as
there is a woman left or a child, your task is yet unfulfilled.  Make a
personal application of it; I am one of them.  Do you wish to
exterminate me, sir?" she said, looking up at him brilliantly, with her
glorious brown eyes.

"Oh, you--you are different, of course," said the lieutenant,
hesitatingly, not liking to face this intensely personal application of
his intemperate remark.

"Not I!  I am just like the rest--"

"Treason!  I won't hear it," said Desborough, softly.  "There are no
others like you on earth."

"Just like the rest," she continued emphatically, unheeding the
interruption, which the others had hardly caught, "and I will tell you
that never again will that flag at the gaff there be the flag of
America.  You have lost us for good."

"Oh, don't say that.  Make a personal exception of yourself at least,
Miss Wilton, and give us room to hope a little."

"No, no," she laughed.  "You have lost us all--me included."

There was a chorus of expostulation and argument immediately, but Miss
Wilton was not to be overborne.

"Father!" she called quickly to the colonel, who, followed by the
captain, at once joined the little group of officers.  "These gentlemen
seem to doubt me when I say their sometime colonies are gone for good.
Won't you help me to state the point so they will understand it?"

"Gentlemen," said the old colonel, slowly and impressively, "the
colonies were the most loyal and devoted portion of the king's dominion
at one time.  I have been up and down the length and breadth of them, I
know the feeling.  I was for years a soldier of the king myself,--with
your fathers, young sirs,--and I can bear witness that no part of the
kingdom responded with such alacrity to every legitimate demand upon it
by the home government.  Never did men so readily and willingly offer
themselves and their goods for the service of the king.  But it is all
changed now.  The change came slowly, but it came inevitably and
surely, and you could no more change the present conditions than you
could turn back the sun in its course.  England has lost her colonies--"

"Her late colonies," corrected Katharine, softly.

"Yes, yes, of course, her late colonies, that is, beyond possibility of
recovery.  We will not be taxed without representation."

"But suppose that we gave you the representation for which you asked,
colonel.  How then?  Would not there be a general return to allegiance
in that event?" queried the captain.

"Sir," replied the colonel, proudly, "the child who has once learned to
walk alone does not afterward go back to creeping and crawling, or
stumbling along by the aid of his mother's hand.  We have tasted our
independence, enjoyed it, and now we mean to keep it."

"Splendid, sir! splendid, father!" cried the delighted Katharine.
"There speaks the spirit of Runnymede, and Naseby, too, gentlemen!"

"Hush, hush, my child!" chided the colonel, half amusedly; "it is only
the spirit of a plain man who has learned to love liberty by studying
the history of his ancestry and his people."

"Ah, but, colonel, how are you going to get that liberty without
fighting for it?" asked Beauchamp, with rash temerity.  "Howe and
Cornwallis, for instance, have been pursuing Washington for six months,
and could never get near enough to fire a shot at him, so they say."

"Fight, sir, fight!" exclaimed the colonel, in astonished wrath; "why,
God bless me, sir, I am willing to stand out now and show you how they
can fight!"

But Miss Katharine sprang to her feet: "And Bunker Hill, Mr. Beauchamp,
and Long Island!" she cried impetuously.

Beauchamp backed away precipitately from before her in great confusion,
which invoked much mocking comment from the laughing officers round
about him.

"Here is one time the English forces are routed by a rebel!" said
Hollins.

"Yes," added Desborough, "but then Beauchamp is no worse off than the
rest of us would be, if Miss Wilton were opposed to us."

"Well," continued another, coming to the rescue, "we won both of those
engagements, you know, Miss Wilton, after all."

"Won!  Who said anything about winning, sir?  Anybody can win, if they
have men enough or strength enough and money enough--we were talking
about fighting, sir."

"But really, you know," went on Beauchamp, recovering, and returning to
the charge, "Washington's army haven't fought since those days you
speak of, and they must be wiped out of existence by now, I should
suppose."

"Not if George Washington is still alive," interrupted the colonel, his
anger at the inconsiderate officer having somewhat abated.  "I know him
well.  I have known him from a boy,--met him first when I used to go
shooting with Lord Fairfax out at Greenway Court.  I knew his family;
his brother Lawrence too, I was with him at Cartagena,--where I met
your father, Lord Desborough, by the way,--and the world does not yet
know the quality of that man.  If he retreats, it is because he
absolutely has to; and you will see, he will turn and strike Howe and
Cornwallis some day such a blow as will make them reel.  I should not
wonder if he had done so already.  'T is six long weeks since we have
heard any news from home.  Trust me, gentlemen, the Americans will
fight; and if there is a God of justice, they will win too."

"I would fight myself, had I but the opportunity," said Katharine,
resolutely.  "And there are hundreds of other women with the same
feeling."

"Oh, Miss Wilton, you would find no enemies here to fight.  We are all
captives of your bow and spear now, and crave your mercy," said
Desborough, meaningly.

"True, Mistress Katharine.  I hardly know now who commands this ship,
you or I!" said the captain, smiling at her.

"Alas, you do, Captain Vincent; were I the commander, we would be going
that way," she replied, pointing off over the quarter, and gazing
wistfully over the cool, sparkling water, the white-capped waves
breaking beautifully away in every direction.  "Oh, my poor, poor
country, when shall I see you again?" she murmured; "when--"

"Sail ho!" floated down from the foremast head at this moment, and the
idle ship awoke again.

"Where away?"

"Right ahead, sir."

Holmes and Beauchamp walked forward to get a look at the stranger, and
the captain and the colonel stepped across to the weather side of the
deck.  Chloe was sent below to procure a wrap for her mistress, and
Katharine was left alone for a few moments with Desborough.  It was his
first opportunity.

"Have you no curiosity as to the sail reported, Lieutenant Desborough?"

"No, Mistress Katharine, none whatever.  I take no interest in anything
but you.  No, please don't go now," he went on in humble entreaty.  "I
wish to speak to you a moment.  When you came aboard I hoped to see you
often, to be with you alone--to win you--"  His voice sank to a
passionate whisper.

"My lord, my lord! it were best to go no further," she interrupted
gravely.  "'T is no use; you remember."

"Yes, yes, I remember everything,--everything about you, that is.  I
shut my eyes and feel the soft touch of your cool hand on my fevered
head again, as when I had that bullet in my breast.  Oh, it thrills me,
maddens me!  I 'd be wounded so again, could I but feel those hands
once more--  Listen to me, you must listen!  It cannot hurt you to hear
me, and I am sure one of the others will be back in a moment; you are
never alone," he said, detaining her almost forcibly.  "I love you; you
must know that I do.  What is that land, or any land, beside my love?
You are my country!  I can give you lands, title, rank, luxury--  Be
pitiful to me, Mistress Katharine.  What can I do or say or promise?
You shall grace the court of the king, and be at the same time queen of
my heart," he went on impetuously, his soul in his eager whisper.  She
turned and walked over to the lee rail, whither he followed her.

"I 'd rather be in that land off yonder than be the king himself.  I
hate the king, and I could not love the enemy of my country!  No, no,"
she replied, "it cannot be--it can never be!"

"Pshaw!  Your country,--that's not the reason; you love him still," he
went on jealously, "that sailor."

"Yes, 't is true; I love a sailor--you are not he."

"But he is dead!  You left him lying there on the floor in the hall,
you remember, and since then have heard nothing.  He is surely dead."

"It is cruel of you to say it," she went on relentlessly, "but I shall
love his memory then.  No, 't is useless--I respect you, admire you, am
grateful to you, but my heart is there!" and she pointed away again.

"Won't you let me try to win you?" he persisted.  "Don't say me nay
altogether, give me some hope.  If he be dead, let me have a chance.
Oh, Katharine Wilton, I would give up anything for--"

A midshipman touched him on the arm.  "Captain wants to see first
lieutenant, sir!" he said with a wooden, impassive face, saluting the
while.

With a smothered expression of rage, Desborough sprang across the
deck,--for such a summons is not to be disregarded for an instant; even
love gives way to the captain, on shipboard at least.  The little
midshipman was a great favorite with Katharine, and, grateful for the
interruption, she accordingly laid her hand lightly and affectionately
on the shoulder of the Honorable Giles Montagu, aged thirteen, one of
the youngest and smallest middies in the ship; but he stood very
straight and rigid, the personification of dignity, and endeavored to
look very manly indeed.

"Thank you, Mr. Montagu," she said, somewhat to his surprise.

"Don't mention it, nothing at all, madam--orders!  Got to obey orders,
you know."

Katharine laughed.  "You dear sweet child!" she said, and suddenly
stooped and kissed him.  The Honorable Giles turned pale, then flushed
violently and burst into unmanly tears.

"Why, what is it?  Don't you like to have me kiss you?" she said,
amazed.

"It is n't that, Miss Wilton.  I 'd rather kiss you than--than
anything; but you call me a boy, and treat me like a child, and--and I
can't stand it.  I--I 've challenged all the men in the steerage about
you already," alluding to the other little fellows of like rank; "they
call me a baby there, too, because I 'm so little and so young.  But I
'll grow.  And--I love you," he went on abruptly and determinedly,
choking down his sobs and swallowing his tears, while fingering the
handle of his dirk, and furtively rubbing his eyes with his other hand.
"Oh, madam, if you would only wait until I got a frigate!  Won't you?
But no!  You don't treat me like a man," he exclaimed bitterly,
stamping his foot and turning away.

"Well, I never!" cried the astonished and abashed Katharine, completely
overawed for the moment by this novel declaration.  "What next?"

Truly, they made men out of boys early in those days.  The next moment
the hoarse cries of the boatswain and his mates, and the beating drums,
called all hands to clear the ship for action and startled everybody
into activity at once.  The Honorable Giles, the manly if lachrymose
midshipman, sprang forward to his station as rapidly as his small but
sturdy legs could carry him.




CHAPTER XXXIV

_Captain Vincent Mystified_

While the big ship was rapidly and methodically being stripped for the
possible emergency, the captain was engaged in busy conversation with
the colonel.  They had steadily drawn near the reported sail until the
lookouts could plainly make out a small fleet of small ships.  Never
dreaming that they could be American ships, Captain Vincent had his
ship prepared for action, more through the habitual wariness of an
experienced sailor than from any premonition of an impending battle.
But as the two forces drew near, the actions of the opposing fleet
became suddenly suspicious; all but one of them tacked ship, and stood
off to the northeast, in a compact group in close order, under all
possible sail, though one, the smallest and a brig, it was noticed,
lagged behind the rest of the group in a way which bespoke either very
slow sailing qualities or deliberate purpose of delay.  The remaining
ship, the largest of them all, stood boldly on its original course.
This latter, it was plain to see, was a small frigate, possibly a
twenty-eight or a thirty-two.  Taking into account the respective rates
of speed, the frigate, whose course made a slight angle with that of
the ship of the line, would probably cross the bows of the latter
within range of her battery.  None of the opposing vessels showed any
flags as yet, and their movements completely mystified Captain Vincent.

"Certainly a most extraordinary performance going on there!" he said,
after a long look through his glass, which he then handed to the
colonel.  "They show no flags, but I cannot conceive of their being
anything but a squadron or a convoy of ours.  What do you make them
out, Colonel Wilton?"

Now, the colonel was morally certain that they were Americans, or, at
least, that the first and nearest one was an American ship.  He had
been one of the naval committee which had taken charge of the building
of the men-of-war ordered by Congress in '75; he had seen the Randolph
frequently on the ways and after she was launched, and was entirely
familiar with her lines.  Perhaps the wish also was father to the
thought, for the old soldier was not sufficiently versed in nautical
affairs to detect at that distance the great disparity in force between
the two ships, to which for the moment he gave no thought, or he would
not have entertained hopes for a release from confinement by
recapture,--a patent impossibility to a seaman.  So he answered the
captain evasively, returning the glass and pleading his ignorance of
nautical matters to excuse his indefinite opinion.

"It must be the Carrysford, with Hythe's squadron; she is a thirty-two.
But why they should act this way, I cannot see.  He must know what we
are now, as there are no ships of our size in these waters, except our
own, and why should he send the rest of them off there?  They are
leaving us pretty fast, except that brig.  Now, if it were a colonial
convoy, I should say that this frigate was going to engage us in the
hope of so crippling us as to effect the escape of the rest; but I
hardly think that your men are up to that yet."

"Think not?" said the colonel indifferently, violently repressing an
inclination to strike him.  "It may be as you say, Captain Vincent;
still, I think we are up to almost anything that you are."

"Oh, colonel," laughed the captain, good-naturedly, "you are not going
to compare the little colonial forces with his majesty's navy, are you!
Now, I am morally certain that is a king's ship.  See the beautiful set
of her sails, the enormous spread of the yards; notice how trim and
taut her rigging and running gear stand out, and then, too, see how
smartly she is handled.  Only English ships are thus.  Hythe is a
sailor, every inch of him," he went on in genuine admiration for the
approaching vessel.  "See!  He has the weather gauge of us now, or will
have.  Not that it matters anything.  We could afford to let him have
it even if he were an enemy; but what he means by this sort of
performance, I don't understand.  However, we shall know in half an
hour at least."

"Well, sir?" he said, turning toward Lieutenant Desborough, who at that
moment stepped on the poop in fighting uniform, sword in hand.

"Ship's ready for action, sir!"

"Very good.  Keep the people at their quarters, and stand on as we are.
Ah, Mr. Montagu, will you step below and fetch me my sword out of my
cabin.  What do you think of her, Desborough?"

"We think she is an American, sir," said Desborough.

"Oh, you do, do you?  Well, I think she is one of ours.  No American
would dare to lead down on us in that way!  We can blow him out of the
water with a broadside or two, you know, but we 'll give him a hint all
the same.  Fire a gun there, to leeward, and hoist our colors."

As the smoke rolled away along the water, the stops were broken, and
there flew out from each masthead the splendid English flag.  It was
answered soon afterward by a small English flag at the gaff of the
approaching ship, which apparently mystified the captain more than
ever, though it confirmed him in his previous opinion.

"Oh, father," whispered Katharine, clinging to the colonel, "what do
you think it is?  See that English flag!"

"Kate, I 'm morally sure that it is an American ship; it is just the
plan and size of those ordered by Congress in '75.  One of those ships
should be in commission by now.  If I am right, this should be the
Randolph.  I saw her a dozen times in Philadelphia; and if that's not
she, I shall never pretend to know a ship again."

"But did you hear what Captain Vincent said?" continued Katharine; "how
many guns would the Randolph carry?"

"About forty, and most of them small ones at best," answered the
colonel, with a sigh.

The two ships were much nearer now, and their disparity in force was
apparent even to the most unskilful eye.

"The little ship can't fight this great one, father, can it?"

"No, my dear; that is, not with any chance of success.  But I fear--or
hope, rather--that they mean to engage us, and sacrifice themselves in
order not to allow us to capture the little fleet, probably prizes, off
yonder.  The man who commands her is a hero, certainly."

"Just what Mr. Seymour would do.  Oh, if it were he!" she exclaimed,
clasping her hands, her eyes filling with tears at the possibility.

"Well, it may be, of course.  He was certain to be posted captain soon,
and 'tis like him truly.  But, Kate, the ships are drawing nearer every
moment.  You must go below in case of action, my dear."

"Yes, Miss Wilton," said Desborough, who had at that moment approached
them, looking very handsome, having heard the last words of the
colonel; "we have arranged a safe place for you and your maid, in the
cable tiers, way below the water-line, and out of the way of shot,
though I hardly expect much of it from that fellow.  Will you allow me
to conduct you there?  Perhaps you too, colonel, would be safer if you
would--"

"Pardon me, sir, unless force is used, I shall remain on deck.  The
idea of me, sir--skulking in the hold during an action!  Why, sir,--"

"And the idea of me, either, doing the same thing!" said Katharine
defiantly, in a ringing voice in which there was a clear echo of her
father's determination.

Both men looked at her smiling.

"Oh, you are different, Miss Wilton," said Desborough.

"No use, Katharine: you must go," added her father.

"Oh, please!"

"My daughter--"

"Oh, father, let me stay just a little longer--there is no danger yet.
Take Chloe down, if you will, Mr. Desborough, and have a place ready
for me.  I 'll go down when the battle begins--indeed I will, father!"
she continued entreatingly.

"Well," said the colonel, uncertainly, "let her stay a little longer,
my lord."

"Very well, sir," replied Desborough, bowing and turning forward.

"Here, you Jack, take this girl below and stow her away in the cable
tiers by the main hatch," he said, pointing to Chloe, who was led
unresistingly away, her teeth chattering with undefined but none the
less overwhelming terror.  The colonel stepped forward beside Captain
Vincent, and Desborough descended to the main-deck to superintend the
fighting of the batteries, while Katharine, grateful for the respite,
and determined not to go below at all, stepped aft in the shelter of
the rail, her heart already beating madly, as the two ships approached
each other in silence.




CHAPTER XXXV

_Bentley Says Good-by_

The men on the Randolph were in excellent spirits, and as they drew
nearer and nearer became more and more anxious for the fray.

"She's a big one, ain't she?" said one young seaman, glancing over a
gun through a port-hole forward; "but we ain't afraid of her, mates.
We 'll just dance up and slap her in the face with this, and then turn
around and slap her with t' other side," laying his hand at the time on
one of the long eighteens which constituted the main battery of the
frigate.

"Yes, and then what will she do to us?  Blow us into splinters with a
broadside, youngster!  Not as I particularly care, so we have a chance
to get a few good licks at her with these old barkers," said an older
man, pointing, like the first, to a gun.

"That's the talk, men," said Seymour, who was making a tour of
inspection through the ship in person, and who had stopped before the
gun and heard the conversation.  "Before she sinks us we will give it
to her hard.  I can depend upon you, I know."

"Yes, yes, your honor."

"Ay, ay, sir--"

"We 's all right, sir--"

"We 's with you, your honor--" came in a quick, strong chorus from the
rough-and-ready men, and then some one called for three cheers for
Captain Seymour, and they were given with such a will that the oak
decks echoed and re-echoed again and again.

"Pass the word to serve out a tot of grog to each man; let them splice
the main-brace once more before they die," said Seymour, grimly, amid a
chorus of approving murmurs from the sailors, as he walked slowly along
the lines, greeting men here and there with plain, bluff words of
cheer, which brought smiles of pleasure to their stern, weather-beaten
faces.

"Now, ain't he a beauty?" whispered the captain of number two gun to
his second.  "Blow me if 't ain't a pleasure to serve under sich a
officer, and to die for him, too!  Here is to a speedy fight and lots
of damage to the Britisher," he cried loudly, lifting his pannikin of
rum and water to his lips, amid a further chorus of approval.

Old Bentley was standing on the forecastle forward, looking earnestly
at the approaching ship, when Seymour came up to him.  The rest of the
men, mindful of the peculiar relationship between the two,
instinctively drew back a little, leaving them alone.

"Well, Bentley, our work is cut out for us there."

"Ay, Captain Seymour.  I 'm thinking that this cruise will end right
here for this ship--unless you strike, sir."

"Strike!  Do you advise me to do so, then?"

"God forbid!  Except it be with shot and these," said the old man,
lifting an enormous cutlass, ground to a razor edge, which he had
specially made for his own personal use in battle.  "No, no; we 've got
to fight him till he 's so damaged that he can't get at the rest.  Do
you see, sir, how the brig lags behind them?" he went on, pointing out
toward the slowly escaping squadron.  "The boy's got her luffed up so
she makes no headway at all!"

"I know it.  I have signalled to him twice to close with the rest--he
can sail two feet to their one; but it is no use,--he pays no
attention.  He should n't have been given so responsible a command
until he learned to obey orders," said Seymour, frowning.

"Let the boy alone, Master John; he 'll do all right," said Bentley;
"he's the makings of a good sailorman and a fine officer in him.  I 've
watched him."

"Ha! there goes a shot from the liner," cried Seymour, as a puff of
smoke broke out from the lee side followed by the dull boom of a cannon
over the water, and then the flags rippled bravely out from the
mastheads.  "Well, we did not need that sort of an introduction.  Aft
there!" cried the captain, with his powerful voice.

"Sir."

"Show a British flag at the gaff.  That will puzzle him for a while
longer.  Well, old friend, I must go aft.  It's likely we won't both of
us come out of this little affair alive, so good-by, and God bless you.
You 've been a good friend to me, Bentley, ever since I was a child,
and I doubt I 've requited you ill enough," he said, reaching forth his
hand.  The old sailor shifted his cutlass into his left hand, took off
his hat, and grasped Seymour's hand with his own mighty palm.

"Ay, ever since you were a boy; and a properer sailor and a better
officer don't walk the deck, if I do say it myself, as I 've had a hand
in the making of you.  But what you say is true, sir: we 'll probably
most all of us go to Davy Jones' locker this trip; but we could n't go
in a better way, and we won't go alone.  God Almighty bless you, sir!
I--" said the old seaman, breaking off suddenly and looking wistfully
at the young man he loved, who, understanding it all, returned his
gaze, wrung his hand, and then turned and sprang aft without another
word.

The ships were rapidly closing, when Seymour's keen eye detected a dash
of color and a bit of fluttering drapery on the poop of the
line-of-battle ship.  Wondering, he examined it through his glass.

"Why! 't is a woman," he exclaimed.  Something familiar in the
appearance made his heart give a sudden throb, but he put away the idea
which came to him as preposterous; and then stepping forward to the
break of the poop, he called out,--

"My lads, there is a woman on yon ship, on the poop, way aft.  We don't
fight with women; have a care, therefore, that none of you take
deliberate aim at her, and spare that part of the deck where she stands
in the fight, if you can.  Pass the word along."

"Well, I 'm blessed," said one old gun captain, _sotto voce_, "be they
come out against us with wimmen!"

The Randolph had the weather-gage of the Yarmouth by this time; and
Seymour shifted his helm slightly, rounded in his braces a little, and
ran down with the wind a little free and on a line parallel to the
course of his enemy, but going in a different direction.  He lifted the
glass again to his eye, and looked long and earnestly at the woman's
figure half hidden by the rail on the ship.  Was it--could it
be--indeed she?  Was fate bringing them into opposition again?  It was
not possible.  Trembling violently, he lifted the glass for a further
investigation, when an officer, trumpet in hand, sprang upon the rail
of the Yarmouth forward and hailed.




CHAPTER XXXVI

_The Last of the Randolph_

"Pass the word quietly," said Seymour, rapidly, to one of his young
aids, "that when I say, 'Stand by to back the maintopsail,' the guns
are to be fired.  Bid the gun captains to train on the port-holes of
the second tier of guns.  Mind, no order to fire will be given except
the words, 'Stand by to back the maintopsail.'  The men are to fire at
the word 'topsail.'  Do you understand?  Tell the division officers to
hold up their hands, as a sign that they understand, as you pass along,
so that I can see them.  Lively now!  Quartermaster, standby to haul
down that flag and show our colors at the first shot."

The frigate was now rapidly drawing near the ship of the line, until,
at the moment the officer hailed, the two ships were nearly alongside
of each other.  The awful disparity between their sizes was now
painfully apparent.

"Ship ahoy!  Ahoy the frigate!" came down a second time in long hollow
tones through the trumpet from the officer balancing himself on the
Yarmouth's rail by holding on to a back-stay.  "Why don't you answer?"

"Ahoy the ship!" replied Seymour at last through his own trumpet.
"What ship is that?"

"His Britannic majesty's ship of the line, Yarmouth, Captain Vincent.
Who are you?  Answer, or I will fire!"

The flying boom of the Randolph was just pointing past the Yarmouth's
quarter, and the two ships were abreast each other; now, if ever, was
the time for action.

"This is the American Continental ship, Randolph, Captain Seymour,"
cried the latter, through the trumpet, in a voice heard in every part
of the ship of the line.

At least two hearts in the Yarmouth were powerfully affected by that
announcement.  Katharine's leaped within her bosom at the sound of her
lover's voice, and beat madly while she revelled in thought in his
proximity; and then as she noticed again the fearful odds with which he
was apparently about to contend, her heart sank into the depths once
more.  In one second she thrilled with pride, quivered with love,
trembled with despair.  He was there--he was hers--he would be killed!
She gripped the rail hard and clenched her teeth to keep from screaming
aloud his name, while her gaze strained out upon his handsome figure.
Pride, love, death,--an epitome of human life in that fleeting
moment,--all were hers!

On the main-deck of the frigate the name carried consternation to
Lieutenant Lord Desborough.  So Seymour was alive again!  Was that the
end of my lord's chance?  No.  Joy!  The rebel was under the guns of
the battle-ship!  Never, vowed the lieutenant, should guns be better
served than those under his command.  Unless the man surrendered, he
was doomed.  So, he spoke eagerly to his men, bidding them take good
aim and waste no shot, never doubting the inevitable issue.  These
thoughts took but a moment, however.  Beauchamp, who had done the
talking, now stepped aft to Captain Vincent's side, and replied to
Seymour's hail by calling out,--

"Do you strike, sir?"

"Yes, yes, of course; that's what we came down here for.  We'll strike
fast enough," was the answer.

A broad smile lighted up Captain Vincent's face; he turned to the
colonel, laughing, and said with a scarcely veiled sneer,--

"I told you they were not up to it.  The cad! he might have fired one
shot at least for the honor of his flag, don't you see?"

The colonel with a sinking heart could not see at all.  Cowardice in
Seymour, in any officer, was a thing he could not understand.  The
world turned black before Katharine.  What! strike without a blow!  Was
this her hero?  Rather death than a coward!  In spite of her faith in
her lover, as she heard what appeared to be a pusillanimous offer of
surrender, Desborough's chances took a sudden bound upward, while that
gentleman cursed the cowardice of his enemy and rival, which would
deprive him of a pleasing opportunity of blowing him out of the water.
Most of the men at the different guns relaxed their eager watchfulness,
while sneers and jeers at the "Yankee" went up on all sides.

"Heave to, then," continued Beauchamp, peremptorily and with much
disgust, "and send a boat aboard!"

"Ay, ay, sir!"

Oh, it was true, then; he was going to surrender tamely without--

"Stand by!" there was a note of preparation in the words in spite of
Seymour's effort to give them the ordinary intonation of a commonplace
order,--a note which had so much meaning to Katharine's sensitive ear
that her heart stopped its beating for a moment as she waited for the
next word.  It came with a roar of defiance.  "Back the maintopsail!"
But the braces were kept fast and the unexpected happened.  In an
instant sheets of flame shot out from the muzzles of the black guns of
the Randolph, which were immediately wreathed and shrouded in clouds of
smoke.  At the moment of command Seymour had quickly ordered the helm
shifted suddenly, and the Randolph had swung round so that she lay at a
broad angle off the quarter of the Yarmouth.  The thunderous roar of
the heavy guns at short range was immediately followed by the crashing
of timber, as the heavy shot took deadly effect, amid the cheers and
yells and curses and groans and shrieks of the wounded and startled men
on the liner, while three hearty cheers rang out from the Randolph.

The advantage of the first blow in the grim game, the unequal combat,
was with the little one.

"How now, captain!" shouted the colonel, in high exultation.  "Won't
fight, eh!  What do you call this?"

"Fire! fire!  Let him have it, men, and be damned to you!  The man 's a
hero; 't was cleverly done," roared the captain, excitedly.  "I
retract.  Give it to him, boys!  Give it to the impudent rebel!" he
roared.

Katharine, forgot by every one in the breathless excitement of the past
few moments, bowed her head on her hands on the rail, and breathed a
prayer of thankfulness, oblivious of everything but that her lover had
proved himself worthy the devotion her heart so ungrudgingly extended
him.  There was great confusion on board the Yarmouth from this sudden
and unexpected discharge, which, delivered at short range, had done no
little execution on the crowded ship; but the officers rallied their
men speedily with cool words of encouragement.

"Steady, men, steady."

"Give it back to them."

"Look sharp now."

"Aim!  Fire!"

And the forty-odd heavy guns roared out in answer to the determined
attack.  The effect of such a broadside at close range would have been
frightful, had not the Randolph drawn so far ahead, and her course been
so changed, that a large part of it passed harmlessly astern of her.
One gun, however, found its target, and that was one aimed and fired by
the hand of Lord Desborough himself: a heavy shot, a thirty-two, from
one of the massive lower-deck guns of the Yarmouth, which the pleasant
weather permitted them to use effectively, came through one of the
after gun-ports of the Randolph, and swept away the line of men on the
port side of the gun.  Some of the other shot did slight damage also
among the spars and gear, and several of the crew were killed or
wounded in different parts of the ship; but the Randolph was
practically unharmed, and standing boldly down to cross the stern of
the Yarmouth to rake her.  But the English captain was a seaman, every
inch of him, and his ship could not have been better handled; divining
his bold little antagonist's purpose, the Yarmouth's helm was put up at
once, and in the smoke she fell off and came before the wind almost as
rapidly as did the Randolph, her promptness frustrating the endeavor,
as Seymour was only able to make an ineffectual effort to rake her, as
she flew round on her heels.  The starboard battery of the Yarmouth had
been manned as she fell off, and the port battery of the Randolph was
rapidly reloaded again.  The manoeuvre had given the Englishmen the
weather-gage once more, the two ships now having the wind on the port
quarter.  The two batteries were discharged simultaneously, and now
began a running fight of near an hour's duration.

Seymour was everywhere.  Up and down the deck he walked, helping and
sustaining his men, building up new gun's crews out of the shattered
remains of decimated groups of men, lending a hand himself on a tackle
on occasion; cool, calm, unwearied, unremitting, determined, he
desperately fought his ship as few vessels were ever fought before or
since, imbuing, by his presence and example and word, his men with his
own unquailing spirit, until they died as uncomplainingly and as nobly
as did those prototypes of heroes,--another three hundred in the pass
at Thermopylae!

The guns were served on the Randolph with the desperate rapidity of men
who, awfully pressed for time, had abandoned hope and only fought to
cripple and delay before they were silenced; those on the Yarmouth, on
the contrary, were fired with much more deliberation, and did dreadful
execution.  The different guns were disabled on the Randolph by heavy
shot; adjacent ports were knocked into one, the sides shattered, boats
smashed, rails knocked to pieces, all of the weather-shrouds cut, the
mizzenmast carried away under the top, and the wreck fell into the
sea,--fortunately, on the lee side, the little body of men in the top
going to a sudden death with the rest.  The decks were slippery with
blood and ploughed with plunging shot, which the superior height of the
Yarmouth permitted to be fired with depressed guns from an elevation.
Solid shot from the heavy main-deck batteries swept through and through
the devoted frigate; half the Randolph's guns were useless because of
the lack of men to serve them; the cockpit overflowed with the wounded;
the surgeon and his mates, covered with blood, worked like butchers, in
the steerage and finally in the ward room; dead and dying men lay where
they fell; there were no hands to spare to take them below, no place in
which they could lie with safety, no immunity from the searching hail
which drove through every part of the doomed ship.  Still the men,
cheered and encouraged by their officers, stood to their guns and
fought on.  Presently the foretopmast went by the board also, as the
long moments dragged along,  Seymour was now lying on the quarter-deck,
a bullet having broken his leg, another having made a flesh-wound in
his arm; he had refused to go below to have his wounds dressed, and one
of the midshipmen was kneeling by his side, applying such unskilful
bandages as he might to the two bleeding wounds.  Nason had been sent
for, and was in charge, under Seymour's direction.  That young man, all
his nervousness gone, was most ably seconding his dauntless captain.

The two ships were covered with smoke.  It was impossible to tell on
one what was happening on the other; but the steady persistence with
which the Randolph clung to her big enemy had its effect on the
Yarmouth also, and the well-delivered fire did not allow that vessel
any immunity.  In fact, while nothing like that on the frigate, the
damage was so great, and so many men had fallen, that Captain Vincent
determined to end the conflict at once by boarding the frigate.  The
necessary orders were given, and a strong party of boarders was called
away and mustered on the forecastle, headed by Beauchamp and Hollins;
among the number were little Montagu, with other midshipmen.  Taking
advantage of the smoke and of the weather-gage, the Yarmouth was
suddenly headed for the Randolph.  As the enormous bows of the
line-of-battle ship came slowly shoving out of the smoke, towering
above them, covered with men, cutlass or boarding pike in hand, Seymour
discerned at once the purpose of the manoeuvre.  Raising himself upon
his elbow to better direct the movement,--

"All hands repel boarders!" he shouted, his voice echoing through the
ship as powerfully as ever.

This was an unusual command, as it completely deprived the guns of
their crews; but he rightly judged that it would take all the men they
could muster to repel the coming attack, and none but the main-deck
guns of the Yarmouth would or could be fired, for fear of hitting their
own men in the mêlée on the deck.  The Randolph was a wreck below, at
best; but while anything held together above her plank shears, she
would be fought.  The men had reached that desperate condition when
they ceased to think of odds, and like maddened beasts fought and raved
and swore in the frenzy of the combat.  The thrice-decimated crew
sprang aft, rallying in the gangway to meet the shock, Nason at their
head, followed close by old Bentley, still unwounded.  As the bow of
the Yarmouth struck the Randolph with a crash, one or two wounded men,
unable to take part in repelling the boarders but still able to move,
who had remained beside the guns, exerted the remaining strength they
possessed to discharge such of the pieces as bore, in long raking
shots, through the bow of the liner; it was the last sound from their
hot muzzles.

The Yarmouth struck the Randolph just forward of the mainmast; the men,
swarming in dense masses on the rail and hanging over the bowsprit
ready to leap, dropped on her deck at once with loud cheers.  A sharp
volley from the few marines left on the frigate checked them for a
moment,--nobody noticing at the time that the Honorable Giles had
fallen in a limp heap back from the rail upon his own deck, the blood
staining his curly head; but they gathered themselves together at once,
and, gallantly led, sprang aft, handling their pistols and pikes and
waving their cutlasses.  Nason was shot in a moment by Hollins' pistol,
Beauchamp was cut in two by a tremendous sweep of the arm of the mighty
Bentley, and the combat became at once general.  Slowly but surely the
Americans were pressed back; the gangways were cleared; the
quarter-deck was gained; one by one the brave defenders had fallen.
The battle was about over when Seymour noticed a man running out in the
foreyard of the Yarmouth with a hand-grenade.  He raised his pistol and
fired; the man fell; but another resolutely started to follow him.

Bentley and a few other men, and one or two officers and a midshipman,
were all who were able to bear arms now.

"Good-by, Mr. Seymour," cried Bentley, waving his hand and setting his
back against the rail nearest to the Yarmouth, which had slowly swung
parallel to the Randolph and had been lashed there.  The old man was
covered with blood from two or three wounds, but still undaunted.  Two
or three men made a rush at him; but he held them at bay, no man caring
to come within sweep of that mighty arm which had already done so much,
when a bullet from above struck him, and he fell over backward on the
rail mortally wounded.

Seymour raised his remaining pistol and fired it at the second man, who
had nearly reached the foreyard arm; less successful this time, he
missed the man, who threw his grenade down the hatchway.  Seymour
fainted from loss of blood.

"Back, men! back to the ship, all you Yarmouths!" cried Captain
Vincent, as he saw the lighted grenade, which exploded and ignited a
little heap of cartridges left by a dead powder-boy before the
magazine.  Alas! there was no one there to check or stop the flames.
The English sailors sprang back and up the sides and through the ports
of their ship with frantic haste; the lashings were being rapidly cut
by them, and the braces handled.

"Come aboard, men, while you can," cried Captain Vincent to the
Americans.  "Your ship 's afire; you can do no more; you 'll blow up in
a moment!"

The little handful of Americans were left alone on their ship.  The
only officer still standing lifted his sword and shook it impotently at
the Yarmouth in reply; the rest did not stir.  The smoke of battle had
now settled away, and the whole ghastly scene was revealed.  A woman's
cry rang out fraught with agony,--"Seymour, Seymour!" and again was her
cry unheeded; her lover could not hear.  She cried again; and then,
with a frightful roar and crash, the Randolph blew up.




CHAPTER XXXVII

For Love of Country

The force of the explosion occurring so near to the line-of-battle ship
drove her over with irresistible power upon her beam-ends until she
buried her port main-deck guns under water; her time was not yet come,
however, for, after a trembling movement of sickening uncertainty, she
righted herself, slowly at first, but finally with a mighty roll and
rush as if on a tidal wave.  For a few seconds the air was filled with
pieces of wreck, arms, spars, bodies, many of which fell on the
Yarmouth.  The horrified spectators saw the two broken halves of the
ill-fated frigate gradually disappearing beneath the heaving sea,
sucking down in their inexorable vortex most of the bodies of those,
alive or dead, who floated near.  The fire had come in broad sheets
through the portholes of the main-deck guns of the ship from the
explosion, driving the men from their stations, and, by heating the
iron masses or igniting the priming, caused sudden and wild discharges
to add their quota of confusion to the awful scene.  Pieces of burning
wreck had also fallen in the tops, or upon the sails, or lodged in the
standing rigging, full of tar as usual, and dry and inflammable to the
last degree.  The Yarmouth, therefore, was in serious danger,--more so
than in any other period of the action,--her little antagonist having
inflicted the most damaging blow with the last gasp, as it were; for
little columns of flame and smoke began to rise ominously in a dozen
places.  Then was manifested the splendid discipline for which British
ships were famous the world over.  Rapidly and with unerring skill and
coolness the proper orders were given, and the tired men were set to
work desperately fighting once more to check and put out the fire.
Long and hard was the struggle, the issue much in doubt; but in the end
the efforts of her crew were crowned with merited success, and their
ship was eventually saved from the dangerous conflagration which had
menaced her with ruin, not less complete and disastrous than had
befallen the frigate.

While all this was being done, a little scene took place upon the
quarter-deck which was worthy of notice.  Something heavy and solid,
thrown upward by the tremendous force of the discharge, struck the rail
with a mighty crash at the moment of the explosion, just at the point
where Katharine, wide-eyed, petrified with horror, after that one vivid
glance in which she apparently saw her lover dead on his own
quarter-deck beneath her, stood clinging rigidly to the bulwarks as if
paralyzed.  It was the body of a man; instinctively she threw out her
strong young arm and saved it from falling again into the sea on the
return roll of the ship.  One or two of the seamen standing by came to
her assistance, and the body was dragged on board and laid on the deck
at her feet.  Something familiar in the figure moved Katharine to a
further examination.  She knelt down and wiped the blood and smoke and
dust from the face of the prostrate man, and recognized him at once.
It was old Bentley, desperately wounded, his clothes soaked with blood
from several severe wounds, and apparently dying fast, but still
breathing.  A small tightly rolled up ball of bunting was lying near
her on the deck; it was a flag from the Randolph, which had been blown
there by the force of the explosion.  She quickly picked it up and
pillowed the head of the unconscious man upon it.  Then she ran below
to her cabin, coming back in a moment with water and a cordial, with
which she bathed the head and wiped the lips of the dying man.  The
fires were all forward, and, the wind being aft, the danger was in the
fore part of the ship; no one therefore paid the least attention to
her.  There was, in fact, save the captain and one or two midshipmen,
no one else on the poop-deck except her father, who like herself had
been overwhelmed by the sudden and awful ending of the battle.  Being
without anything to do, the colonel, who had been watching the men
fight with the fire, happened to look aft for a moment and saw his
daughter by the side of the prostrate man.  He stepped over to her at
once.

"Katharine, Katharine," he said to her in a tone of stern reproof and
surprise, not as he usually spoke to her, "you here!  'T is no place
for women.  When did you come from below?"

"I've not been below at all, father," she replied, looking up at him
with a white, stricken face which troubled his loving heart.

"Do you mean to tell me that you have been on deck during the action?"

"Yes, father, right here.  Do you not understand that it was Mr.
Seymour's ship--I could not go away!"

"By heavens!  Think of it!  And I forgot you completely--  The fault
was mine, how could I have allowed it?" he continued in great agitation.

"Never mind, father; I could not have gone below in any case.  Do you
think he--Mr. Seymour--can be yet alive?" she asked, still cherishing a
faint hope.

The colonel shook his head gloomily, and then stooping down and looking
at the prostrate form of the man on the deck, he asked,--

"But who is this you have here?"

The man opened his eyes at this moment and looked up vacantly.

"William Bentley, sir," he said in a hoarse whisper, as if in answer to
the question; and then making a vain effort to raise his hand to his
head, he went on half-mechanically, "bosun of the Randolph, sir.  Come
aboard!"

"Merciful Powers, it is old Bentley!" cried the colonel.  "Can anything
be done for you, my man?  How is it with you?"

Katharine poured a little more of the cordial down his throat, which
gave him a fictitious strength for a moment, and he answered in a
little stronger voice, with a glance of recognition and wonder,--

"The colonel and the young miss! we thought you dead in the wreck of
the Radnor.  He will be glad;" and then after a pause recollection came
to him.  "Oh, God!" he murmured, "Mr. Seymour!"

"What of him?  Speak!" cried Katharine, in agony.

"Gone with the rest," he replied with an effort "'T was a good fight,
though.  The other ships,--where are they?"

"Escaped," answered the colonel; "we are too much cut up to pursue."

"Why did you do it?" moaned Katharine, thinking of Seymour's attack on
the ship of the line.

The old man did not heed the question; his eyes closed.  He was still a
moment, and then he opened his eyes again slowly.  Straight above him
waved the standard of his enemy.

"I never thought--to die--under the English flag," he said slowly and
with great effort.  Supplying its place with her own young soft arm,
Katharine drew forth the little American ensign which had served him
for a pillow--stained with his own blood--and held it up before him.  A
light came into his dying eyes,--a light of heaven, perhaps, no pain in
his heart now.  One trembling hand would still do his bidding; by a
superhuman effort of his resolute will he caught the bit of bunting and
carried it to his lips in a long kiss of farewell.  His lips moved.  He
was saying something.  Katharine bent to listen.  What was it?  Ah! she
heard; they were the words he said on the deck of the transport when
they saw the ship wrecked in the pass in the beating seas,--the words
he had repeated in the old farmhouse on that winter night to the great
general, when he told the story of that cruise; the words he had made
to stand for the great idea of his own life; the words with which he
had cheered and soothed and sustained and encouraged many weaker men
who had looked to his iron soul for help and guidance.  They were the
words to which many a patriot like him, now lying mute and cold upon
the hills about Boston, under the trees at Long Island, by the flowing
waters and frowning cliffs of the Hudson, on the verdant glacis at
Quebec, 'neath the smooth surface of Lake Champlain, in the dim
northern woods, on the historic field of Princeton, or within the still
depths of this mighty sea now tossing them upon its bosom, had given
most eloquent expression and final attestation.  What were they?

"For--for--love--of--country."  The once mighty voice died away in a
feeble whisper; a child might still the faintly beating heart.  The
mighty chest--rose--fell; the old man lay still.  Love of
country,--that was his passion, you understand.

Love of country!  That was the great refrain.  The wind roared the song
through the pines, on the snow-clad mountains in the far north, sobbed
it softly through the rustling palmetto branches in the south-land, or
breathed it in whispers over the leaves of the oak and elm and laurel,
between.  The waves crashed it in tremendous chorus on rock-bound
shores, or rolled it with tender caress over shining sands.  Under its
inspiration, mighty men left all and marched forth to battle; wooed by
its subtle music, hero women bore the long hours of absence and
suspense; and in its tender harmonies the little children were rocked
to sleep.  Ay, love of country!  All the voices of man and nature in a
continent caught it up and breathed it forth, hurled it in mighty
diapason far up into God's heaven.  Love of country!  It was indeed a
mighty truth.  They preached it, loved it, lived for it, died for it,
till at last it made them free!




CHAPTER XXXVIII

_Philip Disobeys Orders_

"Who is this, pray?" said Captain Vincent, at this moment stepping back
to the silent little group.

"The boatswain of the Randolph," replied the colonel.  "He has just
died."

"Poor fellow! but there are many other brave men gone this day.  What
think you was the complement of the frigate, colonel?"

"Over three hundred men certainly," replied the colonel (the actual
number was three hundred and fifteen).  "Most of them not already done
for were lost in the explosion, I presume?"

"Yes, assuredly; and now I owe you an apology, my dear sir.  I never
saw a more gallant action in my life.  The man 's gone, of course, but
he shall have full credit for it in my report; 'twas bravely done, and
successfully, too.  We are frightfully cut up, and in no condition to
pursue.  In fact, I will not conceal from you that some of our spars
are so severely wounded, and the starboard rigging so damaged and
scorched and cut up, that I know not how we could stand a heavy blow.
Twenty-five are killed, and upward of sixty wounded too, and about
thirty missing, killed, or wounded men of the boarding party, who were
undoubtedly blown up with the frigate.  Beauchamp is gone; and that
little fellow there," pointing to a couple of seamen bringing a small
limp body aft, "is Montagu.  Poor little youngster!"

"This has indeed been a frightful action, captain," replied the
colonel.  "I knew young Seymour well.  He was a man of the most
consummate gallantry.  This sacrifice is like him," he continued
softly, looking at Katharine and then turning away.  Perhaps the
captain understood.  At any rate he stepped to her side and said
gently,--

"Mistress Katharine, this is no place for you; you must go below.
Indeed, I must insist.  I shall have to order you.  Come--" and then
laying his hand on her arm, he started back in surprise.  "Why, you are
wounded!"

"'Tis nothing, sir," said Katharine, faintly.  "I welcome it; 'twas an
American bullet.  Would it had found my heart!"

"Only a flesh-wound, colonel; no cause for alarm," said the captain,
looking at it with the eye of experience.  "It will be all right in a
day or two.  But now she must go below.  I can't understand how you
were allowed to stay here, or be here.  What were they thinking of?
But you saw one of the hottest and most desperate battles ever fought
between two ships since you were here.  They can fight; you were right,
colonel," he went on in ungrudging admiration.

"Here, Desborough," he added, addressing the lieutenant, who just then
put his foot on the deck, "take Miss Wilton below, and ask the surgeon
to attend her at his convenience; she 's gone and got herself wounded
by her friends."

Lieutenant Desborough, black and grimy, streaked with smoke and powder,
turned pale at the captain's words, and sprang forward anxiously and
led the object of his love down the steps to her cabin.  "Wounded!" he
murmured.  "Oh, my love, why did no one take you to a place of safety?"

"'T is nothing," she replied, going on as if in a dream.

Desborough had his wish: his rival was gone; he had the field to
himself; but he was too manly to feel any exultation now that it was
over, and too sorry for the vacant despair he saw on her face.  He
tenderly whispered to her as he led her on,--

"Believe me, dear Katharine, it is not thus I would have triumphed over
Mr. Seymour.  He was in truth a knightly gentleman."

Overwhelming pity for her filled his heart, and he went on
magnanimously,--

"I am sorry--"

She made no answer; she did not hear.  In the cabin the body of little
Montagu was lying on a table.  He would never get his frigate now.  How
small and frail and boyish looked the Honorable Giles to-day!  Why did
they send children like that to war?  Had he no mother?--poor lad!
Moved by a sudden impulse, she stooped and kissed him, as she had done
an hour before.  No throb of the proud little heart answered responsive
to her caress now.  Alas! she might kiss him when and as she pleased;
he would not feel it, and he would not heed.  Entering her own berth at
last, she closed the door and sank down upon her knees,--alone with God!


"A sail coming down fast,--the little brig, sir," reported the officer
of the deck to Captain Vincent.  "Shall we come about and give him a
broadside?"

"No, no; we dare not handle the braces yet,--not until the gear and
spars have been well overhauled."

"Shall we use the stern-chaser then, sir?"

The Yarmouth had left the scene of the explosion some distance away by
this time, but she was still within easy gun-shot.  Captain Vincent
earnestly examined the brig; as he looked, she came up to the wind,
hove to, and dropped a boat in the water.  There was a bit of spar
still floating there.  The captain saw that three or four men were
clinging to it.

"No; she's on an errand of mercy.  There are men in the water on that
topmast there.  Let her go free," he said generously.  "We 've done
enough to-day to satisfy any reasonable man."

The colonel grasped his hand warmly and thanked him.  The little brig
picked up her boat, swung her mainyard, and filled away again on the
port tack, in the wake of the rest of the little squadron now far
ahead; then, understanding the forbearance of the big ship, she fired a
gun to leeward and dipped her ensign in salute.

The force of the explosion had thrown Seymour, from his advantageous
position aft, far out into the water and away from the sinking ship.
The contact with cold water recalled him to his senses at once; and
with the natural instinct of man for life, he struck out as well as he
might, considering his broken leg and wounded arm and weakened state.
There was a piece of a mast with the top still on it floating near by.
He struggled gallantly to make it,--'twas no use, he could do no more;
closing his eyes, he sank down in the dark water.  But help was near: a
hand grasped him by his long hair and drew him up; one of his men,
unwounded fortunately, had saved him.  The two men presently reached
the bit of wreck; the sailor scrambled up on it, and by a great effort
drew his captain by his side; two more men swam over desperately, and
finally joined the little group.  They clung there helpless, hopeless,
despairing, fascinated, watching the remains of the Randolph disappear,
marking a few feeble swimmers here and there struggling, till all was
still.  Then they turned their eyes upon their late antagonist, running
away before the wind in flames; they saw her fight them down
successfully; appalled, none spoke.  Presently one of the seamen
glanced the other way, and saw the little brig swiftly bearing down
upon them.

"God be praised!  Here's the brig, the Fair American," he cried.  "We
shall be saved--saved!"

The brig was handled smartly; she came to the wind, backed the
maintopsail, and lay gently tossing to and fro on the long swells.  The
young captain stood on the rail, clinging to the back-stays, anxiously
watching.  The boat was dropped into the water, and with long strokes
shot over to them.  The men sprang aboard; rude hands gently and
tenderly lifted the wounded captain in.  They pulled rapidly back to
the brig; the falls were manned, and the boat was run up, the yard
swung, and she filled away.  Seymour was lifted down; Philip received
him in his arms.

"I ought to arrest you for disobedience of orders," said the captain,
sternly.  "Why did you pay no attention to my signals?  You have
jeoparded the brig.  Yon ship can blow you out of the water; you are
quite within range."

But they soon saw that no motion was made by the ship; and in
accordance with Seymour's orders the gun was fired and the colors
dipped,--a salute which the ship promptly returned.

"I ought to put you under arrest, Philip," again said Seymour, faintly,
while he was lying in the tiny cabin, having his wounds dressed; "but I
will not.  'T was gallantly done; but obey orders first hereafter,--'t
is the first principle of action on the sea."  That was rather cool
comfort for the young officer, considering that his somewhat reckless
action had just saved Seymour's life.  He made brief reply, however,
and then resumed his station on the deck of his little vessel, which
was rapidly overhauling the rest of the fleet.  As soon as the night
fell, the wind permitting, they were by Seymour's direction headed for
the harbor of Charleston once more.  Now that his mind was free again,
Seymour's thoughts turned to that woman's form of which he had one
brief glimpse ere the line-of-battle ship disappeared in the smoke.
Could it indeed have been Katharine Wilton?  Could fate play him such a
trick as to awaken once more his sleeping hope?  Through the long night
he tossed in fevered unrest in his narrow berth.  Again he went over
the awful scenes of that one hour of horror.  The roar of the guns, the
crash of splintered timbers, the groans of the wounded men, rang in his
fretted ear.  They seemed to rise before him, those gallant officers
and men, the hardy, bold sailors, veterans of the sea, audacious
youngsters with life long before them, Bentley, his old, his faithful
friend,--lost--all lost.  Was there reproach in their gaze?  Was it
worth while, after all?  Ay, but duty; he had always done his
duty--duty always--duty--  Ah, they faded away, and Katharine looked
down upon--it was she--love--duty--love--duty!  Was that the roar of
battle again, or only his beating heart?  They found him in the
morning, delirious, shouting orders, murmuring words of love, calling
Kate,--babbling like a child.




CHAPTER XXXIX

_Three Pictures of the Sea_

A short time before sunset that same evening the Yarmouth was hove to,
and the hoarse cry of the boatswain and his mates was once more heard
through the ship, calling,--

"All hands!  Bury the dead."

Skilled hands had been working earnestly all the afternoon to repair
the damage to the vessel; much had been accomplished, but much more
still remained to be done.  However, night was drawing on, and it was
advisable to dispose of the dead bodies of those who had been killed in
the action, or who had died since of their wounds, without further
delay.  Some of the sailmaker's mates had been busy during the
afternoon, sewing up the dead in new, clean hammocks, and weighting
each one with heavy shot at the feet to draw it down.  The bodies were
laid in orderly rows amidships, forward of the mainmast, and all was
ready when the word was passed.  The crew assembled in the gangways
facing aft, the boatswain, gunner, carpenter, sailmaker, and other
warrant officers at their head.  The captain, attended by Colonel
Wilton and the first lieutenant in full uniform, and surrounded by the
officers down to the smallest midshipman, stood facing the crew on the
quarter-deck; back of the officers, on the opposite side of the deck,
the marine guard was drawn up.  At the break of the poop stood the
slender, graceful figure of a woman, alone, clearly outlined against
the low light of the setting sun, looking mournfully down upon the
picture, her heart, though filled with sadness and sorrow particularly
her own, still great enough to feel sympathy for others.

The chaplain, clothed in the white vestments of his sacred office,
presently came from out the cabin beneath the poop-deck, and stopped
opposite the gangway between the line of men and officers.  Two of the
boatswain's mates, at a signal from the first lieutenant, stepped to
the row of bodies and carefully lifted up the first one and laid it on
a grating, covering it at the same time with a flag.  They next lifted
the grating and placed one end of it on the rail overlooking the sea,
and held the other in their hands and waited.  The captain uncovered,
all the other officers and the men following his example.

The chaplain began to read from the book in his hand.  The first body
on the grating was a very small one,--only a boy, looking smaller in
contrast to those of the men by which it had lain.  The little figure
of the Honorable Giles looked pathetic indeed.  Some of the little
fellow's messmates had hard work to stifle their tears; here and there
in the ranks of the silent men the back of a hand would go furtively up
to a wet eye, as the minister read on and on.

How run the words?

"Forasmuch as it hath pleased Almighty God, in His wise Providence, to
take out of this world the soul of our deceased brother--"  Was it
indeed Thy pleasure, O God, that this little "brother" should die?  Was
Thy Providence summed up in this little silent figure?  Alas, who can
answer?

And then as the even voice of the priest went on with the solemn and
beautiful words which never grow familiar,--"we therefore commit his
body to the deep,"--the first lieutenant nodded to the watching
sailors.  They lifted the inboard end of the grating high in the air; a
fellow midshipman standing by pulled aside the covering flag; the
little body started, moved slowly,--more rapidly; there was a flash of
light in the air, a splash in the water alongside.

The chaplain motioned for another; it was a man this time,--all the
rest were men; four of the seamen lifted him up.  Again the few short
sentences, and the sailor was launched upon another voyage of life.
Tears were streaming from eyes unused to weeping, tracing unwonted
courses down the strangely weather-beaten, wrinkled cheeks; men
mourning the loss of shipmate and messmate, friend and fellow.  The
last one in the row was a gigantic man; over his bosom was laid a
little blood-stained flag of different blazoning: there was the blue
field as in the heavens, white stars, and red and white stripes that
enfolded him like a caress.  The sailors lifted him up and waited a
moment, until the tall, stately, distinguished figure of the colonel,
in his plain civilian dress, stepped out from the group of officers and
stood beside the grating; he put his hand upon the flag of his country,
glad to do this service for a faithful if humble friend.  It was soon
over; with a little heavier splash old Bentley fell into the sea he had
so loved, joining that innumerable multitude of those who, having done
their duty, wait for that long-deferred day when the sea shall give up
her dead!  The woman hid her face within her hands, the great bell of
the ship tolled solemnly forward, the sun had set, the men were
dismissed, the watch called, and the night fell softly, while the ship
glided on in the darkness.


Another week had elapsed.  The Yarmouth had been driven steadily
northward, and by contrary winds prevented from making her course.  She
was in a precarious condition too; a further examination had disclosed
that some of her spars, especially the mainmast, had been so severely
and seriously wounded, even more so than at first reported, as scarcely
to permit any sail at all to be set on them, and not fit in anyway to
endure stress of weather.  The damages had been made good, however, as
far as possible, the rigging knotted and spliced, the spars fished and
strengthened as well.  The ship had been leaking slightly all the time,
from injuries received in the fight, in all probability; but a few
hours at the pumps daily had hitherto kept her free, and though the
carpenter had been most assiduous in a search for the leaks, and had
stopped as many as he had been able to come at, some of them could not
be found.  The weather had steadily changed for the worse as they had
reached higher latitudes, and it was now cold, rainy, and very
threatening.  The captain and his officers were filled with anxiety and
foreboding.  Katharine kept sedulously in her cabin, devoured by grief
and despair; and the once cheery colonel, full of deep sympathy for his
unfortunate daughter, went about softly and sadly during the long days.

The day broke gloomily on one certain unfortunate morning; they had not
seen the sun for five days, nor did they see it then.  No gladsome
light flooded the heavens and awoke the sea; the sky was deeply
overcast with cold, dull, leaden clouds that hung low and heavy over
the mighty ship; a horror of darkness enshrouded the ocean.  Away off
on the horizon to the northeast the sky was black with great masses of
frightful-looking clouds; through the glass the watchful officers saw
that rain was falling in torrents from them, while the vivid lightning
played incessantly through them.  Where the ship was, it had fallen
suddenly calm, and she lay gently rolling and rocking in the moderate
swell; but they could see the hurricane driving down upon them, coming
at lightning speed, standing like a solid wall, and flattening the
waves by sheer weight.  All hands had been called on deck at once, at
the first glimpse of the coming hurricane.  Desborough had the trumpet;
the alert and eager topmen were sent aloft to strip the ship of the
little canvas which the heavy weather and weakened spars had permitted
them to show.  It was a race between them and the coming storm.  The
men worked desperately, madly; some of them had not yet reached the
deck when the rain and the wind were upon them.  By the captain's
direction, the colonel had brought Katharine from below, and she was
standing on the quarter-deck sheltered by the overhang of the poop
above, listlessly watching.  Desborough had made no progress in his
love-affairs; he had too much tact and delicacy to press his suit under
the present untoward circumstances, and indeed had been too incessantly
occupied with the pressing exigencies of the shattered ship, and the
duties of his responsible position thereon, to have any time to spare
for more than the common courtesies.  The awful storm was at last upon
them: a sudden change in its direction caused the first fierce blow to
fall fairly upon the starboard side of the ship; it pressed her down on
her beam-ends; over and over she went, down, down.  Would she ever
right again?  Ah, the spliced shrouds and stays on the weather-side,
which had been that attacked by the Randolph, finally gave way, the
mainmast went by the board about halfway below the top, the foremast at
the cap, and the mizzentopmast, too; relieved of this enormous mass of
heavy top hamper, the ship slowly righted herself.  The immense mass of
wreckage beat and thundered against the port side; it was a fearful
situation, but all was not yet lost.  Gallantly led by Desborough
himself, who saw in one sweeping glance that Katharine was still safe,
the men, with axes and knives, hacked through the rigging which held
the wreck of the giant spars to the ship, and after a few moments of
sickening suspense she drifted clear; a bit of storm canvas was spread
forward on the wreck of the foremast, and the ship got before the wind
and drove on, laboring and pitching in the heavy sea.  The decks were
cleared; and indeed there was little left to clear, the waves having
broken over her several times when she lay in the trough of the sea,
sweeping everything out with them, and the vessel was a total
wreck,--the spars gone, rails and bulwarks battered in and smashed,
boats lost, the battle having destroyed these on the starboard side,
and the wreck and the sea the others.  Stop! there was one boat left
amidships, a launch capable of holding about forty persons in a pinch,
and still seaworthy; it was, by the captain's order, promptly made as
serviceable as possible in view of the probable emergency.

About four o'clock in the afternoon the carpenter came aft with the
sounding-rod of the well in his hand.  The strain had been too much for
her; some of the weakened timbers had given way, or some of the seams
had opened, or perhaps a butt had started, for the ship was leaking
badly.  Still those dauntless men did not despair.  The crew were told
off in gangs to work, and all night the clank, clank, of the pumps was
heard.  Katharine dutifully laid down as she was bidden; but there was
no sleep for her nor any one else on the ship that long night.  The day
broke again finally, but brought them no cheer: their labor had been
unavailing; the leak had gained on them so rapidly that the ship lay
low in the water, listless and inert, rolling in a sick, sluggish,
helpless way in the trough of the sea.  The wind had abated somewhat,
and a boat well handled might live in the water now.  By Captain
Vincent's direction the men were sent to their stations on the spar, or
upper deck.  The boat's crew was chosen by selecting every fifteenth
man in the long lines, the division officers doing the counting.  The
boat was launched without tackles, by main strength, sliding on rollers
over the side through the broken bulwarks.  Katharine, listless and
indifferent, still attended by Chloe, was put aboard.  Captain Vincent
looked about among his officers; whom should he put in charge?  They
all looked deprecatingly and entreatingly at him.  None desired to go;
no one wished to be singled out to abandon the ship and his brother
officers.  His glance fell on Desborough.

"The duty is yours; you are the first officer of the ship."

"Oh, Captain Vincent, do not send me, I beg you.  My place surely is on
the ship with you.  Cannot some one else--"

"No, you must go.  My last command to you, my lord," he said, smiling
faintly and extending his hand.  Desborough, seeing the futility of
further appeal, grasped it warmly in both his own, bowed to the other
officers, and with a wave of his hand stepped on the rail and sprang
into the tossing boat alongside.

"Are there any others to go?" he said.

The captain's eye fell upon the figure of the colonel standing among
the officers.

"You are to go, sir.  Nay, I will hear of no objections.  You are my
prisoner, and I am bound to see you delivered safely.  Go, colonel.  I
mean it; I will have you put aboard by a file of marines if you do not
go at once."

Katharine awoke from her apathy and stretched out her hands with a
piteous cry,--

"Father, father, oh, I cannot lose you too."

"Prisoner or no prisoner, sir," said the colonel, "let me say that I am
proud of my connection with you and your officers and your men.  If I
live to reach the shore, the world shall hear of this noble ending.
Good-by, captain; good-by, gentlemen.  I would fain stay with you."

"No, no!" was the cry from this band of heroes; and then Hollins sprang
forward and shouted,--

"Lads!  Three cheers for the colonel and for our shipmates in the
launch!  Let them tell at home that we were glad to stay by the old
ship."

The hearty cheers came with a roar from five hundred throats.

"Good-by, good-by; God bless you!" cried the colonel, choking and
utterly overcome, as he got into the boat, and sank down in the stern
sheets beside his daughter.

"Colonel, we have n't a moment of time," whispered Desborough, who saw
that the ship was sinking.

"Shove off, men; pull hard!"

A few moments of hard rowing in the heavy sea put them some little
distance away, and the boat waited under just enough way to give them
command of her.  The men of the ship kept their stations; calm and
peaceful, they also waited.  The ship settled lower and lower; a man
stepped hurriedly aft; and a moment later the bold and brilliant ensign
of Old England, which never waved over braver men, fluttered out in the
heavy breeze from the wrecked mast-head, the vivid red of the proud
flag making a lurid dash of color against the gray sky-line.  The ship
was lower now.  Now she plunged forward; the water rose; the captain
raised his hand; three hearty cheers rang out; the drums beat; the
marines presented arms.  She was gone!  The flag streamed out bravely
on the surface of the water, and then it was drawn down; a confused
mass of heads and waving arms was seen in the water, and they too in a
moment were slowly drawn down into the vortex caused by the sinking
ship.  The woman again hid her face in her hands; the colonel laid his
arm across the shoulder of his daughter; Desborough and the men in the
boat stared horribly at the spot left vacant; a deep groan broke from
them; they rose on the crest of a wave, sank down again, rose once more
and looked again,--the little boat was alone on that mighty sea!


Oh, the agony of those long and frightful days in that little boat!
Never a sail did they sight, as day after day they rowed or sailed to
the westward, eagerly scanning the horizon for a landfall.  The waves
washed over them, saturating their clothing; the chill winds of winter
froze them.  First their provisions gave out, though served with the
most rigid economy by Desborough himself; then the water, husbanded as
no precious jewel was ever hoarded, was exhausted to the last drop, and
that drop, by common consent, Desborough forced between Katharine's
reluctant lips, though she would fain have refused it, claiming no
indulgence beyond the others.  The rare qualities of that young officer
showed themselves brilliantly in this frightful peril.  It was due to
his skill and careful management that they were not swamped a dozen
times; tireless, unselfish, cheerful, unsparing of himself, without him
they would have died.  The men bore their sufferings, when all food and
water failed them, with the sturdy resolution of British sailors;
Desborough his, with the courage of the hero that he was, his fiercest
pang being for the white-faced girl who suffered in uncomplaining
silence.  The colonel exhibited the stoical indifference of a seasoned
old soldier, as to his own personal condition, all his thoughts being
centred upon his daughter, who passed through the dreadful experience
with the calm resignation of a woman who had nothing left to live for,
and, strange to say, seemed to feel it less acutely than the rest; even
black Chloe, who had impartially shared with her mistress in all the
favors accorded to her, being in a state of utter exhaustion, amounting
to collapse.

When the pangs of hunger and thirst got hold of them, they refused--and
were indeed entirely unable--to work longer with the oars, so that,
unless the wind was fair and the sail was set, they simply drifted on.

One by one the sailors died.  Waking from a troubled sleep of short
duration, Katharine one day found Chloe's dead hand around her feet,
her cold lips pressed upon them.  Some of the men grew mad before they
died, and raved and babbled of green fields and running brooks until
the end came, and still the little boat drifted on.  Few and short were
the prayers the living said as, day by day they cast the dead into the
sea.  Desborough, the resolute, with undying strength kept steadily at
the helm.  Once only did he speak to Katharine in words of love.  As
their situation grew more and more hopeless, and even his resolute
optimism began to fail him, he bent down and whispered in her ear,--

"I would not trouble you now, Katharine, but before we die I must tell
you once again that I love you.  Will you believe it?"

"I will believe it," she answered dully, giving him her hand.  Oh, he
thought in agony, as he bent over it and kissed it, how thin and white
and feeble it was I One morning, after hope was dead, he was listlessly
scanning the line of the horizon as the rising sun threw it into
relief, more from habit than expectancy, when his heart almost stopped
its feeble beating, for land was there before him if his strained eyes
did not deceive him.  Doubting the evidence of his weakened senses, and
fearing the delusions of a disordered imagination, he refrained from
communicating his impressions to any of the others until the light of
day determined the accuracy of his vision.  Then he whispered the news
to Katharine, the apathetic woman told it to the sinking colonel, and
then Desborough cried it to his dying crew.  The wind sprang up at the
moment too, and in a few hours they beached the boat upon a low sandy
shore, with the waves breaking gently over it in long easy rollers.  It
was a desolate coast, sparsely wooded with small trees, and having
little evidence of human habitation about it; but no glimpse of heaven
could have more rejoiced a dying soul than this bleak haven to which
they had been brought.  They staggered, half fell, out of the boat, and
lay exhausted, with ghastly haggard faces, on the shining sands, giving
thanks to God for His mercy.

Desborough, as the strongest of the party, started inland, finding by
and by a little stream of fresh water, and farther on, on higher
ground, seeing a house, the smoke curling from its chimneys showing
that it was inhabited.  To the bubbling spring he half led, half
dragged his shipwrecked party.  They drank sparingly by his direction,
and were refreshed, for with the cool water life and hope came back to
them once more.  Then he left them again and went on to the house.
They had landed on the shore of Virginia, and the people of the house
welcomed and cared for the poor castaways, sharing with them their
humble store with the kindly hospitality for which the land was famous.
Their long voyage was at an end, their troubles were over.  The colonel
and Katharine would be free again; they might go home once more, and
Desborough would be a prisoner.




BOOK V

THE DEAD ALIVE AGAIN


CHAPTER XL

_A Final Appeal_

It was springtime again in Virginia.  The sky, its blue depths
accentuated by the shifting clouds, was never more clear, wherever it
appeared in the intervals of sunshine, nor the air more fresh and pure,
even in that land famed for its bright skies and its mild climate, than
it was this April day; which, with its sunshine and showers in
unregulated alternation, seemed symbolical of life,--that life of which
every tender blade of grass, every venturesome flower thrusting its
head above the sod, seemed to speak.  There was health and strength in
the gentle breeze which wantonly played with the budding leaves of the
great trees, already putting forth little evangels of that splendid
foliage with which they decked themselves in the full glory of summer.
That merry wind which swept through the open boat-house at the end of
the wharf laid a bold hand upon the curls which fell about the neck of
the young girl sitting there by the door near the water on one of the
benches, gazing out over the broad reaches of the quiet, ever beautiful
Potomac, rippled gently by the wind under the late afternoon sun.  The
gallant little breeze, fragrant with balm and perfume of the trees and
flowers, kissed a faint color into her pale cheek, and seemed to
whisper to her despondent heart in murmuring sounds that framed
themselves into the immortal words "hope, hope."

The young girl had but yesterday entered upon her twentieth spring.
Four months ago there had not been a merrier, lighter-hearted, gayer,
more coquettish young maiden in tidewater Virginia; and to-day, she
thought, as she looked down at her thin hand outlined so clearly upon
the vivid cardinal cloak she wore, which had dropped unheeded on the
seat by her side, to-day she was like that man in the play of whom her
father read,--a grave man.  No, not a man at all.  Once, in her
enthusiasm, she had fondly imagined that she had possessed all those
daring qualities of energy and action, those manly virtues, which might
have been hers by inheritance could the accident of sex have been
reversed.  But now she knew she was but a woman, after all,--so weak,
so feeble, so listless.  What had she left to live for?  Once it was
her father, then it was her country, then it was her lover; now?
Nothing!  Her father at the request of Congress would soon resume his
interrupted duties in France, now become more important than ever.  He
was a man of the world and a soldier, a diplomat.  The hard experiences
of the past few months were for him episodes, exciting truly, but only
part of a lifetime spent in large adventure, soon forgotten in some
other strenuous part demanded by some other strenuous exigency.  But
she,--no, she was not a man at all, but a woman,--unused to such scenes
and happenings as fate had lately made her a participant in.  Her
father might have his country,--he had not lost his love, his heart was
not buried out in the depths of the cruel sea.  What had become of that
Roman patriotism upon which she prided herself in times past?  Her
country!  What had changed her so?  There were many answers.

There was Blodgett's grave at the foot of the hill.  She had played in
childhood with that faithful old soldier.  Many a tale had he told her
of her gallant father when, as a young man, he gayly rode away to the
wars, leaving her lady mother in tears behind.  She could sympathize
with waiting women now, and understand.  Those were such deeds of
daring that the rude recital of the old man once stirred her very heart
with joy and terror; now she was sick at the thought of them.  And
Blodgett was gone; he had died defending them, where he had been
stationed.  That was an answer.

There, too, far away in another State, lay the lover of her girlhood's
happy day,--the bright-eyed, eager, gallant, joyous lad.  What good
comrades they had been!  How they had laughed, and played, and ridden,
and rowed, and hunted, and danced, and flirted, through the morning of
life,--how pleasant had been that life indeed!  He was quiet now; she
could no longer join in his ringing laugh, the sound of his voice was
stilled, they might never play together again,--was there any play at
all in life?  That was another answer.

There was the white-haired mother, the stately little royalist, Madam
Talbot, who slept in peace on the hill at Fairview Hall, her ambitions,
her hopes, and her loyalty buried with her, leaving the place
untenanted save by wistful memories; she too had gone.

Answers?--they crowded thick upon her!  There were the officers of the
Yarmouth, Captain Vincent, Beauchamp, Hollins, and the little boy, the
Honorable Giles, and all the other officers and men with whom she had
come in contact on that frightful cruise.  There were the heroic men
who had stayed by their ship, who had seen the favored few go away in
the only boat that was left seaworthy, without a murmur at being left
behind, who had faced death unheeding, unrepining, sinking down in the
dark water with a cheer upon their lips.  There was the old sailor,
too, with his unquenchable patriotism, her friend because the friend of
her lover; and Philip, her brother; and there was Seymour himself.  Ah,
what were all the rest to him!  Gone, and how she loved him!

She leaned her head upon her hand and thought of him.  Here in this
boat-house he had first spoken to her of his love.  Here she had first
felt his lips touch her cheek.  There, rocked gently by the light
breeze, upon the water at her feet was the familiar little
pleasure-boat; she had not allowed any one to row her about in it since
her return, in spite of much entreaty.  It was this very cloak she wore
that day, nearly the very hour.  The place was redolent with sweet
memories of happy days, though to think on them now broke her heart.
It all came back to her as it had come again and again.  She briefly
reviewed that acquaintance, short though it was, which had changed the
whole course of her life.  She saw him again, as he struck prompt to
defend her honor in the hall, resenting a ruffian's soiling hand
stretched out to her; she saw him lying wounded and senseless there at
her feet.  She saw him stretched prone on that shattered deck, on that
ruined ship, pale, blood-stained, senseless again, again unheeding her
bitter cry.  She would have called once more upon him, save that she
knew humanity has no voice which reaches out into the darkness by which
it may call back those who are once gone to live beyond.  She did not
weep,--that were a small thing, a trifle; she sat and brooded.  What
had she lost in the service of her country?  What sacrifices had been
exacted from her by that insatiable country!  Alas, alas, she thought,
men may have a country, a woman has only a heart.

Four short months had changed it all.  How young she had been!  Would
she ever be young again?  How full of the joy of life!  Its currents
swept by her unheeded now.  Why had not God been merciful to her, that
she could have died there upon the sea, she thought.  Ah, poor humanity
never learns His mercy; perhaps it is because we have no measure by
which to fathom its mighty depths.  She saw herself old and lonely,
forgotten but not forgetting.  But even then lacked she not
opportunity; woman-like, in spite of her constancy, she took a
melancholy pleasure in the thought that there was one still who
hungered for the shattered remnants of her broken heart, who lived for
the sound of her voice and the glance other eyes and the light of her
face.  One there was, handsome, brave, distinguished, gentle, of
ancient name, assured station, ample fortune, who longed to lay all he
was or had at her feet.

But what were these things?  Nothing to her, nothing.  There was but
one, as she had said on the ship to Desborough: "I love a sailor; you
are not he."  And yet her soul was filled with pity for the gallant
gentleman, and she thought of him tenderly with deep affection.

Presently she heard quick footsteps on the floor of the boat-house, and
turning her head she saw him.  He held a letter, an official packet,
with the seal broken, open in his hand.

"Oh, Miss Wilton, you here?" he said.  "I have looked everywhere for
you.  Do you not think the evening air grows chill?  Is it not too cold
for you out here in the boat-house?  Allow me;" and then, with that
gentle solicitude which women prize, he lifted the neglected cloak and
tenderly wrapped it about her shoulders.

"Thank you," she said gratefully, faintly smiling up at him, "but I
hardly need it.  I do not feel at all cold.  The air is so pleasant and
the sun is not yet set, you see.  Did you wish to see me about anything
special, Lord Desborough?"

"No--yes--that is--  Oh, Mistress Katharine, the one special want of my
life is to see you always and everywhere.  You know that,--nay, never
lift your hand,--I remember.  I will try not to trespass upon your
orders again.  I came to tell you that--I am going away."

"Going away," she repeated sadly.  "Has your exchange been made?"

"Yes; a courier came to the Hall a short time since, and here it is.
My orders, you see; I must leave at once."

"I am sorry, indeed sorry that you must go."

He started suddenly as if to speak, a little flash of hope flickering
in his despondent face; but she continued quickly,--

"It has been very pleasant for us to have you here, except that you
have been a prisoner; but now you will be free, and for that, of
course, I rejoice.  But I have so few friends left," she went on
mournfully, "I am loath to see one depart, even though he be an enemy."

"Oh, do not call me an enemy, I entreat you, Katharine.  Oh, let me
speak just once again," he interrupted with his usual impetuosity; "and
talk not to me of freedom!  While the earth holds you I am not free:
ay, even should Heaven claim you, I still am bound.  All the days of my
captivity here I have been a most willing and happy prisoner,--your
prisoner.  I have looked forward with dread and anguish to the day when
I might be exchanged and have to go away.  Here would I have been
content to pass my life, by your side.  Oh, once again let me plead!
My duty, my honor, call me now to the service of my king.  I no longer
have excuse for delay, but you have almost made me forget there was a
king.  Now that I must go, why should I go alone?" he went on eagerly.
"I know, I know you love the--the other,--but he is gone.  You do not
hate me, you even like me; you regret my going; perhaps as days go by,
you will regret it more.  We are at least friends; let me take care of
you in future.  Oh, it kills me to see you so white, and indifferent to
life and all that it has or should have for you.  You are only a girl
yet,--I cannot bear to see all the color gone out of your sweet face,
the light out of your eyes; the sight of that thin hand breaks my
heart.  Won't you live for me to love,--live, and let me love you?
Your father goes to-morrow, so he says, and you will be left alone
here; why should it be?  Go with me.  Give me a right to do what my
heart aches to do for you,--to coax the roses back into your cheek, to
woo the laugh to your lips, to win happiness back to your heart; to
devote my life to you, darling.  Have pity on me, have pity on my
love,--have pity!"

His voice dropped into a passionate whisper; as he pleaded with her, he
sank down upon one knee by her side, beseeching by word and gesture and
look that she should show him that pity he could see in her eyes, that
he knew was in her heart, and to which he made his last appeal; and
then, lifting the hem of her dress to his lips with an unconscious
movement of passionate reverence, he waited.

She looked at him in silence a moment.  So young, so handsome, so
appealing, her heart filled with sorrow and sympathy for him.  There
was hope in his eyes which she had not seen for many days; how could
she drive it away and crush his heart!  It might be cruel, but she had
no answer, no other answer, no new word, to tell him.  Her eyes filled
with tears; she could not trust herself to speak, she only shook her
head.

"Ah," he said, rising to his feet and throwing up his hands with a
gesture of despair, "I knew it.  Well, the dream is over at last.  This
is the end.  I sought life, and found death; that, at least, if it
shall come I shall welcome.  Would God I had gone down with the ship!
You have no pity; you let a dead image--an idea--stand between you and
a living love.  Will you never forget?"

"Never," she said softly.  "Love knows no death.  He is alive--here.
But do not grieve so for me; I am not worth it.  You will go away and
forget, and--"

"No; you have said it, 'Love knows no death.'  I, too, cannot forget.
As long as I live I shall love--and remember.  How if I waited and
waited?  Katharine, I would wait forever for you," he said, suddenly
catching at the trifle.

"No, it would be no use.  My friend, we both must suffer; it cannot be
otherwise.  I esteem you, respect you, admire you.  You have protected
me, honored me; my gratitude--"  She went on brokenly, "You might ask
anything of me but my heart, and that is given away."

"Let me take you without it, then.  I want but you."

"No, Lord Desborough, it cannot be.  Do not ask me again.  No, I cannot
say I wish it otherwise."

His flickering hope died away in silence.  "Katharine, will you promise
me, if there ever comes a time--"

"I promise," she said; "but the time will never come."

He looked at her as dying men look to the light, there was a long
silence, and then he said,--

"I must go now, Katharine.  I suppose I must bid you good-by now?"

"Yes, I think it would be best."

"I shall pass this way again on my journey to Alexandria in half an
hour; may I not speak once more to you then?"

"No," she said finally, after a long pause.  "I think it best that we
should end it now.  It can do no good at all.  Good-by, and may God
bless you."

He bent and kissed her hand, and then stopped a moment and looked at
her, saying never a word.

"Good-by, again," she said.

On the instant he turned and left her.




CHAPTER XLI

_Into the Haven, at last_

Two weary horsemen on tired horses were slowly riding up the river road
just where it entered the Wilton plantation.  One was young, a mere boy
in years; but a certain habit of command, with the responsibility
accompanying, had given him a more manly appearance than his age
warranted.  The other, to a casual glance, seemed much older than his
companion, though closer inspection would show that he was still a
young man, and that those marks upon his face which the careless
passer-by would consider the attributes of age had been traced by the
fingers of grief and trouble.  The bronzed and weather-beaten faces of
both riders bespoke an open-air life, and suggested those who go down
upon the great deep in ships, a suggestion further borne out by the
faded, worn naval uniforms they wore.  In spite of the joy of
springtime which was all about them, both were silent and both were
sad; but the sadness of the boy, as was natural, was less deep, less
intense, than that of the man.  He was too young to realize the
greatness of the loss he had sustained in the death of his father and
sister; and were it not for the constant reminder afforded him by the
presence of his gloomy companion, he would probably, with the careless
elasticity of youth, have been more successful in throwing off his own
sorrow.  The man had not lost a father or a sister, but some one dearer
still.  He looked thin and ill, and under the permanent bronze of his
countenance the ravages wrought by fever, wounds, and long illness were
plainly perceptible; there were gray hairs in his thick neatly tied
locks, too, that had no rightful place there in one of his age.  The
younger and stronger assisted and watched over his older companion with
the tenderest care and attention.

They rode slowly up the pleasant road under the great trees, from time
to time engaging in a desultory conversation.  Philip endeavored to
cheer his companion by talking lightly of boyhood days, as each turn of
the road brought familiar places in the old estate in view.  Here he
and Katharine and Hilary had been wont to play; there was a favorite
spot, a pleasant haunt here, this had been the scene of some amusing
adventure.  These well-meant reminiscences nearly drove Seymour mad,
but he would not stop them.  Finally, they came to the place where the
road divided, one branch pursuing its course along the river-bank past
the boat-house toward the Talbot place, the other turning inland from
the river and winding about till it surmounted the high bluff and
reached the door of the Hall.  There Philip drew rein.

"This is the way to the Hall, you know, Captain Seymour," he said,
pointing to the right.  Seymour hesitated a moment, and said finally,--

"Yes, I know; the boat-house lies over there, does it not, beyond the
turn?  I think I will let you go up to the house alone, Philip, and I
will go down to the boat-house myself.  I will ride back presently."

"Well, then, I will go with you," said Philip.  "I really think you are
too weak, you know, especially after our long ride to-day, to go alone."

"No, Philip," said Seymour, gently, "I wish to be alone for a few
moments."

The boy hesitated.

"Oh, very well," he said, beginning to understand, "I will sit down
here on this tree by the road and wait for you.  I 'll tie my horse,
and you can leave yours here also, if you wish.  There is nothing at
the Hall, God knows, to make me hurry up there now, since father and
Katharine are gone," he continued with a sigh.  "Go on, sir, I'll wait.
You won't mind my waiting?"

"No, certainly not, if you wish it I shall be back in a few minutes
anyway.  I just want to see the--the--ah--boathouse, you know."

"Yes, certainly, I understand, of course," replied Philip, bluntly, but
carefully looking away, and then dismounting from his tired horse and
assisting Seymour to do the same from his.

"Poor old fellow!" he murmured, as he saw the man walk haltingly and
painfully up the road and disappear around the little bend.

Left to himself Seymour stumbled alone along the familiar road over
which a few short months before he had often travelled light-heartedly
by the side of Katharine.  As he pressed on, he noticed a man leave the
boat-house and climb slowly up the hill.  Desirous of escaping the
notice of the stranger, who, he supposed, might be the factor or agent
of the plantation, he waited in the shadow of the trees until the man
disappeared over the brow of the hill, and then he staggered on.  A
short time after, he stood on the landward end of the little pier, and
then his heart stood still for a second, and then leaped madly in his
breast, as he seemed to hear a subtle voice, like an echo of the past,
which whispered his name, "Seymour!  Seymour!"  Stepping toward the
middle of the pier so that he could see the interior of the boat-house
through the inner door, his eyes fell upon the figure of a woman
standing in the other doorway looking out over the water, stretching
out her hands.  The sun had set by this time, and the gray dusk of the
evening was stealing over the river.  He could not see distinctly, but
there was light enough to show him a familiar scarlet cloak at her
feet, and although her back was turned to him, he recognized the
graceful outlines of her slender figure.  It was Katharine, or a dream!
But could the dead return again?   Had the sea given up her dead indeed?

He could not believe the evidence of his bewildered senses.  It might
be an hallucination, the baseless fabric of a vision, some image
conjured from the deep recesses of his loving heart by his enfeebled
disordered imagination, and yet he surely had heard a living voice,
"Seymour--John--Oh, my love!"  Stifling the beating of his heart,
holding his breath even, stepping softly, lest he should affright the
airy vision, he staggered to the door and stood gazing; then he
whispered one word,--

"Katharine!"

It was only a whisper she heard, but it reached the very centre of her
being.

"Katharine," he said softly again, with so much passionate entreaty in
his wistful voice, that under its compelling influence she slowly
turned and looked toward the other door from whence the sound had come.
Then as she saw him, lifting one hand to her head while the other
unconsciously sought her heart, she shrank back against the wall, and
stared at him in voiceless terror.  He dropped unsteadily to his knee,
as if to worship at a shrine.

"Oh, do not go away," he whispered.  "I know it is only a dream of
mine--so many times have I seen you, ever since the night the frigate
struck and I sent you to your death on that rocky pass, in that beating
sea.  Ay, in the long hours of the fever--but you did not shrink away
from me then, you listened to me say I love you, and you answered."  He
stretched out his hand toward her in tender appeal.  She bent forward
toward him.  He rose to his feet, half in terror.

"Kate," he said uncertainly, "is it indeed you?  Are you alive again?"

She was nearer now.  One glad cry broke from her lips; he was in her
arms again, and she was clasped to his heart!--a real woman and no
dream, no vision.  What the wind could only faintly shadow forth upon
her cheek, sprang into life under the touch of his fevered lips, and
color flooded them like a wave.  Laughing, crying, sobbing, she clung
to him, kissed him with little incoherent murmurs, gazed at him, wept
over him, kissed him again.  All the troubles of the intervening days
of sadness and privation faded away from her like a disused chrysalis,
and she sparkled with life and love like a butterfly new born.

He that was dead was alive again, he had come back, and he was here!
As for him, in fearful surprise, he held her to his breast once more,
still unbelieving.  She noticed then an empty sleeve, and raised it
tenderly to her lips.

"I lost it after an action with the British ship Yarmouth,--it was only
a flesh wound at first,--we were long in reaching Charleston; the arm
had to be amputated.  It was a fearful action."

"I know it," she interrupted; "I was there."

"You, Katharine!  Ah, that woman on the ship!  I was not deceived then,
and yet I could not believe it."

"Yes, 'twas I.  I gloried in your bravery, until I saw you lying, as I
thought, dead on the deck.  Oh, John, the horror of that moment!  Then
I called you, and you did not answer.  Then I wanted to die, too, but
now I am alive again, and so happy--but for this;" she lifted the empty
sleeve to her lips.  "How you must have suffered, my poor darling," she
went on, her eyes filling with tears, her heart yearning over him.
"And how ill you look, and I keep you standing here,--how thoughtless!
Come to the bench here and sit down.  Lean on me."

"Nay, but, Kate, you too have suffered.  See!"  He lifted her arm, the
loose sleeve fell back.  "Oh, how thin it is, and how smooth and round
and plump it was when I kissed it last," he said, as he raised it
tenderly again to his lips.

"It is nothing, John.  I shall be all right now that you are here.  You
poor shattered lover, how you must have suffered!" she went on, with a
sob in her voice.

"Oh, Katharine, this," looking down at his empty sleeve, "was nothing
to what I suffered before, when I thought I had killed you!"

"When you thought you had killed me!" she said in surprise.  They were
sitting close together now, and she had his hand in both her own.
"How--when, was that?"

And then he told her rapidly about the loss of the Radnor, and the idea
which her note had given that she was on board of it.

"And you led that ship down to destruction, believing I was on her!
How could you do it, John?" she said reproachfully.

"It was my duty, darling Kate," he said desperately.

"And did you love your duty more than me?"

"Love it?  I hated it!  But I had to do it, dearest," he went on
pleadingly.  "Honor--you told me so yourself, here, in this very spot;
I remember your words; do you not recall them?--'If I stood in the
pathway of liberty for a single instant I should despise the man who
would not sweep me aside without a moment's hesitation.'  Don't you
know you said that, Katharine?"

"Did I say it?  Ah, but that was before I loved you so, and you swept
me aside,--well, I love you still, and, John, I honor you for it too;
but I could not do it.  You see, I am only a woman."

"Kate, don't say 'only a woman' that way; what else would I have you,
pray?  But tell me of yourself."

Briefly she recited the events that had occurred to her, dwelling much
upon Desborough's courage and devotion to her in the first days of her
captivity, the death of Johnson, the burning of Norfolk, the death of
Bentley.  He interrupted her there, and would fain hear every detail of
the sad scene over again, thanking her and blessing her for what she
had done.

"It was nothing," she said simply; "I loved to do it; he was your
friend.  It seemed to bring me closer to you."  Then she told him of
the foundering of the ship, of the frightful voyage in the boat, and
rang the changes upon Desborough's name, his cheerfulness, his
unfailing zeal and energy, until Seymour's heart filled with jealous
pain.

"Kate," he said at last, "as I came up the road I saw a man leave the
boat-house and climb the hill; who was it?"

"It was Lord Desborough, John."

Seymour was human, and filled with human feeling.  He drew away from
her.

"What was he doing here?" he said coldly.  She smiled at him merrily.

"Bidding me good-by.  He was made prisoner, of course, by the first
soldier we came across after we landed, and has been spending the days
of his captivity with us.  He was exchanged to-day, and leaves
to-night."

"Katharine, he was in love with you!" he said, with what seemed to him
marvellous perspicacity.

"Yes, John," she answered, still smiling.

"Was he making love to you here?"

"Yes."

"And you?  You praise this man, you like him, you--"

"I think him the bravest man, the truest gentleman in the world--except
this one," she said, laying her hand upon his shoulder and her head
upon his breast.  "No, no; he pleaded in vain.  I only pitied him; I
loved you.  Do not be jealous, foolish boy.  No one should have me.  I
am yours alone."

"But if I had not come back, Kate,--how then?"

"It would have made no difference.  I told him so."

Neither of them in their mutual absorption had noticed that a horse had
stopped in the road opposite the boat-house, and a horseman had walked
to the door and had halted at the sight which met his eyes.  Desborough
recognized Seymour at once, and he had unwittingly heard the end of the
conversation.  He was the second.  The man was back again.  It was
true.  The gallant gentleman stood still a moment, making no sound,
then turned back and mounted his horse, and rode madly away with
despair in his heart.

"Oh, Katharine," Seymour said at last, "do you know that I am a poor
man now?  Lame!  See, I can no longer walk straight."  He stood up.
"Poor surgery after the battle did that."

"The more reason that in the future you should not go alone," she said
softly, standing by his side.

"And with but one arm," he continued.

"No, three," she said again, "for here are two."

"Besides, my trading ships have been captured by the enemy, my private
fortune has been spent for the cause.  I am a poor man in every sense."

"Nay, John, you are a rich man," she said gayly.

"Oh, yes, rich in your love, Katharine."

"Yes, that of course, if that be riches, and richer in honor too; but
that's not all."

"What else pray, dearest?"

"Did you know that Madam Talbot had died?" she answered, with apparent
irrelevance.

"No, but I am not surprised at it.  After her son's death I expected
it, poor lady.  He loved you too, Kate.  We fought about you once," he
said; and then he told her briefly of Talbot's end, his burial, the
interview he had with Talbot's mother, and the letter.

"I have seen that letter since I returned," she said.  "It is at
Fairview Hall now awaiting you, awaiting its master like the other
things there,--and here.  Shall we live there, think you, John?"

"Awaiting me!  Its master!  Live there!  What mean you, Kate?" he cried
in surprise.

"Yes, yes, it is all yours," she replied, laughing at his astonishment.
"A codicil to her will, written and signed the day before she died, the
day after you saw her, left it all to you.  It was to have been her
son's and then mine; and when she believed us dead, as she had no
relatives in this land she left it to you, 'As,' I quote her own words,
'a true and noble gentleman who honors any cause, however mistaken, to
which he may give his allegiance.'  I quote them, but they are my own
words as well.  You are a rich man, John, and the two estates will come
together as father and Madam Talbot had hoped, after all."

"I am glad, Kate, for your sake."

"It is nothing.  I should have taken you, if you had nothing at all."

A young man ran down the little pier and into the house at this moment.
"Kate," he cried, "where are you?  It is so dark here I can hardly
see--  Ah, there you are!" he ran forward and kissed her boisterously.
"You 'll have to forgive me, I could not wait any longer, Captain
Seymour.  Father rode down the hill after Lord Desborough galloped by
me, and met me there, waiting.  Oh, I was so glad to know you were
alive again!  We felt like a pair of murderers, did n't we, Captain
Seymour?  Father told me you were here, Kate, and then we waited until
now, to give you a little time, and then I could n't stand it any
longer, I had to see you.  Father's coming too, but I ran ahead."

"Why, Philip," cried Kate, as soon as he gave her an opportunity,
kissing him again and laughing light-heartedly as she has not done for
days, "how you have grown!  You are quite a man now."

"It is entirely due to Philip, Katharine, that I am here," said
Seymour.  "He commanded the little brig which ran down to the Yarmouth
at the risk of destruction, and picked me up.  Disobeyed orders too,
the young rogue.  He brought me into Charleston, nursed me like a
woman, and then brought me here.  I should have died without him."

"Oh, Philip," said the delighted girl, kissing the proud and happy
youngster with more warmth than he had ever known before, "promise me
always to disobey your orders.  How can I thank you!"

"Very bad advice that.  Promise nothing of the kind, Philip; but what
are you thanking him for, Kate?" said the cheery voice of the colonel
as he came in the door.

"Thanking him for Seymour, father."

"Ah, my boy," said the colonel, grasping his hand, "you don't know how
glad I am to see you.  It is like one returning from the dead.  But it
is late and cold and quite dark.  Supper is ready, let us go up to the
Hall.  I shall see the Naval Commissioners in a few days, Seymour, and
get you another and a better ship.  The country is full of your action;
they 've struck a medal for you and voted you prize money and thanks,
and all that.  I make no doubt I can get you the best ship there is on
the ways, or planned.  'T was a most heroic action--"

"Not now, father," said Katharine, jealously, throwing her arm about
her lover.  "He shall not, cannot, go now; he must have rest for a long
time, and he must have me!  We are to be married as soon as he is well,
and the country must wait.  Is it not so, John?"

"What's that?" said the colonel, pretending great surprise.

"Sir," answered Seymour, nervously, "I have something to say to
you,--something I must say.  Will you give me the privilege of a few
moments' conversation with you?"

"Seymour," said the colonel, smiling, "you asked me that once before,
did you not?"

"Yes, sir, I believe so."

"And I answered you--how?"

"Why, you said, if my memory serves me, that you--"

"Exactly, that I would see you after supper, and so I will.  Come,
children, let us go in; this time I warrant you there will be no
interruptions."

The father and son turned considerately and walked away, leaving the
two lovers to follow.

"You won't leave me, John, will you, now that you have just come back?"

"No, Kate, not now; I am good for nothing until I get strong."

"Good for me, though; but when you do get strong?"

"Then, if my country needs me, dearest, I shall have to go.  But I fear
there will be no more ships of ours to get to sea, the blockade is
getting more strict every day.  I can be a soldier, though.  No, Kate,
do not beg me.  My duty to my country constrains me."

"Don't talk about it now, then, John.  At least I shall have you for a
long time; it will be long before you are well again."

"Yes, I fear so," he said with a sigh.

"Why do you sigh, dearest?"

"Because I want to stay with you, and I ought to welcome any
opportunity to enter active service.  Think what old Bentley would say."

"Old Bentley did not love you," she replied quickly, with a jealous
pang.

"Ah, did he not!" said Seymour, softly.

There was a long pause.

"Well," said Katharine at last, "I suppose nothing will move you if
your duty calls you, but I warn you if you get killed again, I shall
die.  I could not stand it another time," she cried piteously.

"Well, dearest, I shall try to live for you.  Now we must go to the
Hall."

But, to anticipate, fate would be kinder toward Katharine in the future
than she had been in the past and it was many a day before her lover,
her husband rather, was able to get to sea; and, as if they had
suffered enough, he went through the rest of the war on land and sea
scatheless, and was one of those who stood beside the great commander
before the trenches of Yorktown, when the British soldiers laid down
their arms.  But this was all of the future, and now they turned
quietly and somewhat sadly to follow the others.

This time it was Katharine who helped Seymour up the hill.  Slowly,
hand in hand, they walked across the lawn, up the steps of the porch,
and toward the door of the Hall.  The night had fallen, and the house
was filled with a soft light from the wax candles.  They paused a
moment on the threshhold; Katharine resolutely mastered her fears and
resolved to be happy in the present, then, heedless of all who might
see, she kissed him.

"Home at last, John," she said, beaming upon him.  And there, with the
dark behind, and the light before, we may say good-by to them.