Vowels.

               _a_      _e_ and _i_      _o_  and  _u_

                               Consonants.

          _ba_     _ca_     _da_ a. _ra_     _ga_     _nga_

          _ha_     _la_     _ma_     _na_     _pa_ a. _fa_

                   _sa_     _ta_     _va_     _ya_

A dot _above_ the character changes the vowel sound _a_ of the original
consonants into _e_ and _i_.

  _be_   _ke_   _de_ a. _re_   _ge_   _nge_   _he_   _le_   _me_   _ne_

                      [Line of Tagal characters]

  _bi_   _ki_   _di_ a. _ri_   _gi_   _ngi_   _hi_   _li_   _mi_   _ni_

              _pe_ a. _fe_   _se_   _te_   _ve_   _ye_

                      [Line of Tagal characters]

              _pi_ a. _fi_   _si_   _ti_   _vi_   _yi_

A dot _below_ the character changes the vowel sound _a_ of the original
consonant into _o_ and _u_.

  _bo_   _co_   _do_ a. _ro_   _go_   _ngo_   _ho_   _lo_   _mo_   _no_

                      [Line of Tagal characters]

  _bu_   _cu_   _du_ a. _ru_   _gu_   _ngu_   _hu_   _lu_   _mu_   _nu_

                _po_ a. _fo_  _so_   _to_   _vo_   _yo_

                       [Line of Tagal characters]

                _pu_ a. _fu_  _su_   _tu_   _vu_   _yu_

From the foregoing characters it would appear that _a_ and _o_, as also
_e_ and _i_, _da_ and _ra_, _pa_ and _fa_, had each but one and the same
character.[77]--Besides the Tagal, five other different idioms are used by
the civilized races of Luzon, namely, Bisaya, Pangasinana (the same as
Ilocano), Tbanac (same as Cagayana), Bicol, and Pampanya.

The Tagals are a small race, of a clear yellow complexion, and,
notwithstanding their broad flat noses and thick lips, are by no means of
unpleasing appearance. The hair of the head is rigid, bristly, and black;
the beard very sparse. They all wear European clothes more or less,
although the fashion in which they wear them is quite peculiar and
ludicrously odd. Not merely do the lower orders and servants wear the
shirt ironed perfectly smooth and unwrinkled, instead of a coat, above
their continuations, but the Tagal dandy prides himself on his
well-lacquered boots, his white stockings, his new Paris silk hat worn
with a jaunty cock to one side, and above all his carefully plaited
resplendent white shirt, as he struts through the streets of Manila,
cigaret in his mouth, and swinging an elegant little cane! The women wear,
like the Javanese women, the "Sarong," a parti-coloured striped cotton
dress, rolled round the loins, and a close-fitting very short jacket, so
short indeed that between it and the gown a space about an inch wide
intervenes through which the naked body is visible, while the fine
transparent gauze-like stuff of which the jacket is made is much better
calculated to show off than to conceal their attractions. This universal
fashion of dress is the more surprising, as the various orders of monks
exercise in all other respects an almost despotic control over the
natives, and as it is much more attributable to their influence than to
that of the secular authorities that the speech, manners, and customs of
old Castile have taken firm and extensive root in the Philippines. It
seems, however, unjust to compare this group of islands, as has been done
by modern writers, on account of the all-pervading influence of the
Spanish element, with a province of Spain, in contradistinction to the
colonies of other nations, where the Europeans have always been regarded
by the natives as the lords of a conquered country. The English in India,
Ceylon, and New Zealand, and the Dutch in Java, all appear to have a much
firmer and more secure footing than the Spaniards, despite their having
mingled with the people. How little can be effected by forced amalgamation
of speech and manners, is best illustrated by the late separation of
Central and Southern America from the Spanish rule, although in most of
these countries the majority of the people speak only Spanish, and are
governed entirely in accordance with Spanish customs. Much better founded
seems to us the observation that it was less the sword than the cross of
Spain which brought the Philippines under the throne of Castile, and that
the natives have become Spanish Christians, without being Spanish
subjects. The entire Archipelago is nothing but one rich church domain, a
safe retreat for the legion of Spanish monks, who are able to lord it here
with unrestrained power. There is a Governor-general of the Philippines
only so long as it pleases the Augustinian, Dominican, and Franciscan
friars; and if ever an insurrection breaks out in the Archipelago,
designed to shake off the Spanish yoke, there will be more than one monk
to head the movement.

In a country where the cloister and its denizens interfere so arbitrarily
in all the concerns of life, and impart to the capital itself, as indeed
to the entire Archipelago, a character entirely peculiar to itself,
religious establishments and their zealous occupants call for special
consideration, and the reader need assuredly feel no surprise that we
should begin the narrative of our visit to the capital of the Philippines
by a description of its monasteries. In Manila these unfortunately are
not, as they were in the middle ages, the nurseries of culture and
civilization, of science and art, but rather give the impression of being
simply huge establishments for the maintenance of zealous souls, weary of
life, who wish to close their days of labour in tranquil contemplation,
exempt from all anxiety.

The four orders of monks to whose hands are confided the entire spiritual
and very much of the secular well-being of the inhabitants of the
Philippines, are the Augustines (_Agustinos Calzados_--sandalled friars),
the Franciscans, the Dominicans, and the barefoot Augustinian mendicants
(_Agustinos descalzados_ or _Recoletos_).

The monastery of the Bare-Foot Friars, lying close to the wall of the
fortifications, consists of a number of spacious buildings, some of which
date from the 17th century. Everything here tells of former power and
splendour. From the billiard-room and parlour on the first storey, the eye
is charmed by a marvellous landscape commanding the Bay of Manila and the
mountains that surround it. How delightful must it be in the evening
twilight to pace these airy chambers in the society of congenial souls,
and, while the brow is fanned by the cool sea-breeze, to give free scope
to the reins of fancy, as it swept far away over the Bay of Manila! For
what privations must not such a source of pure exquisite enjoyment
indemnify the ascetic brethren of the cloister! That spiritual meditation
and converse however do not form the sole topics discussed in these
departments, was abundantly evidenced by the hints let fall by several of
the monks who conducted us through the various corridors and apartments,
and who were constantly indulging in visions of Carlist supremacy and a
return of the halcyon days of monasticism. On our remarking that so far as
worldly consideration was concerned, the cloister enjoyed far more cordial
support in Manila than either in Spain or Cuba, one of the Augustinians
who was accompanying us, a tall commanding figure, attired in the plain
garb of the order, replied: "The Government knows that it has need of us,
that it could not get on a day without us, therefore it leaves us in
peace, and places no impediments in our path as in Spain."[78] And he was
right. Whensoever the monks lift the finger, Spain has ceased to rule in
the Philippines. The spiritual reins have ever bridled the secular
authority, and such a state of things is the severest impediment to the
development of the country and its intellectual growth.

Of the various monastic orders resident in Manila the Augustinians are by
far the best educated. They have made the various dialects of the native
races their study far more deeply than the other orders. The "_Flora de
las Filipinas_," the _only_ botanical work which has ever been published
in the Spanish language, treating of this interesting Archipelago, was
compiled by an Augustinian monk, Fray Manuel Blanco.[79]

The number of monks resident in the monastery of Manila when we were there
was 48, but there was room enough for three times as many. Altogether
there were of the Augustinian order 58 monasteries and parishes in the
island of Luzon, extending from one end of the island to the other. In the
entire Archipelago there are, according to public documents, 145
Augustinian monks, whose authority extends over 14 provinces and 153
villages, numbering 1,615,051 souls.[80]

The monastery of the Dominicans is kept clean and comfortable, and its
wide spacious apartments leave a less vivid impression of decay and human
indifference than the majority of the monastic edifices. Here also the
lofty, light chambers in the upper storeys command a magnificent prospect.
The Prior, Padre Vellinchon, received the Austrian travellers with much
cordiality, and conducted them in person round all the apartments of the
very extensive building. He spoke Latin pretty fluently, and without the
peculiar Spanish accent, besides possessing a slight acquaintance with
French; and was somewhat better informed upon European matters than his
spiritual _confreres_. The library of the order is not kept in the
convent, but in one of the buildings of the University of St. Thomas also
used by the Dominicans, but it is quite unimportant, whether as regards
the number of works it contains or their scientific value.

The spiritual jurisdiction of the Dominicans extends over eight provinces
of the Archipelago, including 76 villages, with in all 427,593 souls,
whose eternal interests are watched over by 76 brethren of the order.[81]

A Dominican friar, Joaquin Fonseca, is president of the permanent
commission of Censorship of Books, consisting in all of nine members, five
of whom are nominated by Government and four by the Archbishop of
Manila.[82] We had the pleasure of being made acquainted with Fray
Joaquin Fonseca, who also holds the appointment of Professor of Theology
in the University of St. Thomas, and were presented by him with a copy of
an imperfect epic poem composed in Spanish, which had for subject the
history of the island of Luzon and its inhabitants.[83] Of this
interesting fragment we shall publish a translation in another place.

Just as we were leaving the Dominican monastery, its worthy Prior begged
our acceptance, by way of souvenir of our visit, of a copy of Dante's
Divina Commedia in the original text, and a dictionary of the Ybanac, one
of the idioms most extensively used throughout the Archipelago.

The monastery of the Franciscans presents no other feature of interest,
than in so far as it is an emblem of the melancholy spiritual decay in
which the members of this order at present find themselves in Manila. The
dirt and untidiness which were not merely apparent in the various
apartments, but which were even but too obvious in the external appearance
of the brothers of the order, make a most disagreeable impression; for
poverty and necessity, these two cardinal principles of the mendicant
orders, are by no means incompatible with cleanliness and neatness.

The Franciscans possess 16 missions in 14 of the provinces, comprising
159 villages and 749,804 inhabitants.[84] The spiritual instruction of
these is intrusted to 184 brethren of the order, 74 priests, and 43
_Clerigos Interinos_ (occasional preachers).

The monastery of the _Recoletos_, or Reformed Augustinians, offers a not
less impressive prospect than that of the Franciscans. Here, too, the
occupants permit to appear a careless indifference utterly destructive of
the value of their ghostly ministration. As we entered, the brethren of
the order had finished their mid-day repast. Some of the monks were still
sitting in a dirty, gloomy verandah round a table on which was spread a
table-cloth stained with food and drink, while in front of each stood a
half-empty wineglass. A lay brother announced us, upon which one of the
monks rose to bid us welcome. From his rather jovial appearance, and the
suspicious colour of his nose, we presumed he was the cellarer, and were
not a little surprised when, in the course of conversation, he announced
that it was the Prior himself who was speaking with us.

We had the utmost difficulty in making the brethren, whose information was
of a most limited extent, comprehend from what country we came. The
circumstance that the original German name _Oesterreich_ is pronounced
Austria in Spanish, puzzled still more hopelessly the comprehension of
the monks, whose geographical knowledge did not seem to extend much
beyond the sphere of their vision. At first they confounded Austria with
Australia, and fancied we must have come direct from the fifth quarter of
the globe, but when the _Novara_ voyagers, proud of their Fatherland,
refused to permit this opinion to pass current, and gave a more clear
explanation, one of the younger monks thought he had at last found out our
_habitat_, and evidently priding himself on having solved the riddle, gave
his less ingenious brethren to understand that we came, not from
Australia, but from Asturias, and were consequently fellow-countrymen! The
limited intelligence of the Franciscan mistook Austria for Asturias, and
made of the Austrian Empire a Spanish province! Lest the hypothesis should
suggest itself to the reader, that this confusion of foreign empires with
domestic provinces might possibly have originated in our not being
acquainted with the language of the country, it is necessary that we
should inform him that one member of the Expedition was thoroughly versed
in Spanish, so as to be able to maintain fluent conversation, and that he
was perfectly comprehended upon all other topics. Just as little must it
be supposed that the above anecdote is but an ill-natured imputation, or
the expression of a long-vanished national jealousy, or anything else than
a proof of the present state of education among the present occupants of
the monasteries of Manila.

The Recoletos watch over the spiritual weal of 567,416[85] children
belonging to parishes in the various islands of the Archipelago, and
number 127 brethren.

In each monastery there is what is called a _Procuracion_, where the
various printed books published by the order (almost exclusively
dictionaries and grammars of the native languages and dialects) are sold
for the behoof of the funds of the monastery. The members of our
Expedition exerted themselves to form a very complete collection of all
such publications; and while thus engaged they also succeeded in getting
several MS. treatises on language.[86] Works and memoirs on the history of
the island and the state of its inhabitants are scarcely met with in the
wretchedly deficient libraries of the monasteries, which consist of not
more than 500 or 600 volumes, mostly works of theology and philosophy.
Whatever of valuable literary material may once have belonged to these
institutions has apparently been removed to Spain, whose libraries have
also gradually absorbed the literary treasures of the monasteries of
Central and Southern America.

Besides the monasteries, Government Square (Plaza de Gobierno), in the
inner portion of the city, possesses some little interest for strangers.
It has the shape of a large oblong, surrounded on each of its four sides
by the palace of the Governor-general, that of the archbishop, the
cathedral, and the law offices, with a well-kept garden-plot in the
centre, in which is a handsome statue of Charles IV., the whole strongly
recalling the principal square in the Havanna. The cathedral is equally as
remarkable for the clumsiness of its exterior as for the profusion of
perishable gold and silver within. The first edifice was erected by
Legaspi, the conqueror of Luzon, in 1571, and was composed of bamboo-cane
thatched with palm-leaves. The present temple was built in 1654 during the
papacy of Innocent X., after several previous buildings had been
destroyed, some by fire, others by earthquake. The palace of the
Captain-general is an extensive but very simple building, with long wide
corridors internally, but which can make no pretensions to architectural
magnificence externally. In one of its saloons our Commodore and his
companions were received by the Captain-general of the Philippines, Don
Fernando Narzagaray, who had held this elevated post since 1857. Formerly
Governor of the island of Porto Rico, in the West Indies, Don Fernando
was, in consequence of his openly avowed Carlist proclivities, sent into
honourable exile to the Philippines, and by a lucky chance is at present
once more invested with the dignity of one of the highest officials of
Queen Isabel II. of Spain. This gentleman received the voyagers of the
_Novara_ with the proverbial lofty courtesy of the Spaniards, yet not
without suffering to appear in his address a certain embarrassment and
hesitation, which however may have been due to his not being sufficiently
acquainted with any other tongue than the Spanish, to enable him to use it
in giving fluent expression to his thoughts. The conversation turned
chiefly upon the scene of our latest visit, Java. Notwithstanding the not
very formidable distance, and the constant communication existing between
the two islands, the Captain-general seemed to have but a very vague
conception of the political and social condition of Java, and framed his
questions as though they related to some remote island, in some entirely
different section of the globe, rather than an island in all but immediate
vicinity. As we prepared to return to our vehicles, Don Fernando made use
of the usual unmeaning compliment "_Usted[87] sabe que mi casa es a la
disposicion de Usted!_" (You know you may consider my house as entirely at
your disposal):[88] it would rather have astonished him though, had his
visitors taken him at his word!

Passports, which are absolutely necessary in Manila to make the very
shortest excursion into the interior, are given with the utmost alacrity
to strangers, without any one thenceforward paying the slightest attention
to enabling any expedition to carry out its objects. This cold, utterly
indifferent treatment was doubly felt by travellers fresh from Batavia,
where they had been overwhelmed with every sort of attention.

In the office of the Captain-general we saw several large sheets of
printed matter in columns, suspended on the walls, which we presumed were
the annual statistics of the commerce of the Archipelago, and accordingly
requested one of the officials to provide us with one. It was only when
unfolding a little later the documents which had been so readily given to
us that we discovered our error, and became aware that these tables
printed with such care and elegance did not in any way refer to what we
had supposed, but were the statistics of the various monasteries, and
their inhabitant brethren throughout the Philippines. We had far greater
trouble and difficulty ere we could get at the particulars of the natural
productions and state of trade of Manila.

When the visitor passes through the St. Domingo gate to the suburb of
Binondo, on the N.E. side of the inner city, we traverse what is called
the Isthmus, a narrow strip of meadow-land, surrounded by water on both
sides, on which has been erected within these few years a simple monument
in honour of Magelhaens, the discoverer of the Philippines, who, wounded
by a native with a poisoned arrow, breathed his last, 15th April, 1521, on
the small island of Mactan, lying opposite Cebu. A Doric column of black
marble, 76 feet high, with inscriptions engraven on the four sides of the
pedestal, lifts its head here since 1854,[89] and is altogether a more
appropriate monument than that which the Spaniards erected at Havanna to
the greatest navigator of any age, Christopher Columbus, to whom they owe
all their after power and greatness, on the spot where his ashes reposed
for many a long year in the cathedral before they were conveyed back to
Spain. A poor insignificant votive tablet, built into a recess near the
altar, is all that intimates that there once reposed there for a season
the mortal remains of the man who, to use the words of a German poet,
"bestowed on the world another world."[90]

On this isthmus are situated the most delightful pleasure grounds in
Manila; the esplanade, with its simple, shady walks, and benches on which
to repose, and further on, nearer the sea on the left bank of the river,
the "Calzada" dam (causeway). Hither every evening comes the gay world of
Manila, in long rows of carriages, to be fanned by the delicious cool
sea-breeze. Arrived at the farther extremity of the promenade, the
coachman, resplendent in gorgeous livery and large shining top-boots, for
he does not drive from the box but rides postilion, is usually ordered to
stop, and the gentlemen leave the carriage in order to chat with the
ladies in the surrounding vehicles, just as we accost our fair friends in
the theatre, and pay our visits in the boxes. For in Manila there are
neither theatres nor concert-rooms, and the public promenade is therefore
the only rendezvous of the "beau monde."

Unfortunately we reached Manila in the height of the rainy season, when
even the attractiveness of nature can only be guessed at by occasional
glimpses, and the delightful outdoor life which enlivens the streets and
the front porch of the private residences of the inhabitants, is utterly
arrested. Here, as in Batavia, the tropical rains fall with a violence of
which a native of the northern climates, who has never lived in the
tropics, and knows only the rainfall of his own country, can hardly form
any conception. In July, 1857, it rained here for fourteen days
uninterruptedly, so that the Pasig overflowed its banks, and people were
ferried about the streets of Manila, as in the city of Lagoons, by means
of small boats, called here _bancas_. This inundation was converted into a
merry-making, and visits were paid on all sides in elegant little boats.

The one sole amusement with which even the rainy season cannot interfere,
is cock-fighting. So soon as the bad weather has fairly set in, universal
recourse is had to this, the most popular of amusements, whose cruel,
murderous issue is strangely in contrast with the mild, soft, timid
character of the natives. These "_Gallos_," as they are called, are a
monopoly of Government, that is to say, they can only be held with their
permission, and upon payment of a fee for such license. The revenue which
Government derives from this anything but civilized amusement is very
considerable,[91] and the fee paid by the owners of the cocks and the
spectators is at any rate the least objectionable part of the spectacle,
for far larger sums are lost in the betting. What cards and hazard are for
_blasee_ Europe, cock-fighting is for the simple native of Manila. Such is
their passionate excitement, that several days elapse before their
ordinary apathy subsides into its state of chronic contentment. It is
singular that, with the exception of the Spaniards and the mixed race
founded by them in various distant parts of the world, there is not now
one single civilized nation that can find any pleasure in such brutal
amusements as cock-fights and bull-fights.

The scene of action is a small building, built of bamboo, and thatched
with palm-leaves, in the interior of which the benches for the spectators
rise behind each other in form of an amphitheatre, while the arena, or
pit, is filled with the owners of cocks and betting-men, until the signal
for the commencement of the combat is given. Each owner caresses or
incites once more his champion, or to prove his courage flings him against
one of the other cocks. At last the spectators have decided to back one or
the other of the cocks, red or white, the flat comb or the round comb; the
bets are "on," and the "spur," a sharp-pointed weapon above two inches in
length, and provided with a sheath, is firmly attached to the right foot.
Then the two cocks are simultaneously swung against each other, and a few
feathers are plucked from their necks to excite their fury. The bell in
the hand of the director gives the signal for the commencement of the
"main." The spectators retire from the "pit," the sheaths are taken off
the trenchant spurs, and the encounter commences. Most marvellous is the
eagerness for the fray, the dogged valour, which these two knightly
antagonists display to the very last gasp; how even wounded, bleeding, and
sorely fatigued, they will not give up the contest! Occasionally it
happens that neither of the combatants is hailed the victor. The
extraordinary keen, sharp "spur" sometimes wounds both warriors with
terrible severity, till with severed limbs, and bleeding from every pore,
both lie dead on the field of battle.[92]

Very comical is the method hit upon in those places of amusements to
supply the places of the return tickets in use amongst ourselves, and at
the same time render it impossible for any different person to make use of
them. When a native wishes to leave the apartment with the intention of
returning he has his naked fore arm, near the wrist, stamped as he goes
out with a black die, which secures his re-admission, and at the same time
obviates all anxiety as to his losing his return ticket! On his return
this mark is easily wiped out.

During our stay occurred the "_Fiestas Reales_," or royal fetes, which
were given by the Colonial Government in honour of the birth of an heir to
the Spanish throne, Don Alfonso, Prince of the Asturias. The little
heir-apparent had, in fact, seen the light in the month of November
preceding, at Madrid, but when the news reached the Philippines it was
Lent; respect for the tenets of the Catholic Church deferred the
festivities, and afterwards the various fire-works, triumphal arches,
illuminations, &c., took so long a preparation that the month of June and
the rainy season were again at hand before the fete could be held, which
owing to the latter circumstance fell through, and excited hardly any
interest. That intelligence should be so many months in arriving at the
Philippines is due less to their great distance, than to the little care
taken by Government to promote the public interests. Until 1857, all
letters to Europe were for the most part dispatched by sailing vessels, so
that letters remained four or five months on the way, and owing to the
uncertainties of the length of passage made by the various vessels, it was
constantly happening that the last letters sent came to hand before those
dispatched several weeks earlier. This irregularity and uncertainty
weighed so heavily upon commerce, that since March, 1858, there has been
established regular communication by steam between Manila and Europe, the
epistolary matter from Europe, for the residents throughout the
Archipelago, being conveyed by a Spanish steamer from Hong-kong, which is
distant only 600 miles, while all letters for Europe are conveyed to the
latter port in time for the mails of the 1st and 15th of each month,
whence they are forwarded together with the English correspondence via
Singapore and Suez.

On the other hand there is up to this moment no regular communication with
any of the adjacent islands in the Archipelago, even the Government only
availing itself of such sailing vessels as private adventurers may from
time to time charter. When any change of officials takes place, the new
appointment must often remain vacant for months till the occupant reach
his post; indeed, during our stay in Manila we witnessed a case in which
the consort of the Governor of the Marianne Archipelago had been vainly
waiting for months for an opportunity to return to her husband.[93] Some
foreign merchants settled at Manila had made an offer to the Government,
in consideration of a fixed subsidy, to establish regular communication
between the various islands of the Archipelago, and to keep it on foot by
means of five steam vessels. But the Colonial Government did not see its
way to giving the company a larger subsidy than 43,000 Spanish piasters
(L6763 at par), and thus the whole plan once more fell through, the
carrying out of which would so greatly tend to the development of these
islands.

Notwithstanding the fertility of the islands in all manner of natural
wealth, there are at present but three products of the soil which are
exported in anything like large quantities to the European and North
American markets, and which thus give this group any importance in the
eyes of the commercial world, viz. tobacco, Abaca, or Manila hemp, and
sugar. The amount of all other articles exported, such as coffee, indigo,
Sapan wood (_Caesalpinia sapan_), straw-plait,[94] hides and skins of
animals, &c., is proportionately but small. We visited the great
manufactories of Binondo, as also that of Arroceros, where _cigarillos_,
or paper-covered cigarettes, are exclusively manufactured. The former
gives employment to about 8000 work-people, mostly women. In the long
workshops, where it is common to see 800 females sitting at work on low
wooden benches in front of a narrow table, there prevails a most
disagreeable deafening hubbub. Some are busy moistening the leaves, and
cutting off the requisite lengths, or are sorting the fragments and
smaller pieces, of which inferior cigars will be made; others hold in
their right hand a flat smoothed stone, with which they keep continually
pounding each single leaf, in order to make these more susceptible of
being rolled up. This drumming noise, and the cries of several hundreds of
workwomen, who, on the appearance of foreign visitors, handle their
implements of stone with yet more energy, apparently out of sheer
wantonness, the strong odour of the tobacco, and the disagreeable
exhalations from the bodies of so many human beings shut up together in
one close apartment, in a tropical temperature, have such an unpleasant,
uncomfortable effect that one hastens to exchange the damp sultry vapours
of the workshops for the fresh air without.

In the _Cigarillo_ manufactory about 2000 workmen find employment. Here
also there is felt in the workshops the same clammy, sultry atmosphere. A
workman can make about 150 packages of 25 cigarettes, or 3750, per diem,
for which he is paid four reals[95] (1_s._ 7_d._ English). Most
extraordinary is the rapidity, bordering almost upon the magical, with
which the cigarillos are counted, divided into packages, bound up, and
stamped. The unpractised vision of the visitor is hardly able to follow
the celerity of motion of the workman's hands and fingers.

Besides the two factories already mentioned, there is yet a third
cigarillo manufactory in Cavite, which employs 4000, and a fourth in
Malabon, employing 5000, workwomen. The quantities annually produced by
these various manufactories amount to about 1,200,000,000 cigarillos. If
we deduct the numerous holidays of the Church, on which no work is done,
we shall find that about 5,000,000 must be made daily. Government buys up
each year from the planters the entire crop of tobacco at a fixed price,
and exports it partly in leaf, but for the most part in cigars, the right
to manufacture which no one possesses but the Government. The monopoly of
tobacco was, after great difficulties had been encountered, first
introduced into the Philippines in 1787 by Don Jose Basco, the then
Governor-general.

The greater part of the cigars are shipped to the East Indies, the islands
of the Malay Archipelago, and North America, only a small quantity in
proportion coming to Europe for sale.

The principal tobacco-growing districts of the island of Luzon are Cagayan
and Bisayx, in which on an average 180,000 cwt. of tobacco are grown
annually; of these about 80,000 cwt. are sent annually in the leaf to
Spain, while the surplus are worked up into cigars in Luzon itself, sold
at auction (_al martillo_) every month, and knocked down to the highest
bidder. The average price is 8 to 10 dollars per 1000 _Costados_. There is
but one species of tobacco grown in Manila, and the size of the leaf is
the sole element that regulates the value. The Manila tobacco is a very
strong narcotic; there is, notwithstanding the prevailing opinion in
Europe, no opium mingled with it; one end being simply dipped in rice
juice to glue it together. Indeed, the enormous cost of that liquid drug,
which plays so important a part in the history of the Chinese empire,
would alone prevent its being used. As cigars are greatly in request by
both sexes in Manila, and it is necessary first to provide for the supply
of the country itself, it occasionally happens that the stocks are not
sufficiently large at once to supply all demands for exportation. Except
during the public sales by auction, no one is permitted to buy of
Government more than 1000 cigars at once, a regulation most vicious in
principle and useless in practice, as persons who wish to possess larger
quantities of cigars have simply to send round to any number of persons in
the tobacco trade, in order to provide themselves with what they require.
We ourselves experienced how any one, who was desirous of buying 45,000
cigars, sent 45 different individuals to the bonded magazine, from which
each brought 1000 cigars without any further interference.

Although altogether more tobacco is raised on the island of Luzon than in
Cuba, yet the exportation from the former is far less in quantity, for the
reason already commented upon, that a large portion of the tobacco so
grown is consumed in the country itself. Luzon provides 1/10th, and Cuba
1/12th of the entire production of tobacco on the earth, which amounts to
4,000,000 cwt.[96] There are indeed two countries which produce a far
larger quantity of tobacco than either Luzon or Cuba,[97] but in no other
country does the tobacco leaf attain such superior quality, owing to
favourable climate and congenial soil, as in the Spanish possessions
already named.

Another chief product of the Philippines, which first found its way into
the markets of the world from these islands, is what is called Manila
hemp. This, however, is not the common hemp plant (_Cannabis sativa_), but
is procured from the fibres of the "_Musa textilis_," a species of
banana, and is called by the Tagals _abaca_. The plant comes in great
quantities from almost every one of the Philippines, from Luzon to
Mindanao, so that the area over which it extends stretches between the
equator and 20 deg. N. This seems, however, to be the most northerly limit of
vegetation of the _Musa textilis_, and consequently it is out of question
to attempt to introduce into Europe the cultivation of this most useful
plant, which, ere it can be profitably grown, requires a temperature of
77 deg. Fahr. The stem of this _musacea_ grows in the Philippines to a height
of from 9 to 12 feet, by about 6 inches in thickness, its leaves being of
an exceedingly dark green colour, 8 feet in length by 1-1/2 feet in width.
The fruit is smaller, and neither so yellow nor so palatable as that of
the common banana. To procure the hemp, the trunk, so soon as the fleshy
bulbous fruit makes its appearance, is stripped of its splendid leaves,
which serve as fodder for the oxen, and is left about three days to
ferment. It is then peeled off in pieces, which by the application of a
corresponding pressure are drawn between two knives, not too sharp, in
order to separate the hemp, which now begins to be visible, from the bast,
which, owing to the fermentation, has become rather brittle. This process
is continued until the hemp is sufficiently cleaned to admit of its being
spread out and dried in the sun. A skilful workman may make extract from 8
to 10 feet of hemp a day. There are 450,000 cwt. of hemp produced
annually, of the value of L520,000, the greater part of which is sent to
the United States of North America, while from 30,000 to 60,000 cwt. is
manufactured into rigging for ships in the country itself, at the splendid
factory of Messrs. Russell and Sturgis, an American firm, by whom it is
exported to Singapore, Australia, and China. This raw material, as well as
the various products manufactured from it, has a magnificent future
opening to it, and will ere long compete advantageously with English and
Russian hemp in the European markets. The principal objection as yet made
to the use of the Manila hemp for rigging, viz. its contracting in wet
weather, can easily be obviated by more careful treatment of the fibres in
the process of manufacture. On the other hand, in strength and elasticity
the abaca surpasses its rival, as has been proved by repeated experiments,
especially over common European, and even Russian, hemp.[98] Messrs.
Russell and Sturgis have, it is true, monopolized the hemp product of the
entire Archipelago, but under their fostering care it must sensibly
increase and become perceptibly improved. From the leaves of _Musa
textilis_, like those of all other species of the banana tribe, very
excellent paper can be made, and by the increasing cultivation of the
_musaceae_ in the tropics, two main objects could be attained, viz.
providing a plentiful subsistence for the natives, and extending and
cheapening the medium that mainly contributes to widen the circle of
knowledge of mankind.[99]

Next to _Musa textilis_, the Rame-shrub (_Boehmeria tenacissima_)
especially deserves the attention of business men. The fibre of this
member of the _urticaceae_, which unites extraordinary toughness with much
beauty and fineness, is stronger and more durable than that of Russian
hemp, and with careful preparation would make into finer thread than the
very expensive material which is used in Europe at the present day for
making the world-famous Brussels point-lace. The variety of purposes to
which this useful plant may be applied has hitherto been less fully
recognized than those of the Manila hemp. In Europe the _Boehmeria
tenacissima_ is but found in botanical gardens, or herbariums, and as yet
not the slightest use is made of it for industrial purposes. And yet the
introduction on a large scale of Manila hemp and Rame fibre into the
European markets in place of Russian hemp, would have more than merely a
commercial and industrial importance![100]

We may also notice in this connection another description of fabrics made
from fibrous material, which, though but little known beyond the limits of
the Archipelago, seems to us to deserve to be more extensively known, and,
it would seem, may be most profitably taken up. These are the delicate
almost transparent tissues prepared from the fibres of one of the
_Bromeliaceae_ (_ananassa sativa_), which are used by the natives for
ornamental shirts, _chemisettes_, and necklaces, and are known in commerce
by the names of _Pina_ or grass-cloths.[101] The threads of these textures
are so thin, that they can only be woven in apartments where there is not
the slightest breath of air. The natives contrive to weave them into the
most beautiful designs, and were they submitted to some chemical process
which should impart to the web a clearer colour, less of a dirty yellow,
the world of taste would be enriched by the addition of one of the most
exquisite materials that could be presented to adorn the graceful form of
woman, and while seeming to conceal her charms, would but render them more
conspicuously attractive.

Although the rainy season, during which we visited Manila, was but little
inviting for excursions, we yet could not resist the temptation to make an
excursion to the celebrated _Laguna de Bay_, a short distance in the
interior. Mr. J. Steffan, consul for Bremen, a Swiss by birth, and a
partner in one of the most eminent mercantile houses in Manila (Jenny and
Co.), who from the moment the Austrian expeditionaries set foot in the
Philippines manifested to them the most delightful hospitality, was on
this occasion also our companion and cicerone. Two other foreigners, an
English artist and a merchant from Amsterdam, joined our party. The
first-named had lived for long on the island, and had already visited all
its most accessible spots, whence he had returned with some very accurate
sketches; the latter had been sent out by his firm to Manila, in 1857,
when the price of sugar had fallen, for the purpose of purchasing, at the
price to which he was limited, a large quantity of that important article
of colonial produce. By the time, however, he had reached the capital of
the Philippines, the value of the sugar had already, in consequence of a
favourable crop, exceeded the limit assigned him, and has since then
advanced 300 per cent. Still the Amsterdam agent held on, awaiting a fall,
and meanwhile did his best to wile away his time of exile by feasting his
eyes with all the various beauties of the island.

On a grey, dreary morning we found ourselves pulling up the Pasig in small
covered boats, till we reached the Lagune, where a larger craft was
awaiting us, to take the entire company of pilgrims on board and transport
them to the opposite shore of this inland lake, as far as Los Banos. In
clear sunny weather a row in a _banca_ upon the river Pasig, the aorta of
Manila, which forms the communication between the city and the Lagune,
together with all the various settlements along the shores of that
internal sea, must be exceedingly pleasant. The banks of the river,
indeed, are flat and unsightly, but the vegetation rejoices in a
marvellous profusion of the most beautiful forms and colours. The
_Bambusaceae_ are the chief ornament of the shores, on which there are but
few palms to be seen, while the banana, the sugar-cane, or the rice-plant
are only exceptionally met with at certain points. The delicate-leaved
bamboo accordingly presents hereabouts an elegance and variety of form,
which at first sight seems to mark out its individual representatives as
belonging to so many different families of plants. Wherever the subjacent
rock is visible along the banks it presents beds of an ashen-grey
pumice-stone, which constitutes the chief building material of Manila. On
the shores of the river, near the city, are situate the various factories
and iron-foundries, above which are the residences of the wealthy
Mestizoes and foreign settlers, as also the country-seat of the
Governor-general, whence, still ascending the stream, are Tagal villages
of wretched cane huts, grouped round stately churches and parsonages,
which peep picturesquely through lovely groves of bamboo.

There are three modes of boating on the Pasig and through the Lagune,
namely, the _banca_, consisting of a large trunk of a tree hollowed out
and covered with an awning of bamboo; the _lorcha_ or _falua_ (corruption
of felucca), large, comfortable, but exceedingly clumsy row-boats, which,
particularly during the rainy season when there is a heavy sea running,
are those chiefly used in this navigation; and finally, the _casco_, which
is of equal breadth at either end, and has more the appearance of a raft.
The last-named is principally made use of for the transport of heavy
merchandise, and is in especial favour with the natives, for the reason
that it is practicable to hoist sail upon it as well as to row. On the
Lagune there is also found yet a fourth kind of boat, the Paraho, the
principle of which, as well as the name, has obviously been borrowed from
the Malay _Prahu_, which it closely resembles in form and mode of
steering.

On the Pasig there is a constant and amazing tide of human activity.
Numberless boats pass and repass, some bound for the city, to supply it
with provisions and other necessary articles, even to drinking-water,
which has to be shipped in casks at a considerable distance, others
returning with all sorts of purchases made in Manila, for the supply of
the various residents on the shores of the Lagune with the necessaries of
life. On this voyage we got a sight of numbers of grackles (_Pastor
Rosen_), the well-known grasshopper-destroyer, which, about five years
before, had been introduced from China at considerable expense, with the
view of extirpating this formidable locust. But since these birds, to kill
which is punishable by imprisonment, have become acclimatized, they seem
to have lost all relish for grasshoppers, sitting quiet and unmoved on the
trees and roofs of the houses, while swarms of locusts are disporting
under their very eyes. Apparently the number of these destructive insects
is less great in China than in Manila, where these voracious wanderers
often appear in dense swarms, which, in the shape of black clouds,
absolutely obscure the daylight! Probably, too, their means of sustenance
is much more limited in China than in the Philippines, where these birds,
being in fact treated as tame animals, and fairly domesticated, find
frequent opportunities of satisfying their hunger otherwise.

At the village of Patero (from _Pato_, duck), which is situated five miles
from the capital on the left bank, the inhabitants are mainly employed in
breeding ducks. In front of each hut, and near the river, there is a large
area fenced in, where these birds can bask in the sun or bathe at
pleasure. The floor of the little poultry house is carefully cleaned every
morning with river-water, and the ground dug up and plentifully filled
daily with shell-fish for the use of the ducks, which the natives bring in
their small canoes from the sea, where they thrive by millions in the mud.
The spectacle of the gently-sloping assembling-places of these cackling
denizens of the watery element, and the clamours with which we were
saluted, strongly recalled to us the penguins of the Island of St. Paul.
In Patero millions of ducks are annually reared as articles of trade, as
the Tagalese look upon the half-hatched eggs and the new-born chickens as
special dainties.

The natives whom we met on the way all wore large round hats, made of
plaited straw or bamboo, white hose, and above these the invariable shirt,
a custom so singular, that it is but very gradually the eye of the
foreigner becomes reconciled to it. The farther we got from the capital
the more the use of Spanish seemed to diminish, till at the Lagune the
natives only speak Tagal and Bisay.

Our original intention had been to row up in _bancas_ as far as the
entrance to the Lagune, where it had been arranged that the _lorcha_,
which had started from Manila a day or two before, was to await our
arrival. But when little more than half way beyond the village of Pasig we
overtook the great clumsy concern, and it was forthwith resolved to remove
into it bag and baggage, not forgetting the "provant," and endeavour to
make ourselves as comfortable as we could for a few days and nights.

As it was perfectly calm, and the _lorcha_ had to be poled along, we were
a considerable time before reaching the entrance to the Lagune, where the
industrious natives had erected a variety of nets and other fishing
apparatus of very peculiar nature. The banks of the Lagune are for some
distance from the shore thickly studded with thousands of what are called
_corals_, or fish-runs, and a special pilot is required to enable the
_lorcha_ to thread this labyrinth of fishing apparatus of every
conceivable form, so as to reach the open water. Singularly enough, it is
for the most part the Tagalese women who manipulate the fishing
instruments, while the men, as we were told, sit in the house and
embroider. Near the entrance is stationed a sort of guardship. A Tagalese
overseer overhauled our passports, turned them over in his hands two or
three times with much official importance, and then returned them to us.
The worthy officer of the law was obviously ignorant of the art of
reading, but for that very reason he looked doubly massy, for fear of
exposing his weak side to the Europeans.

The Lagune de Bay is a fresh-water lake of such dimensions, that even on
a clear day it is impossible, from the entrance, to see the coast on the
further side, much less, of course, in the wretched rainy weather which
stuck by us throughout our trip. Nevertheless, it is far inferior in size
to the great lakes of North America. Its greatest breadth is little more
than 30 miles.[102] All around the fertile shores of this charming lake
nestle little villages, and the daily intercourse with the capital is so
extensive that a steam-boat company would pay well. While on the one hand
the Colonial Government objects to the expense of entering upon an
undertaking so important for developing the general trade, engineers, on
the other hand, have for the last 14 years been busily engaged projecting
the immense work of connecting the Lagune with the ocean by means of a
canal, in such manner as would enable ships approaching Luzon from the
southwards to reach Manila easily, and with great saving in time, instead
of having to sail all round the island. This short cut through the tongue
of land would, it may well be supposed, be in other respects of
incalculable benefit for the country, for the shipping and for trade
generally, especially were the execution of this splendid project to be
carried out hand in hand with a liberal policy, that should shake off that
despotism which at present weighs like a mountain upon every sort of
intellectual and political activity. Let Manila be declared a free port,
let the ships of all mercantile nations visit unrestrictedly the various
harbours of the Archipelago, and Spain will under such relaxations reap
far more profit than from her present retrograde colonial policy, which
can only result in permanent discontent and impoverishment. A thoroughly
unprejudiced Spanish statesman might make most valuable observations by a
brief visit to the neighbouring colony of Singapore, that marvellous
British settlement, which, owing to a commercial policy conceived in the
free, liberal spirit that characterizes the 19th century, has sprung up
from a nest of pirates into the most flourishing and the wealthiest
emporium in the entire Malay Archipelago. The situation of Manila, as also
its numerous natural advantages and resources, would soon make it a rival
to Singapore. But of what avail are the choicest treasures of nature, if
the mind be wanting which can turn them to their proper use, and elicit
their real value?

The continued bad weather compelled us to pass the night most
uncomfortably on board the _lorcha_; however, the morning after our
departure from Manila we arrived at the village of Los Banos on the
southern shore of the Lagune, where we were most courteously received by
Padre Lorenzo, a Tagalese (only the monks being of Spanish blood, whereas
among the secular clergy there are numbers of coloured persons). The
parsonage, formerly an hospital, is an extensive edifice, with covered
terraces, from whence the visitor enjoys the most splendid views of the
neighbouring hills, as also over the village. Here we were rejoined by
those members of the Expedition who, there not being room for all on board
the _lorcha_, had made out the voyage to Los Banos in a small boat. The
Government officer of the village of Pasig was so kind as to provide for
our exploration of the lake a well-appointed, thoroughly armed and
equipped war-galley; by no means a superfluous precaution when making an
excursion upon the lake, as it has not unfrequently happened that
unprotected strangers have returned to Manila robbed of everything.

We had great difficulty in making our kind Father Lorenzo, whose
wanderings had been rather limited, comprehend from what country we came,
and to what nation we belonged. The natives of Luzon for the most part
believe that all mankind consists of but two nations, Spaniards and
English; the former they regard as their own masters, while the political
and commercial power of the latter impress them with more terror than
sympathy, and this feeling is still further deepened by that spiritual
teaching, which makes everything seem to their untutored minds of the most
terrible criminality, which does not strictly accord with Roman
Catholicism.

Los Banos (the baths), so named on account of the numerous hot springs,
whose source is close at hand at the foot of the now extinct volcanic cone
of Maquilui, thickly wooded to its very summit, was so far back as the end
of the 16th century a place of resort for invalids, who hoped here to find
a cure for their various maladies. In the interests of suffering
humanity, the Franciscans of those days, then in the height of their
influence, built over the baths a sort of hut, and a hospital dedicated to
"_Nuestra Senora de las Aguas santas de Maynit_" (our Lady of the Holy
waters of Maynit, the latter name expressing _hot_ in Tagal). Although at
present in a very forlorn and dilapidated condition, there is still in
existence, quite near to the edge of the Lake, an apartment enclosed
within a wall, within which there boils up from a considerable depth a
spring of hot water of a temperature of 186 deg.8 Fahr.; which is
occasionally used, both by natives and foreigners, as a vapour bath,
although these _Thermae_ are more used to scald poultry than for their
original purpose of curing disease. The entire neighbourhood is volcanic.
Behind Maquilui, which is about 3400 feet high, lies, surrounded by a deep
lake, the active crater of the renowned volcano of Taal, while to one side
of the first-named mountain rises in the blue distance, to a height of
from 6000 to 7000 feet, the gigantic mass of the Majayjay[103] range, a
volcanic system long since extinct. An oppressive sultriness in the
atmosphere, such as we had never before experienced, and a drenching
thunder-storm, put a complete stopper on our projected excursion to make a
closer acquaintance with the hills. Somewhat of the terrific heat
experienced here, may, with much justice, be attributed to the great
number of almost boiling springs which issue from the foot of the
Maquilui, so that even on entirely clear days, when the mountain-top is
quite free of clouds, the country about Los Banos seems enveloped in an
atmosphere of mist.

The main object and ever-memorable result of our excursion was the _Laguna
Encantada_ (or Enchanted Lake,--the _Socol_ of the Tagalese), distant not
much more than a mile from Los Banos. Volcanic agency and tropical beauty
have combined to prepare here one of the most singular and mysterious
phenomena that the eye of man may ever behold. Although this small lake is
only separated by a low hill from the larger basin, yet the approach to it
is extremely troublesome and arduous. It is necessary here and there to
use one's hands, in order to creep through the brushwood along the steep
wall of rock, till the shore of the lake is at last reached. Even the very
"dug-outs," in which the lake is to be navigated, have to be transported
over this lonely inhospitable hill. As the Lagune enjoys the unenviable
reputation of being the haunt of numbers of ravenous crocodiles, which
have on several occasions overturned the light canoes navigating it at the
time, and without further ceremony devoured their crews, the natives had
learned to take the precaution of binding two or three canoes close
together with bamboos and cords, in order to diminish the risk of being
overturned while boating on this dreary haunt of "caymano."

While the natives were getting ready this handsome specimen of a craft, we
stood on the shore, every one absorbed in gazing at this singular natural
picture. Calm and mysterious-looking the lake lay before us, a circular
basin, of a deep green from innumerable almost microscopic water plants,
unfathomable, if we may trust common report, and enclosed by a crater-like
wall of lava-blocks. All along the shore grew the tropical forest;
gigantic primeval trunks, wildly festooned with wondrously luxuriant
creepers, raised their towering crests, their splendid coronets of leaves
reflected in the calm mirror below, and casting the lake in every corner
into a dusky, shadowy obscurity of outline. From the topmost branches of
the trees were suspended huge brown, indistinct-looking fruits. There was
death-like silence all around. Only at fitful intervals might be
distinguished the note of a bird, or the muttered growl of distant
thunder. We now got into our canoes and rowed silently over the waters of
the lake. As though to add to the interest of the adventure, it came on to
rain pretty heavily. Some of the party followed the very practical custom
of the natives, who forthwith divested themselves of their clothing, and
left the rain to beat upon their naked bodies, while they put their
dresses under the seats of the boat to prevent their being soaked.
Fortunately the alligators at no time made their appearance in such
numbers as the tales of the natives had led us to anticipate. We saw but
one of these monsters, apparently about 15 feet long, who however speedily
dived out of our sight.[104] Our guides maintained it would be advisable
to take a dog with us, whose howl would have aroused the alligators and
brought them up to the surface in hope as of prey. Indeed people
frequently sacrifice dogs in order to entice these rapacious monsters from
their haunts for the purpose of hunting them.

If however disappointed in this spectacle, we were recompensed by another
not less peculiar. For hardly had a shot been fired at one of the
water-fowls which were skimming to and fro over the lake, than at once
tree and thicket seemed filled with life. Birds of all kinds, screaming
and whirring, fluttered about or dashed wildly against each other on every
side. Thousands that had been sitting on the beach concealed in the deep
shade, wood-pigeons and legions of gigantic bats, which had been suddenly
frightened out of their listless repose, now flew about directly before
the murderous fowling-pieces. The singular-looking fruits which seemed to
be so strangely dependent from the trees, were transformed into Kalong
bats (_Pteropus edulis_), and flew about in immense flocks that obscured
the light of day, directly over our heads, hastily seeking a shelter in
the forest, which should hide them from the gaze of the sportsmen.
Probably we should have brought down some of these singular animals, had
not our fowling-pieces, owing to the incessant pour of rain, got so
thoroughly out of order that we had to content ourselves with getting a
very few specimens for our zoological collection.

On returning to the parsonage from this interesting excursion, we found
the _Alcalde Mayor_, who had come to Los Banos from the adjacent small
town of Santa Cruz, to welcome the foreigners, and be of service to them.
The _Alcalde Mayor_, or _Gobernador_, is the highest official, the chief
both of administration and justice in the province, a sort of prefect,
under whom are the _Gobernadorcillos_, or departmental administrators,
beneath whom again the Cabezas,[105] or parish justices, form yet a lower
grade. The chief duties of these native officials consist in seeing that
the proper amount of tribute or head-money is duly collected. This impost
is divided into three parts: the duty for defraying the State expenses
amounting to five reals, that for supporting the Church amounts to three
reals, and that for the wants of the community amounting to one real, so
that the whole taxation levied upon each individual liable is about nine
reals (4_s._ 9_d._ English). In addition to the natives, the Chinese
resident in Manila and the half-breed Chinese are subject to a poll-tax,
the pure Chinese being rated according to their social position and the
nature of their calling. They pay on the average about 17 dollars, or
about 15 times as much as the native. The poll-tax of the Chinese Mestizo
amounts to 18 reals, or about twice as much as that on the native. All
males are liable to be rated for the poll-tax, as also all females when
married, or when they have attained the age of 25. Those exempted from
the poll-tax are all Spaniards and their half-caste children, all foreign
residents except the Chinese, as also all natives above 60, and a few
native families, whose ancestors had performed certain services for the
Spaniards at the period of the conquest; and, lastly, all native
authorities during their tenure of office (usually six years).[106]

The morning after our excursion to the Enchanted Lake, a hunt of
water-fowl was organized among the swamps surrounding Calamba, which
furnished us with plenty of sport, as well as important scientific
results, in which it would have been yet more productive, had it not been
suddenly brought to a close by the acute illness of one of the canoe-men.
As some cases of cholera had occurred during the few days immediately
preceding, it seemed to be only a wise precaution to exercise some little
prudence on the present occasion. Strange to say, however, the man
attacked, despite his sickness, rowed resolutely till the party reached
Los Banos, during all which period he showed the most lively interest in
the hunt, constantly calling our attention to birds which his keen eye
detected at a distance, or which were moving softly over the water without
being observed.

Meanwhile one of the zoologists was busy at the parsonage, making
preparations of the most interesting specimens procured. Padre Lorenzo
could hardly believe his eyes when he beheld the naturalist engaged in
such a bloody business, apparently on precisely the most agreeable spot of
the whole terrace, and performing the various dissections requisite upon
the dead bodies of some couple of dozen of birds. In whatever direction
one turned in the apartment, the eye encountered nothing but birds of
variegated plumage, gigantic Kalong bats, monkeys, or else barrels filled
with spirits of wine, in which were preserved snakes, fish, and other
small inhabitants of the deep. The poor padre, accustomed to peaceful
meditation and full of simplicity, appeared quite convinced he must have
sinned grievously that such a visitation should have overtaken him, as
that this horde of foreigners should have disturbed the repose of his
peaceful asylum with such appalling practices. The youths of the village,
encouraged by the promise of remuneration, busied themselves with yet
further increasing our zoological collection, and made their appearance,
breathless with running, each with some still more curious and important
object to show to the strange gentleman, who found such interest in snakes
and insects, that he even paid money down for them!

Padre Lorenzo, however, was ere long rid of his singular guests, with whom
he could even not get upon an intelligible footing. On the same day on
which the hunt among the swamps of Calamba took place in the morning, the
Expeditionary party returned from Los Banos, and by way of recompense to
the obliging padre for the discomfort inflicted, they presented him with
some provisions and some bottles of claret, which filled the worthy
gentleman with delight, and seemed completely to reconcile him to the
"Estranjeros." Some of the members of our Expedition also visited the two
villages of Jalla-jalla and Binangonan, lying close to the shore of the
lake, places of great interest in a geographical sense, while the
remainder of the party returned to Manila in the same way they had come.
Unfortunately throughout the entire distance the rain fell worse than
ever. It never ceased pouring in deluges, so that for hours together we
could not get upon deck, but had to remain below in the small bleak,
comfortless cabin. Here there was nothing for it but to wile away the time
as best we might. We talked "_de omnibus rebus, et quibusdam aliis_," we
laughed, we sang, and we--SMOKED, a habit, be it remarked incidentally, so
constant and universal here, that the _Pebete_ with its glowing top is
constantly circulating from hand to hand. This is a sort of tinder in the
shape of small thin rods, a cubit long, which is prepared in China from a
mixture of fine dried sawdust, fir, and clay, and forms a by no means
insignificant article of commerce, the greater part coming from
Macao.[107] A chest of eight cubic feet, filled with _Pebete_ or
"joss-sticks," as the English call this tinder, the use of which pervades
the entire Malay Archipelago as far as Madras, costs from 10_s._ to 16_s._
6_d._ sterling.

By 11 P.M. we had got back to Manila. The weather had cleared up somewhat,
the rain had ceased, and the city and environs were gay with the gleam of
innumerable variegated lamps, intended to represent the illuminations
expressive of the joy of the people at the birth of a prince of the
Asturias. This did not however continue long; the enthusiasm that was
finding vent through the glitter of the lamps was drowned in another
deluge of rain, and as the exhibition had now lasted for several nights in
succession, people at last had got weary of the trouble of constantly
relighting them; the gaudy triumphal arches were decomposed into their
constituent atoms--rough boards, wooden pegs, nails, and filthy little
oil-lamps.

The continuance of the wet weather put more distant excursions out of the
question. We had to content ourselves with having seen all that was really
worth seeing in the city and environs during our limited stay.

Many additional visits were paid to the interior of the city, to the fort,
to the monasteries, and the various public institutions. Of these latter,
two call for a more particular notice: the "_Biblioteca Militar_," and the
immense hospital of San Juan de Dios, under the charge of the Charitable
Friars.

The attraction of the Military Library, which is situated in one portion
of the cloister of the Jesuits which had been almost entirely
destroyed[108] by a former earthquake, consisted far less in its
bibliographic treasures, than in a small collection of objects
illustrative of natural history, of which the first beginning had been
made but a few months before our arrival. It deserves the more notice that
it was not the project of a professed naturalist, but solely of an
"aficimado," or friend to scientific inquiry, Colonel Miguel Creus.
Although very deficient, still the bare experiment has paved the way to a
better and more complete collection, which at present comprises, besides
about 100 species of birds and a few mammalia, a number of objects
illustrative of ethnography, geological specimens, and the various
manufactures and natural products of the Archipelago (among which are 37
species of rice). Considering the natural resources of this Archipelago,
(some of which, especially the Conchylia,[109] far surpass in richness of
colour, beauty, and gracefulness of form anything that has yet been met
with in any part of the globe,) the inauguration of this small collection
may yet prove the foundation of one of the most magnificent and marvellous
museums of natural history, provided the laudable intention of the
founder receive adequate support; and the work, commenced as a labour of
love, be continued and promoted with energy and perseverance.[110]

The great Civil Hospital, to which Dr. Fullerton, a Scotchman settled in
Manila, was so kind as to accompany us, is a very extensive range of
buildings, with large airy rooms, but so unclean and ill-kept, that it is
no wonder if the report be true, that many natives in bad health prefer to
run the chance of death without, to being brought to this infirmary.
Indeed most of the rooms are empty and unoccupied, there being in the
whole building but 30 confined to their beds, which in a city of not less
than 130,000 souls, with but _one_ hospital, is at all events a remarkable
phenomenon. Every year on St. John's day the brethren of the order give a
fete, when all the different rooms are scoured, swept, and garnished, and
the sick in the hospital are present at the festivities, and, unrestricted
by considerations of diet, are regaled with food and wine to their heart's
content. This is likewise the period at which the hospital is most
extensively patronized, and not only by those actually sick, but far more
by those who qualify for a residence in the hospital by a too great
devotion to the plentiful viands provided on St. John's day. When the
English were in possession of Manila during the Seven Years' War, this
range of buildings was used as a barrack, for which reason the church was
considered as desecrated for 90 years, and only in 1857 consecrated once
more as a temple of God.

There is also in the _Calle de Hospicio_ a Military Hospital, somewhat
better kept, and not like the former under the charge of a brotherhood,
but of a medical staff. Unfortunately the arrangements here leave very
much to be desired. The rooms, insufficiently ventilated, are in the
immediate vicinity of the kitchen, the smoke and odours from which cannot
but be very prejudicial to the patients. In the various wards there were
about 150 to 200 sick, whose lot called for redoubled sympathy,
considering the little attention paid them.

Unfortunately no opportunity presented itself during our stay at Manila of
witnessing any of those processions of the Church, which are necessarily
so frequent in the course of the year. This was the more to be regretted,
as we were told of many peculiarities of these costly processions. Here
apparently, as in the earlier dependencies of Spain, in Central and
Southern America, the Roman Catholic ritual has become mingled in the most
extraordinary manner with ceremonies borrowed from paganism. The earliest
Spanish missionaries were especially prone to believe that by retaining
some of the former ceremonies they would facilitate the work of
conversion, and increase the number of neophytes. They saw no scandal in
the native, attired sometimes as a giant twelve feet high, sometimes as a
Malay warrior, sometimes as an aboriginal savage, fantastically painted,
and accoutred with bow and arrow, in a word, in all sorts of masquerading
costume, frolicking in the very midst of the sacred procession, and
performing all manner of buffoonery in front of the life-sized and
gaily-adorned images of saints; but appeared rather to contemplate with
pleasure that these wild beings, who had resisted the Spaniards on their
first arrival on the island, were now subjected to the Holy Church, and
rejoiced in her service! There are also numbers of natives dressed up as
animals, and girls gaily decorated with flowers and in robes of spotless
white, as also a fantastically-attired jester, who from time to time gives
national dances and sings national songs, to the best of his ability, all
in one long procession, accompanied by monks singing chorals and carrying
wax tapers, while a promiscuous crowd of the faithful bring up the rear.

The sight of such processions have anything but an edifying influence upon
a European, but on the mind of the masses they seem to make a deep
impression, and for weeks after, when smoking a cigarette in the privacy
of the family circle, they will talk of the splendour of such solemnities,
and the motley episodes that accompanied it. If it were admissible to
judge of the religious mind of a people by their outward observances, the
Tagalese would be the most devout race in the world. Wherever the natives
come in contact with the Church, they put on an extraordinary stern and
reverential deportment, and even in the most trivial matters the great
influence of the priesthood upon the masses becomes abundantly apparent.
This is the most conspicuous every evening as the clock tolls for the Ave
Maria. The tones work like enchantment upon the people at whatever
distance they may be audible, and for a few moments a profound silence
succeeds to the noise and bustle. The labourer and the promenader, the
ladies and gentlemen of the upper ranks in their elegant carriages, as
well as the poor Tagale returning homeward from his hard day's work, and
driving his laden mule before him, are for the space of an instant awed by
the solemn sounds. All vehicles stop suddenly short, the gentlemen and
servants uncover their heads, the restless masses stand as though nailed
to the ground, and then sink gradually on their knees in prayer, their
heads bared and their cigars extinguished; no one would venture to break
in upon the universal stillness so long as the bell continues to toll. But
as soon as it is silent, each jumps to his feet, and proceeds on again,
believing he may now in safety give way to his frolicsomeness and pursue
his pleasures.

Life in Manila during the dry season was described to us as exceedingly
agreeable and gay. Then almost every evening joyous groups thread the city
singing and joking, while from every hut resounds some snatch of melody
accompanied by the guitar. We had a slight foretaste of the joviality
which must prevail in Manila during the delicious summer evenings from the
joyous disposition manifested by the various Tagal families, even during
the wet season, when the almost incessant rain, and the swampy state of
the streets, compelled the natives to remain crowded in the narrow rooms
of their poor little huts. In St. Miguel, a hamlet in the immediate
neighbourhood of Manila, with a number of country-seats of wealthy
foreigners and natives, we repeatedly heard the sweet plaintive notes of
the native women singing Tagal ditties, which for pathos and thrilling
tenderness surpassed all we had hitherto heard or read of the talents of
the coloured races for song and melody. We shall be able in the Appendix
to give the notes of a very characteristic melody, the words of which form
a very favourite popular song (Condiman), which we ultimately succeeded in
taking down through the kindness of Senor Balthasar Girandier of Manila.

It was at San Miguel that we had not alone the most agreeable, but also
the most melancholy, experience of our entire stay in the capital of the
Philippines. On an island opposite the handsome, beautifully situate
residence of our hospitable friend Mr. Steffan, the Bremen Consul, is the
Poorhouse, in which the insane as well as the sick are confined together,
the whole being, like all the other humane institutions of Manila, under
the superintendence of an ecclesiastic, in the present case a Mestizo. It
appeared there was no proper or regular medical attendance. Without
assistance, or any one responsible for their proper care, these miserable
beings, left in an indescribably desolate and neglected condition, cower
down upon the bare stone floor in the damp, filthy rooms, staring vacantly
before them, or slink about among the cool corridors, murmuring
unintelligibly to themselves. The padre, habituated to such a state of
matters, seems never to give it a moment's thought, but rather to make it
his amusement to conduct strangers through the dismal, horrible wards,
where at each step one encounters some fresh form of misery. We felt most
pity at the sight of a female, whose features and whole appearance spoke
of a happier lot in by-gone days. It seemed a mystery crying aloud for
reparation, that this unhappy being, an orphan, worthy of all compassion,
should for a slight attack of melancholy be liable to be sent to the
asylum for the insane by her unscrupulous relations, that they might with
the greater security possess themselves of her property. So deep and so
permanent was the impression made by this melancholy spectacle, that even
now, after the lapse of years of varied experience, since our visit to the
lunatic asylum of Manila, the ill-fated being, with her wan yet striking
features, her large, melancholy black eyes, and her wavy, shining black
hair, her dress neglected and half torn into pieces, stands out life-like
before us, as an embodiment of misery.

Early on the day on which we bade adieu to Manila we found an opportunity
of seeing a live boa-constrictor, said to be 48 feet long and seven
inches thick, at the house of a secular ecclesiastic in the suburb of
Santa Cruz. This gigantic reptile had been confined for 32 years in a
large wooden cage, where it had enjoyed such a carefully tended existence
that it had fairly outlived the good padre, and was now for sale by his
heirs. The indolent animal, constantly lying almost motionless among the
sand, is fed only once in every four weeks, when it is usually presented
with a young pig.

On the 24th of June the members of our Expedition went on board the small
steamer plying to Cavite, where lay the frigate, on board which all
necessary preparations had been made. Now, on the eve of departure, almost
every one of our number mourned the disappointment of cherished
expectations. The inclemency of the weather had not alone precluded our
undertaking the more distant excursions which would have repaid our
researches in the natural history of the islands, but had even interposed
serious obstacles to our wanderings in the immediate neighbourhood;
moreover, up to the very moment of our departure the Government manifested
the utmost indifference to the objects of the Expedition, while even the
educated portion of the Spanish residents never took the slightest notice.
The more reason therefore is it, under such circumstances, that we should
not be unmindful of the few, such as Messrs. Steffan, Schmidt, Wegener,
Wood, Fullerton, Fonseca, Girandier, and Creus, who, with warm interest in
our plans, furnished us with new material relating to the Philippines and
their inhabitants, and left us with the agreeable prospect of a permanent
exchange of literary and scientific labours.

At one A.M. of the 25th June we weighed anchor in the harbour of Cavite,
on our voyage to the Empire of China. The land breeze, which sets in
regularly every night, carried us clear out of the Bay of Manila, but in
the open sea outside we found, contrary to expectation, instead of the
S.W. monsoon, light variable winds and calms, which materially interfered
with our progress. At last, when we were about mid-way across the China
Sea, we fell in with the long-looked for S.W. wind, which speedily wafted
us to the next station we were to visit, the British colony of Hong-kong,
or Victoria. With favourable winds the voyage from Manila to Hong-kong, a
distance of about 700 nautical miles, is four or five days' sail; owing to
the constant contrary winds we were double that time.

Already, before we came in sight of land, a Chinese fishing vessel had put
a pilot on board in the shape of a long-tailed son of the Celestial
Empire, who jabbered English in a fashion to set the hair on end, and was
lost in wonder at our flag, which he had never before seen. We afterwards
found that the dialect used by our pilot was what is called
Canton-English, such as is spoken by all Chinese who have dealings with
the British, and consisting exclusively of a most ludicrous distortion of
the commonest English phrases.

About noon on the 4th July we sighted the Chinese coast; and before
sundown we had passed the Lemmas islands, and found ourselves in the
island-studded, many-bayed archipelago at the mouth of the Canton River,
where the English have selected Hong-kong, with its admirable harbour, for
the site of their colony. Thousands of fishing-boats covered the surface
of the ocean all around us, always sailing parallel with each other, in
fact, quite a fleet of fishermen, who, on a favourable opportunity, add a
little buccaneering, and have numerous secure retreats among the thousands
of coves all around, so that even up to the present day they can carry on
almost unpunished their piratical attempts upon their own
fellow-countrymen, as well as upon foreigners ignorant of their danger. It
was the first time we had seen in any numbers the Chinese Junk, with its
strange-looking rigging. On most of these small but clumsy vessels there
was cut or painted on either side of the forecastle a huge eye, as though
the crew were anxious to increase the power of vision of their vessel, so
that it might more readily pick its way through the numerous dangerous
reefs and coral banks. On the other hand the superstitious sea-faring
Chinese sometimes veil and cover up the eyes of their vessels, in order
that they should not behold certain strange things passing by, as, for
instance, a dead body, or an approaching thunder-storm, and not be
frightened by them.[111]

The nearer we approached the coast, the more was our gaze rivetted by a
landscape of the most imposing character, and now not owing to the
altitude of the hills (for the highest peak is only 3000 feet), but to the
grandeur of their form and their contour. Here are sharp, needle-shaped
pinnacles, their steep rocky cones reminding one of the Sugar Loaf at Rio,
and then round shoulders of hills, and far-extending ranges, penetrated by
deep defiles, all nearly perpendicular, and without any extent of level
land, and rising sheer out of the sea. These mountain ranges are almost
entirely naked, or covered only with a scanty grass or bush vegetation: no
tree, no forest hides the majestic groups of rocks and stones, and when
the setting sun picked out with dark, well-defined shadows the sharp
outline of the granite rock, it was as though there lay before us a "bit"
of the Swiss Alps, bathed in the sea as far as the limit of
forest-vegetation, and our sailors contemplated with redoubled enjoyment a
scene which reminded them of their native Dalmatia.

As the night was dark, with neither moonlight nor light-house (of which
latter there is unfortunately an utter lack here), we could not venture to
wind our way through the narrow channel into the harbour of Hong-kong, on
the north side of the island, and we anchored therefore about 9 P.M. on
the west side, in the Lemmas Channel; and with the first beams of the sun,
on the morning of the 5th July, we stood in to the enchanting harbour of
Hong-kong. Where the previous day we could descry from seaward hardly any
traces of human activity in the hills and rocks along the coast, so that
the land seemed desolate and deserted, there now smiled upon us, as we
doubled Green Island, the city of Victoria, rising amphitheatre-like; and,
lying invitingly before us, its harbour, all alive with numbers of stately
ships and steamers, looking like an inland lake,--in fact, entirely
land-locked. Several old ships of the line, which the English use as
hospitals and coal depots, filled the background, among which was the
Royal Charlotte, 130 guns, the first three-decker that has passed the
Equator.

At 10 A.M. we cast anchor directly opposite the town; and amid the flags
of England, America, France, Holland, and Russia, there now flaunted
proudly forth the flag of Austria!


FOOTNOTES:

[72] In Manila the minimum annual rainfall is 84 inches, the maximum 102
inches.

[73] The expedition sailed from Madras with about 2300 men; the squadron
consisted of 13 ships of war and transports. The English landed without
any opposition, laid siege to Manila, stormed and captured the city proper
within ten days after their arrival. The Citadel capitulated; the
Governor, an Archbishop, binding himself to pay a contribution of
4,000,000 dollars (L833,000), in order to save the city from being sacked.
This expedition was always looked on by the Spaniards of the Philippines
as a very rash adventure, which by no means tended to diminish the
national antipathy to the English race, although after such freebooting
expeditions as have within these last two years been witnessed on the part
of civilized states in law-abiding Europe, this invasion by an army of
declared enemies must be viewed in an entirely different light.

[74] Spanish writers, treating of the Philippines, derive this name from
"Losong," which in the native language means the wooden mortar in which
the rice, which forms the chief subsistence of the inhabitants, is shelled
and pounded. The first strangers who came to this island, and found in
every hut one of these very peculiar clumsy-looking implements, spoke of
the newly discovered island as "Isle de los Losenes" (island of wooden
mortars), whence in process of time it became transformed into Luzon.

[75] One of these hotels, the Hotel Francais, was, at the time of our
visit, kept by a Frenchman named Dubosse, a man of a most adventurous
disposition, who afterwards accompanied the French army to China as a
mess-man, and was one of the victims seized by Sang-ko-lin-sin's soldiers,
near Pekin, in September, 1860, who met with such a horrible fate. The
other inn, the Hotel Fernando, kept by a North American, is yet more
filthy and noisy than the first-named, since, being situated on the
harbour, it serves for a rendezvous for the various ships' captains. In
neither of these is the charge less than 4 to 5 Spanish dollars a day, or
about L1 sterling.

[76] The Stranger's Guide to the Philippines (_Guia de Forasteros_) for
the year 1859 gives the names of 61 commercial houses established by
Spaniards in Manila. Besides these, there are in the capital of the
Philippines, seven English, three North American, two French, one German,
and two Swiss trading firms.

[77] We borrow this alphabet from the valuable work of Baron von Huegel,
entitled the Pacific Ocean and the Spanish Colonies of the Indian
Archipelago (Vienna, printed at the Imperial Press, 1860), and believe the
reader will the more gratefully welcome it that only a small number of
copies of Baron von Huegel's interesting journal were printed in manuscript
for private circulation.

[78] This opinion of our Augustinian guide is not shared out there. An
Austrian traveller, as widely renowned as highly cultivated, Baron Von
Huegel, relates, in his Diary already alluded to, the following singular
revelations by a friar in Manila: "The Philippine Islands belong to the
Augustine monks; in Manila, Don Pasquale (the then Governor) or another
may ruffle it and talk large,--in the interior we are the true masters.
Tell me where you want to go and everything shall be laid open for you!...
Police in the interior? It is laughable to hear of such an idea! As if
such were possible! and I should be glad to make the acquaintance of that
official who would venture to ask even the simple question of who any man
is, who is under the protection of our order!... Should you like to ascend
the Majayjay, the highest hill in the interior? An Augustinian friar shall
accompany you thither. Should you care to make an excursion to the Lagoons
and thence proceed to the Pacific Ocean? An Augustinian friar shall be
your guide. Have you a hankering to visit the forests of Ilocos, northward
from Manila, or to sail down the great river Lanatin? An Augustinian shall
arrange all that for you. In one word, say what you wish to do!"

[79] Fray Manuel Blanco, whose portrait, the size of life, but by no means
artistically executed, adorns one of the corridors, was born 24th
November, 1778, at Navianos, in the province of Zamora in Spain, and died
in the convent of Manila 1st April, 1845.

[80] Of these there were in 1857, 373,569 liable to taxation. Within the
same year there were 85,629 persons baptized, 16,768 married, and 49,999
buried with the rites of the Church.

[81] In 1857 there were baptized in these 76 villages 21,604 children,
4512 couples were united in wedlock, and 12,002 were buried.

[82] In the entire Archipelago there is but _one_ newspaper, "El Boletin
Oficial," published under the auspices of Government, and which treats
much more of religious than of political topics. There are but two
printing and publishing houses in Manila, one of which is in the hands of
the Dominicans, and prints almost exclusively Prayer-books and religious
works.

[83] This historical poem is entitled "_Luzonia, o sea Los Genios del
Pasig_."

[84] Of this number of souls there were in 1857, 188,509 amenable to
taxation, while during the year there occurred 31,285 births, 21,029
deaths, and 5713 marriages.

[85] In 1857, the order baptized 23,227, joined in marriage 4830 couples,
and buried 15,627.

[86] The printed works obtained in the various monasteries of Manila
consist of dictionaries and small grammars of the Togala, Bisaya, Ilocana,
Tbanac, Bicol, and Pampangu dialects. The MSS. embrace vocabularies of the
Igorotes and Ilongotes languages of Luzon, as also the idiom used by the
natives of the Marianne Archipelago, together with a short treatise on the
Marianne group written in Spanish by a missionary. All these works will be
thoroughly and exhaustively treated of in the ethnological portion, where
also the manuscripts will be published.

[87] _Usted_--contraction for "_Vuestra Merced_" (your Grace).

[88] The fair speeches and amiable phrases of the Spaniards lose all their
value when one finds upon nearer acquaintance with this courteous nation,
that the heart and the feelings take no part therein. There is nothing
which a Spaniard will not offer to a stranger--but it is always on the
clear understanding that the latter will with equal politeness refuse the
proffer. We on one occasion, however, saw a Yankee take these professions
at their apparent value, and by so doing put his Spanish host to no small
confusion. The Spaniard wore a very costly diamond breast-pin, for which
the American could not find words sufficient to express his admiration. To
his exclamations of delight, the Spaniard kept repeating his nauseous "_a
la disposicion de Usted_," till at last the American fairly took the pin
out of the Spaniard's scarf and transferred it to his own. The latter felt
so ashamed and dumbfounded that he could not utter a word. The following
day the American, who had only taken it by way of joke, returned the
costly bauble to the agonized Spaniard, but took occasion in so doing to
remark that he now knew what was meant by Spanish courtesy.

[89] On the island of Mactan (10 deg. 20' N., 124 deg. 10' E.) there was also
erected on the promontory of Sugano, a monument to the memory of
Magelhaens, and the happy idea was entertained of making it also into a
light-house, to warn ships of the danger in approaching the immense
numbers of reefs that are found here.

[90] V. Heinrich Heine's "Romanzero."

[91] It was estimated, we were told, at from $35,000 to $40,000 annually.

[92] Cock-fighting has been so long disused in England, that to most
persons it only lingers as a grim tradition, mainly authenticated by
Hogarth's well-known painting. The degrading associations which a
cock-fight generated are sufficiently well illustrated by the prince of
pictorial satirists. The "betting-ring" still brings together in England
the same intermingling of grades of society, and consequent utter
disruption of all social respect, but with all its faults it never has,
nor can have, the same brutalizing effects of cock-fighting, which are
instanced by the following anecdote, extracted from the _Gentleman's
Magazine_ for April, 1789, and which may even now be found to repay
perusal:--"Died at Tottenham, John Ardesoif, Esq., a young man of large
fortune, ... who if he had his foibles, had also his merits (!) that far
outweighed them. Mr. Ardesoif was very fond of cock-fighting, and had a
favourite cock, upon which he won many very profitable matches. The last
bet he laid upon this cock, he lost; which so enraged him that he had the
bird tied to a spit, and roasted alive before a large fire. The screams of
the miserable animal were so affecting that some gentlemen who were
present attempted to interfere, at which Mr. Ardesoif was so enraged that
he seized a poker, and with the most furious vehemence declared that he
would kill the first man that interfered, but in the midst of his
asseveration he fell dead upon the spot! Such we are assured were the
circumstances attending the death of this great pillar of humanity!"

[93] This unhappy lady died a melancholy death, having, what rarely occurs
among Spanish women, committed suicide at her hotel by swallowing Prussic
acid. It was rumoured that an unhappy attachment led to this fatal
resolve.

[94] Of these straw-plait manufactories the cigar-holders are especially
noticeable for their fine texture and elegance. These are usually sold at
very high prices; some of the more elegant of these fetching from 40 to 50
dollars (L8 to L10). Straw mats and hats, not inferior in fineness of
texture to those of Panama, are made here of palm fibre, and form a not
unimportant article of exportation.

[95] 8 reals = 1 Spanish piastre = 3_s._ 1-3/4_d._ at par; hence 1 real =
4.71875_d._ English.

[96] Owing to the universal interest felt in tobacco, the use of which has
spread over the globe, till it has become a necessary of life to the
civilized man as well as the half-savage races of mankind, we subjoin by
way of completing the information above attained, the following remarks
upon the tobacco culture in other possessions of Spain, extracted from an
unpublished journal, kept by a member of the Expedition, during a visit
previously paid to the West Indies.

"The best sites for growing tobacco in Cuba lie to the westward of the
capital in what is called the _Vuelta abajo_, between Rio Hondo and San
Juan de Martinez, and is about ten English miles in circumference; the
tobacco grown on the _Vuelta arriba_ is usually of inferior quality. In
1856 there were in Cuba 10,000 plantations or _Vegas_, with a superficial
area of 8000 _Caballerias_, (about 414 square miles, 1 Caballeria being
equal to 160,371,041 English square yards, or 33,134 acres), cultivated by
from 14,000 to 16,000 negro slaves. The total value of the capital
employed in this branch of culture (including manual labour, building
utensils, draught animals, &c.) may be estimated at 13,000,000 piasters
(L2,730,000), and the average weight of tobacco produced at a million and
a half _arrobas_, or 37,500,000 lbs. annually. Of this quantity 400,000
_arrobas_, or 10,000,000 lbs., are consumed in Cuba itself, while the rest
is exported partly in the leaf, partly in the manufactured state. One
_Caballeria_ of ground can produce on the average about 360 _arrobas_, or
9000 lbs., of which however only 1/20th will be of superior quality.

"A '_vega_' usually consists of three _Caballerias_, which are in regular
succession devoted to the tobacco cultivation, so that while two are
devoted to maize and other vegetables for human subsistence, only the
remaining third is under tobacco. The season for sowing is in October or
November, and the crop is got in in January or February. On one
_Caballeria_ there are usually found under favourable circumstances
500,000 plants or _Matas_. Hence it results, that as the tobacco culture
of Cuba extends over 8000 _Caballerias_, there are throughout the island
4,000,000,000 plants. Each plant has from 8 to 10 suitable leaves. They
are collected together in bundles, called _manojos_ (handfuls), of from
120 to 130 leaves each, and 80 _manojos_ make one _tercio_, or 150 lbs. of
tobacco. One _manojo_ weighs about 1-1/4 lbs., and when prepared
makes into about 400 cigars. There are in Cuba altogether 600
cigar-manufactories, of which above 400 are in the capital alone. A
workman can make about 150 cigars a day; the rate of pay is about 10
Spanish piasters or _duros_ for 1000. The manufacture of cigars gives
employment to about 20,000 workmen, chiefly males. Under the designation
of _Tabagueros_, they constitute almost an exclusive class, and owing to
their improvidence are usually in wretched plight. In Cuba (as in Luzon)
there is but one species of tobacco raised, but more attention seems to be
paid to its cultivation in the former island. The leaves are sorted in
Cuba according to colour and 'vein' (_venas_), and their quality fixed
accordingly. In commerce there are three sorts, viz.--

  No. I. 42 to 45 Spanish piasters (L6 15_s._ to L7 5_s._) per 1000.
     II. 32         "       "      (L5)                          "
    III. 28         "       "      (L4 10_s._)                   "

The number of cigars annually exported from the Havanna averages from
200,000,000 to 250,000,000, without including the _ramos_, or tobacco
exported in the leaf. The cedar-tree (_Cedrela odorata_), of which the
cigar-boxes are chiefly made, is occasionally prejudicial to the contents,
in consequence of the slight dampness still remaining in the wood bringing
out white spots of decay upon the tips of the cigars."

[97] The United States of North America produce above 200,000 cwt., or
more than one half the whole supply. The annual consumption of tobacco by
the individual is in the United States 3-1/2 lbs., in England 1 lb. and
1/2 oz., in France 1 lb. 1-1/2 oz., and in Germany 2 lbs.

[98] The experiments made at Fort St. George near Madras in July, 1850,
with lines and rigging made of abaca and European hemp, with the view of
testing their respective availability, gave the following interesting
results: a rope of Manila hemp, 12 feet long, 3-1/4 inches in
circumference, and weighing 28-11/16 oz., required a strain of 4460 lbs.
to break it: on the other hand a rope of English hemp of similar
dimensions, weighing 39 oz., broke with a strain of only 3885 lbs. A
second smaller rope of Manila hemp, 1-3/4 inches thick, and 9-1/2 oz.
weight, also 12 feet in length, required 1490 lbs. to break it, while an
exactly similar cord of English and Russian hemp, weighing 13 oz. per
fathom, broke with 1184 lbs., so that in the first instance the abaca line
was 13 per cent., and in the second nearly 22 per cent. stronger than
ropes of similar size of European hemp.

[99] Compare with Forbes Royle's valuable treatise upon Manila hemp,
entitled "The Fibrous Plants of India fitted for cordage, clothing, and
paper." London, 1855.

[100] The best Manila hemp is worth from 4-1/2 to 6 dollars per Spanish
_picul_=140 lbs. Cordage made by steam power of the various dimensions,
from half to one inch thick, sells at 25, and from one to five inches
thick, at 10, piasters per _picul_.

[101] The fabrics known by the name of _Sinamay_ are on the other hand
made of the fibres of the _Musa textilis_. They are of less gossamer
tissue, but almost transparent, and far more durable than the fabrics made
from the Pina.

[102] According to Buzeta the Lagoon is 36 Spanish leagues in
circumference, by an average depth of 15 to 16 _brazos_ (fathoms). While
thirteen rivers of various dimensions flow into the lake, the Pasig alone
issues from it, to carry off its waters to the sea.

[103] Pronounce Mahayhay.

[104] The size attained by the alligator or cayman in the Laguna de Bay
borders on the incredible. Baron Von Huegel, in his work already referred
to, tells of a French settler in _Jalla-Jalla_ (pronounce Halla-Halla),
who assured him that he had once killed an alligator, whose head alone
weighed 250 lbs., while the body was 10 feet in circumference! It lay
buried in the sluice at the mouth of a river, and it proved so difficult
to get it brought to land and cut up, that only the head was severed by
way of trophy, and brought home to his house.

[105] Cabeza, the head, whence it is further applied to express "chief,"
or "chieftain."

[106] Another description of tax is the compulsory labour exacted from the
natives, which is expended in the construction of roads and bridges,
transmission of mail matter, transport of military baggage, luggage of
travellers, &c. &c.

[107] These joss-sticks, by the Chinese called "shi-shin-hiang," burn,
when lighted, so slowly and regularly, that the Chinese often use them to
mark the divisions of time.

[108] The church was utterly ruined, and a large portion of the buildings
are similarly in a most desolate, neglected condition. A hope was however
expressed that in the following year, 1859, members of the Society of
Jesus would come from Europe to settle in the Philippines, who would
include among their other labours that of rebuilding their own cloister.

[109] The graceful elegance of the Conchylia brought from Manila is so
remarkable that an English ship captain, who, without a special knowledge
of the matter, brought on speculation a freight of mussels from the
Philippines to Europe, not only made by their sale an enormous profit, but
even attained in consequence to a certain degree of celebrity in the
scientific world!

[110] Unfortunately the students of Natural Science have met with but
little encouragement or support from Government, and many parts of the
interior still remain a sealed book to them, or are only accessible under
great difficulties. The deficiency of definite information respecting the
island attracts foreign naturalists thither, and of late there have been
exploring it, M. M. Feodor Jagor of Berlin, Dr. Karl Semper of Hamburg,
and La Porte of Paris, all intent on matters connected with the natural
history of this Archipelago, but the majority of such visitants come back
discontented and thoroughly undeceived to land, where all activity of
scientific inquiry is allowed reluctantly, and regarded by the Government
and the priests with an envious eye.

[111] A Chinese sailor, on being asked why his vessel had an eye painted
on its bulwark, replied in Canton-English, "Suppose no hab eye, how can
see?"


                   [Illustration: Life in Hong-kong.]




                                  XIV.

                               Hong-kong.

             Duration of Stay from 5th to 18th July, 1858.

    Rapid increase of the colony of Victoria or Hong-kong.--
    Disagreeables.--Public character.--The Comprador, or
    "fac-totum."--A Chinese fortune-teller.--Curiosity-stalls.--The
    To-stone.--Pictures on so-called rice-paper.--Canton-English.--
    Notices on the Chinese language and mode of writing.--
    Manufacture of ink.--Hospitality of German missionaries.--The
    custom of exposing and murdering female children.--Method of
    dwarfing the female foot.--Sir John Bowring.--Branch Institute
    of the Royal Asiatic Society.--An ecclesiastical dignitary on
    the study of natural sciences.--The Chinese in the East Indies.--
    Green indigo or Lu-Kao.--Kind reception by German countrymen.--
    Anthropometrical measurements.--Ramble to Little Hong-kong.--
    Excursion to Canton on board H.M. gun-boat Algerine.--A day at
    the English head-quarters.--The Treaty of Tien-Tsin.--Visit to
    the Portuguese settlement of Macao.--Herr von Carlowitz.--
    Camoens' Grotto.--Church for Protestants.--Pagoda Makok.--Dr.
    Kane.--Present position of the colony.--Slave-trade revived
    under the name of Chinese emigration.--Excursions round Macao.--
    The Isthmus.--Chinese graves.--Praya Granite.--A Chinese
    physician.--Singing stones.--Departure.--Gutzlaff's Island.--
    Voyage to the Yang-tse-Kiang.--Wusung.--Arrival at Shanghai.


Victoria, the name by which the settlement situate on the north side of
the island of Hong-kong is known in official documents, strongly recalls
another renowned British possession, Gibraltar. A mere uninviting granite
rock of about 9 miles in length, 8 in breadth, and 26 in circumference,
Hong-kong, situate as it is at the mouth of the Canton River, is one of
the best harbours in the Chinese Empire. Owing to the barren, treeless
surface, which consists for the most part of chains of hills, the highest
point of which is 1825 feet above sea-level, with narrow valleys between,
and a small extent of level ground around the bay, hardly a twentieth part
of its surface is adapted to agriculture. The modern cheerful town,
thoroughly European in character, has within these few years rapidly
attained large dimensions, and its numerous palatial structures speak
volumes for the wealth and prosperity of the residents. The buildings of
the colony rise terrace-like one above another, and extend in rows all
along the steep slope of the granite, for a distance of nearly three
miles. Besides the population inhabiting the town, many thousand Chinese
of the very lowest class with their wives and children live here in small
boats year after year, so that the total population of the island amounts
to about 80,000 souls.

Twenty years back Hong-kong was but an insignificant place. Only since the
peace of Nangking in 1842, which shook to its foundation the exclusive
system till then prevalent, and among other important advantages secured
the island of Hong-kong to the English, besides bringing into the
community of nations the huge unwieldy empire with its 400,000,000,
occupying 78 degrees of longitude and 38 of latitude, has it been
developed into the most important business centre of China. It became an
emporium for all European manufactures, as well as for all produce from
the interior, which is shipped hence to the various marts of the world.
Unfortunately the period at which the flag of the great Mandjing, or
Double Eagle, as the Chinese call Austria, was for the first time unfurled
on the shores of the Celestial Kingdom proved most unsuitable for
scientific observation. While in the interior a variety of circumstances
seriously threatened the stability of the throne of the reigning dynasty,
the flames of war were once more breaking out along the coast also, and
adding to the confusion and distress of the Chinese diplomatists. In the
present war the English were for the first time in these waters fighting
side by side with the French, while the Russians and North Americans were
cautiously maintaining an observant, but none the less on that account
menacing attitude. The hatred and animosity of the Chinese populace,
stirred up by their own authorities, was continually goaded to increasing
fury with each new victory of the "red-haired barbarians." The Chinese
bakers in Hong-kong had devised the cruel expedient of poisoning the bread
purchased by the English, and thus avenging themselves on the foe more
fatally and more certainly than by Chinese weapons. Even while walking in
the neighbourhood one's life was not safe, and even the usually not very
easily terrified Englishman was now begirt with "revolvers," when he rode
forth of an afternoon with his wife, or was taken in a sedan-chair to a
friend's house of an evening.

Shortly before our arrival, the captain of a merchantman, while taking a
walk outside the city, was set upon by some Chinese, robbed, and so
severely maltreated that he expired of the injuries he received. So too
the clerk of a mercantile house had been picked up just outside the city
weltering in his blood and pierced with a number of wounds from a dagger,
the murderer in this case also evading detection. An attempt was even made
against the life of the Governor, Sir John Bowring, which was only
frustrated through the vigilance of the sentinel, who discharged his piece
at the scoundrels just as, favoured by night, they were stealing over the
walls of the Government-house, with the view of creeping through the
garden as far as Sir John's cabinet.

Even in the most ordinary domestic matters might be traced the same
relentless hostility on the part of the Chinese, and the state of affairs
was becoming every day more intolerable to the European residents. All the
domestic servants at Hong-kong are Chinese, who come hither from the
nearest provinces of the mainland, in order to benefit by the rate of
wages paid by the "foreign barbarian." The Chinese officials, vying with
each other in every possible method of showing their implacable hatred to
the strangers and to embitter their life in China, now issued an order to
all the Chinese resident in Hong-kong to quit the island and return to
their native country. This ordinance would assuredly have been disregarded
by most of the resident Chinese of the Middle Empire, had not any
violation of the Imperial rescripts been visited with such appalling
consequences. For by the Draconic laws of the Empire, the family of the
criminal expiate his offence, should he take to flight and get beyond the
reach of the arm of Chinese justice. For any such absentee from justice,
some other member of the family is substituted, who may be still on the
spot; as for instance, the father, mother, or brother, who is punished
exactly as though he had in person been guilty of the crime or
misdemeanour. With such terrific means of repressing disobedience
impending over him, no Chinese would venture to set at defiance the orders
of the Mandarins; and accordingly, during the summer of 1858, 10,000
Chinese returned home at once; others, who did not dare to return, but
could not endure that the ruthless doom should be executed upon their
relatives, committed suicide. The position of European ladies in Hong-kong
became anything but enviable, as they had at a moment's notice to take up
the pot-ladle for themselves, and get through the various fatiguing
details of their households with what skill they could. Moreover there was
good ground for apprehension that the Mandarins might cut off all
communications with the neighbouring provinces, which move, as the greater
part of the every-day necessaries of life are supplied from the mainland,
might have exposed the population of Hong-kong to the severest straits.

Under these circumstances any more remote excursions, or visits to the
adjacent mainland, were of course impossible. We had to confine our
investigations to the island itself, there to collect what memoranda we
could, and see as much of the island and its inhabitants as the shortness
of our stay and the prevailing disorders might admit.

Life in Hong-kong has already a strong leaven of western civilization.
Only in the narrowest streets does the visitor come upon examples of the
genuine Chinese type. Most of the natives even inhabit houses built in the
European style, so that one feels as though in a European city inhabited
by a Chinese population, the latter having however greatly altered from
its originality. Only very few types of Chinese popular life are met with
in this English colony. Of these characters the most interesting and
unique is the _Comprador_ (_Mai-pau_), a sort of factotum, whom no
household can dispense with, and whose importance only those can
adequately do justice to who have lived some time in the country. The
Comprador, or _shroff_, is the soul, the good or evil genius, of the
house: he sees to all sorts of purchases, manages the domestic economy,
and maintains order and discipline in the house and household. The entire
domestic control is exclusively lodged in his hands, to that extent that
even the master and mistress of the house may not, without consulting the
Comprador, dismiss one of the servants or engage a new one. For all that
goes on, the latter is responsible. He has to answer for the honesty of
the servants, and must replace anything that may have gone amissing from
the house inventory. If the family leave their house for any time, the
Comprador is informed of the place where the most valuable articles are
deposited, where they are more likely to be found in proper order on their
return than by any other device. Even during the late war, in which the
feeling of the Chinese to the Europeans was anything but friendly, the
Comprador held to his fidelity, and was as useful as ever. In view of the
actual state of matters, a traveller must feel no little astonishment at
beholding the doors and windows of the private dwelling-houses everywhere
wide open, and valuable articles lying exposed in the various apartments.
As however the Comprador himself must get a number of bails to become
responsible for him, and as the post is a very profitable one, it follows
that there are but few cases of dishonesty in this singular profession. It
is especially remarkable that few of the populace seem to be as hostile to
the strangers as the Mandarins, and all the numerous annoyances inflicted
on the latter are invariably to be traced to the intrigues of the Chinese
authorities. How else would it be possible for a couple of hundred
Europeans to rule a colony in which are 80,000 Chinese, and which moreover
is dependent upon the mainland for the very first necessities of life?

The Comprador receives for all his services and attentions no higher pay
than from 12 to 15 dollars a month, besides support for himself and
family. This however is not his sole income, as every tradesman must give
the Comprador a per-centage upon everything, even the most insignificant
article that enters the house, and this custom even extends to any
purchases made by a Chinese in the warehouses of the foreign merchant.

Another "public character," whom one frequently meets in the lower parts
of the city in the public streets of the Chinese quarter, is the
"soothsayer." On a small table before him stands an open draught-board
with a number of squares, on which are inscribed a variety of proverbs and
oracular sayings. In each square is a grain of rice, and quite close to
the board is a bird-cage with a tame canary. Presently some good-humoured
gaping rustic comes up, who wishes to learn his destiny, upon which the
soothsayer suffers the canary to hop out of his cage upon one of the
squares, and pick up a grain of rice _ad libitum_. The sentences and
interpretations, which are inscribed on each square from which the canary
snaps up his food serve for a reply and decision to the curious
questioner, who hands over a small _honorarium_. The apparatus is simple
and ingenious, but the proverbs are excessively silly, and recall much
less the land of Confucius than the dream-books of certain countries
standing high in European civilization.

The stores which seem most to attract the attention of a stranger are the
"Curiosity-shops," in which are heaped up those innumerable articles of
Chinese industry and Chinese taste which are so characteristic of the
country and its inhabitants. Here the eye rests upon objects of the most
bizarre shapes, which in material design and execution are totally unlike
anything the European sees elsewhere; workmanship in wood and stone, that
illustrates in a remarkable manner the extraordinary patience of the
artisan, such as drinking-cups, barrels, frames, cut all in one piece, and
beautifully carved, elegant fancy articles of horn, stone,
mother-of-pearl, ivory, roots of trees, metal, or wood, vases and dishes,
statuettes in copper and clay, woven portraits, embroidery, &c. &c.

Among all these various manufactures, one especially remarks those
prepared from a leek-green, slimy-feeling stone (nephrite), which is in
much request among the Chinese, and is highly valued. The Chinese name,
Yo, from which in all probability is derived the French name _Jade_, does
not indicate however a peculiar species, but is used for all sorts of
carved stone-work and gems, while the most valuable one is called by the
Chinese the "mutton-fat" stone. The articles prepared of what is named
steatite, or soap-stone, are largely used in commerce, but are of very
small value, and usually cut only in very clumsy figures.

But these manufactures make much less impression upon the stranger than
the beautiful pictures of the Chinese artists upon rice-paper, a peculiar
branch of art, cultivated by the Chinese alone, and which as yet has never
been successfully imitated in any other country. The most exquisite
specimens of these are sent to Canton, but among the Chinese in Hong-kong
we saw several beautiful works in this style of painting. The common
designation of rice-paper has led to the erroneous idea that the substance
of which these pictures are made is manufactured from the leaves of the
rice-plant, whereas it is prepared from the pith of an entirely different
plant (_Aralia papyrifera_), which grows in Funan and Tukun. The marrow is
steeped for some time in water, after which it is split by means of very
keen sharp knives into thin leaves, which are then subjected to gentle
pressure. The largest are about a foot square, and are reserved almost
exclusively for pictures, the shreds and inferior sorts alone being used
for the manufacture of artificial flowers. We saw portraits of the Emperor
and Empress, of the rebel leader, Tai-ping, of the notorious Yeh,
ex-governor of Canton, and other well-known or conspicuous personages.
Latterly there has sprung up a strong tendency among the Chinese artists
to daguerreotypes and photographs in miniature upon ivory; and in the
_ateliers_ of Hong-kong a number of artists were engaged in this, at
present the most profitable branch of Chinese artistic skill.

In all these shops the medium of trade is what is called Canton-English,
less a dialect than a confused jargon of English and Chinese words,
consisting of concessions made on either side to the grammar and idiom of
the other, so as the more readily to comprehend each other. A few Spanish
and Portuguese words have also crept in, recalling the former relations of
these countries with China. All English words ending in _e_ mute have in
this gibberish an _i_ attached to them, as also all other words whatever.
Thus they say _timi_, _housi_, _pieci_, _coachi_, _cooki_, &c. &c. There
are certain Chinese, especially in Canton, who pick up a living by
initiating young country folks, who are about entering service in English
mercantile houses, in this singular language. Curious and unpleasant as
this Chinese English dialect sounds in the ears of strangers, it is found
greatly to facilitate intercourse with the Chinese, in consequence of the
immense difficulties attending the study of Chinese, so that most
Europeans find it far more comfortable to master this jargon, which is not
without some influence on the spread of English in the chief commercial
cities, than to occupy themselves with mastering Chinese. The language
spoken by the sons of the "middle kingdom" consists of 450 monosyllabic
sounds, which by various delicate differences in accentuation may increase
to about 1600. The slight, and to unaccustomed ears almost inappreciable,
shades of aspiration and accentuation, are the main difficulty in the way
of foreigners desirous of learning the Chinese language.

To learn the written characters is equally arduous, and requires not less
time and perseverance; for this does not consist of a number of letters,
the varying arrangement of which constitutes words, but of 40,000 more or
less complicated signs, each of which expresses a whole word. They are
rude forms, representing most imperfectly ideas and material objects;[112]
however, the knowledge of 4000 to 6000 such signs, with their various
significations, suffices to understand most of the common Chinese books.
These singular hieroglyphics are not written horizontally but vertically.
Moreover, the Chinese begin from the right side, so that, directly the
reverse of the European custom, the title of a Chinese book is found on
the first page, the leaf furthest to the right hand. Long ago, the
Chinese, like most other Asiatic nations at the present day, wrote with
metal _styli_ upon split leaves of bamboo. Ever since the third century
before Christ, however, when the art was invented of making paper from the
rind of the mulberry tree and the bamboo-cane, and preparing pin-soot,
glair, musk, glue, Indian ink[113] (meh), and other substances, the
pencil has taken the place of the graver. The hieroglyphics now made on
paper are softer, more elegant, and in distinctness of outline admit
greater varieties of form. Most of the Chinese whom we saw engaged in
writing formed the most complicated characters with great celerity and
ease upon the thin paper, and without the firm strokes losing anything of
their neatness and clearness of outline.

Among the various scientific objects recommended as important objects of
inquiry to the members of the Expedition, during their visit to China, by
the renowned sinologue Dr. Pfitzmaier, was the obtaining of rare Chinese
books, and the elucidation of certain ethnographic and linguistic
questions. Whatever was achieved by us in throwing light upon these
matters is due in great measure to the cordial reception with which we
were received by men of science resident at Hong-kong. Especially we would
name in this respect Dr. M. Lobscheid, a German by birth, a missionary and
inspector of schools, who, thoroughly conversant with the Chinese
language, exerted himself to the utmost in forwarding the objects of the
scientific corps, besides assisting us in the purchase of a variety of the
most valuable Chinese works, and giving us much interesting information
respecting the country and the inhabitants. Dr. Lobscheid himself has a
well-selected, valuable, and extensive library of rare Chinese works on
geography, natural science, history, philology, and numismatics, and
presented a number of valuable gifts to the Expedition. One of his
colleagues, Dr. Ph. Winnes, also a German, and a missionary from the
Mission Society of Bale, compiled for us a list of words of the Hakka
dialect, as spoken in the interior of the province of Quang-Tung, hitherto
so little known philologically. It is indeed astonishing what English, and
German, and American missionaries have effected as publicists, during the
short period they have been resident here. The educational and religious
works published in Chinese at the expense of the various religious
societies form already quite a respectable literature of themselves,
although the Chinese language puts as many obstacles in the way of mere
Christian civilization as in that of the propagation of the Evangile
itself. Most of the missionaries consider any attempt to substitute Romish
for Chinese characters as being quite vain. The indistinctness of Chinese
signs has already been fruitful of much controversy among the missionaries
themselves. Thus, for example, those engaged in promulgating the Christian
faith are not as yet agreed by what Chinese word the God of Christianity
may best be indicated. The Roman Catholic missionaries write _Tientschu_
(the Highest of all things); the English and German Protestants use the
sign _Schang-Ti_ (the Most High); the American Protestants make use of the
word _Schin_ (Spirit). These varieties of opinion as to the mode of
expressing the idea of "God," have given rise to a vast number of
publications, which however have unfortunately tended rather to envenom
the dispute than smooth the way to a common understanding.

Conspicuous, however, as are the services of the missionaries in the
publication and diffusion of useful and moral books in the Chinese
language, their direct efforts have, on the other hand, been attended with
but limited results hitherto, and although it is always laid down as an
axiom in the books and manifestoes of the Tai-Ping insurgents, that the
doctrines of Christianity, as deduced from the writings of the Missionary
Societies, are the leading principle of the movement, yet, as set forth
and promulgated by the insurgent chiefs, they cannot be said to deserve
recognition by any known form of Christianity.

As in their religion, so in their mode of life, and their national
customs, the Chinese remain stiff-necked and obstinate, and in this
direction also Christianity is in but few cases capable of mitigating
their frequently barbarous customs. Children in China are constantly
exposed in large numbers, and that not owing to poverty, but from
indifference to the female children. One Chinese woman who at present
professes Christianity, and is a member of the Bale missionary community,
has herself killed eight female children whom she had herself carried in
her womb! Dr. Lobscheid informed us that he was personally cognizant of
one case, where a Chinese mother-in-law, irritated at the birth of a
female child, murdered it before its mother's eyes, almost immediately
after it had come into the world, and this in a rather well-to-do family!
Young mothers often lay their children down in the open field, or on the
sea-beach, watching anxiously if any one takes it away, or till a wave
mercifully sweeps it off. One such infant, accidentally found by some of
the crew of the English frigate _Nankin_, and tended with all the
tender-heartedness of Jack when he finds an object of compassion, is at
present in the German Mission House at Hong-kong, and was baptized in the
cathedral by the chaplain of the frigate, who gave her the name of
Victoria Nankin. Other mothers endeavour to choke the new-born girl with
moistened ashes, which, not unfrequently with caressing hand, they lay
upon the mouth of the little unconscious innocent. Male children, on the
other hand, even such as are crippled or deformed, are very seldom, indeed
quite exceptionally, exposed or put to death. In proportion to the harsh
treatment which the female offspring experience, is the pride and anxious
carefulness which wait on the male children. Indeed the Chinese are very
much in the habit of having several wives, simply because by so doing they
of course have a better chance of a number of male offspring, and it very
frequently happens that the lawful wife of a Chinaman, if she has
continued any length of time childless, will even seek out and bring to
her husband a concubine by whom he may have heirs, that is, _sons_.[114]
In such cases the two wives usually continue on the best of terms, which
cannot be said of those instances where the second or third wife is
introduced into the family by the husband, without the intervention of his
wife. According to the old Chinese law, the man had to be thirty, the
woman twenty, before marriage. At present marriages, as a rule, are made
between sixteen and twenty years of age. It may be assumed that one in
every fifteen Chinese has more than one wife; the first, usually known as
"number one," is generally taken from inclination, whereas the rest are
usually bought, the price varying, according to their youth and beauty,
from 100 to 600 dollars. This custom gives rise to quite a peculiar trade.
Chinese women make a practice of purchasing for themselves from the poorer
classes such of the female children as are of good health and well formed,
whom they bring up with great care, with the view of selling them, when
grown up, to the wealthy Chinese, and even sometimes to--European
residents.[115] The custom of child-murder is most prevalent in the coast
districts of the province of Fo-kien, so that latterly there was a
positive scarcity of women, and marriageable girls had to be imported from
the northern part of the province. The prevalence of this custom of
child-murder in these localities is to be ascribed to the enormous
migration of the male population to Siam, to the islands of the Malay
Archipelago, and other points. These emigrants supply the labour market in
foreign countries, and but seldom return to their families. Numerous
placards and pamphlets, pointing out the enormity of child-murder, and
dissuading from its commission, are printed annually, partly at the cost
of philanthropists, partly at that of the Chinese Government, and widely
diffused, yet without producing any diminution in the practice of this
appalling custom.

The custom of distorting the feet of the better class of women at the
period of their birth, seems to have arisen from the jealousy of the
husbands, who in thus preventing the possibility of gadding about, think
they have secured an additional guarantee for the fidelity and chastity of
their wives. However, one occasionally hears the first introduction of
this singular and cruel custom ascribed to a Chinese empress having once
been born with such distortion of the feet, and that in consequence it not
only became the fashion among the females of the higher class in those
days, out of pure obsequiousness, to imitate by artificial means a
disfiguration accidentally arising from a freak of Nature, but even to
recognize it as a necessary concomitant of the Chinese ideal of beauty.

The Governor of Hong-kong, Sir John Bowring, a distinguished _savant_, who
received the members of the Expedition with the utmost consideration,
invited them to his house and endeavoured to bring them into personal
communication with those residents in the colony most interested in
scientific pursuits, so that each one of us could consult with the
gentleman best able to advise him in his own department, and thus attain
in the shortest time the most satisfactory results. Sir John, moreover, as
President of the China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, admitted the
members of the Expedition to the honours of an extraordinary session. He
welcomed the Austrian naturalists in the heartiest manner, and expressed
the most flattering anticipations from their visit. Very deserving of
remark was the speech made on this occasion by the Lord Bishop of
Hong-kong. In his capacity of a dignitary of the Church, he too bade us
welcome in the warmest manner, and expressed his conviction that
Christianity had nothing to fear, but only to hope, from the study of
natural sciences! What would certain ultramontanists, had they been
present, have replied to this remark of a high ecclesiastical
dignitary?--they who consider government impossible without restricting
the study of the natural sciences!

Among the various subjects discussed at this meeting were several of great
interest, which sufficiently evidenced what a thorough disposition to
mental activity the English show, even in a place where material interests
are necessarily the main objects of attention, and where they, moreover,
are continually exposed to great personal danger.

One of the communications received by the Society was a memoir by Mr. W.
Alabaster, who had accompanied ex-governor Yeh to Calcutta as interpreter,
treating of the Chinese population there, and its influence on the state
of society. The memoir contained the very remarkable statement that the
Chinese colony in Calcutta, which in 1858 counted little more than 500
souls, had not alone monopolized several employments, such as shoemakers,
tailors, &c., but had, even when thousands of miles distant from home,
jealously maintained several of their customs and rites intact. This
Chinese community, so inconsiderable in point of mere numbers, already
possesses its own temple, its own priests, and its own teachers, who guard
any Chinese immigrants from the perils of proselytism; it has founded a
special association, whose object it is to transmit to their native land
the bodies of such as die abroad, while their luxury is beginning to
develope itself to the extent of ordering from China at considerable
expense troops of actors, so as even at this distance to provide
themselves with the national amusement of a genuine Sing-Song. This
peculiarity is of great importance, inasmuch as the emigration from China
is ever assuming more extended dimensions, and already embraces several
portions of the world. We find Chinese scattered throughout Eastern Asia,
in Australia, in California, in Peru, in Brazil, in the West Indies, and,
what is very astonishing they thrive and prosper at most places they
visit, despite the not very humane treatment they receive, and the
wretched, desolate state in which they leave their homes. This enormous
emigration of the sons of the Flowery Land seems destined to be of immense
importance, and to be fraught with momentous influence upon the future of
the other Asiatic populations, whom the Chinese greatly excel in capacity
for work, mechanical dexterity, and dogged perseverance. Even the
religious movement gives the Chinese certain advantages over all other
nations of the Asiatic type of civilization. The Hindoo, like the
Catholic, has numbers of festivals, which greatly diminish the number of
his actual working days; the daily ceremonies prescribed by Brahminism
further curtail the most precious hours of labour; his exclusively
vegetarian food not alone prevents the proper development of his muscular
power, but also by its ostentatiously morbid delicacy, brings him
constantly into collision with the social order of a Christian household.
The Chinese, on the other hand, keeps but one holiday-time, the beginning
of the new year, which he celebrates for fourteen days without
intermission. But the remaining 11-1/2 months of the year are for him but
one long day of work. Moreover, the Chinese has no fastidious notions
about his food. He eats pork, and drinks wine, and prefers fat meat to
meagre fruit diet, thoroughly unrestrained by any considerations as to
whether such a mode of life accords with the institutes of Brahma and
Menu, or the teaching of Confucius. Their sobriety, their capacity, their
industry, their frugal mode of life, and their numbers, all seem to
indicate the Chinese as destined to play an important part, not alone in
the development of the Oriental nations, but also in the history of
mankind. They are, as a German philosopher has profoundly remarked, the
Greeks and Romans of Eastern Asia, and they will, if once hurried onwards
by the great tide of Christian civilization, perform such feats as to
fill even the nations of the old world with wonder and amazement.

Another communication, made during the same meeting of this meritorious
branch of the Royal Asiatic Society in Hong-kong, related to that singular
plant, which has within the last few years excited so much attention in
industrial circles throughout Europe under the name of "Green dye," or
"Vert Chinois." Notwithstanding the experiments hitherto made with this
valuable dye, and the excellent use which has been made of it, more
especially by the Chamber of Commerce at Lyons, the first in Europe to
make application of the new colour, there was yet much to be learned
respecting the mode of raising and manufacturing it, in order to render
its employment entirely practicable. The elegant pamphlet of the Lyons
Chamber of Commerce[116] had just arrived from Europe, and led to a
variety of interesting investigations. Nothing was known in Hong-kong
respecting the plant beyond what was already contained in Robert Fortune's
excellent work and Rondot's treatise. Somewhat later, we were furnished
with more accurate and circumstantial information respecting the Lu-Kao,
the well-known "Green dye" of the English (a species of _Rhamnus_ or
buckthorn), which we shall here transcribe pretty fully.[117]

Lu-Kao is grown chiefly in the northern provinces, extensive plantations
of this valuable plant existing in the country around Foo-Chow and the
environs of the city of Haening. The valuable green dye matter is
obtained, however, from the rind, not of one but of two species _Rhamnus_,
of which the "yellow" grows on the flats, the "white" on the high-grounds
in a wild state. The preparation of the substance, which does not differ
much in appearance from common indigo, is exceedingly primitive. Both
plants are boiled for a considerable time in iron kettles, the yellow
deposit or _residuum_ being suffered to remain undisturbed for several
days. Transferred thence into earthen vessels, a piece of cotton cloth is
steeped into it five or six times, after which the adherent dye is wrung
out, and exposed a second time to the process of boiling in iron pans. The
next step in the manipulation consists in permitting the dye stuff, which
now has much more consistence, to be soaked up by some pieces of cotton,
when it is once more washed, sprinkled upon thin paper, and, lastly,
exposed for some time to the sun.

The Chinese have as yet only used the dye for colouring cloths of coarse
texture; all attempts hitherto to apply it to silks, &c., have proved
fruitless. But the great development of chemical science in Europe
justifies us in expecting that a method will ere long be devised for
fixing this beautiful, durable light green tint, which does not alter even
in candlelight, upon fabrics of fine smooth texture, and thus greatly
enhance its value in the industrial arts. The Lu-Kao has from time
immemorial been used by the Chinese in watercolour paintings, but its use
in industrial processes only dates from about 20 years back. The very
price charged for the small quantities hitherto brought from China, is by
no means natural, but seems to have been artificially forced up by
speculation, apparently in consequence of an unusual demand. In Foo-Chow
the price of one Catti, about 1-3/4 lbs., is 20 _Taels_, or about L6
10_s._ Were the production of this dye stuff really so expensive, we may
be sure it would not be made use of by the Chinese for their ordinary
stuffs, nor could these be sold as cheap as they are. We have found our
opinion confirmed by competent observers in various parts of China, that
this valuable product is susceptible of being acclimatized in Europe, and
of being cultivated with profit, especially in those places where,
together with favourable conditions of temperature and soil, the wages of
labour are not too high.

Like the English authorities and Government officials, our German
fellow-countrymen, resident in Hong-kong, did not fail to exercise their
hospitality for the benefit of the associates of the Expedition, and we
cannot sufficiently express our obligations to the Austrian Consul, Mr. G.
Wiener, and the Prussian vice-consul, Mr. Gustav Oberbeck, for their
delicate attention. The latter presented the Expedition with a number of
articles interesting as illustrating the advances of civilization, which
he had obtained during the siege of Canton, in Dec. 1857, and of which the
greater part have since been deposited at the Imperial Cabinet of
Antiquities at Vienna.

Through the kindness and interest of Dr. Harland (since deceased),
surgeon-in-chief of the colony, some of the members of the Expedition were
enabled to make corporeal measurements in the great prison, the inmates of
which come from the most various parts of the empire, as well as in the
hospital, upon a number of individuals of either sex, all "fair specimens
of the Chinese race," as Dr. Harland assured them, the results of which
will be found in the anthropological section of the _Novara_ publications.

Before the frigate left Hong-kong, despite the insecurity of public
affairs, several excursions were made to the south side of the island, to
Canton, and to the Portuguese settlement of Macao, which proved as
interesting as they were satisfactory.

In the course of their peregrinations about the mountains on the island,
as far as the fishing village on the south side of the island, known as
Little Hong-kong (sweet-waters), the naturalists of the Expedition were
accompanied by Dr. Hance, the botanist, and the missionary, Dr. Lobscheid,
both thoroughly acquainted with the Chinese language. Little as the pretty
name of this small settlement, founded so far back as 1668, is applicable
to the entire island, it yet corresponds well, and is eminently suitable,
to the smiling valley, entirely shut in by lofty rocks, in which lies
wretched Little Hong-kong. A beautiful wood filled with tufts of flowers,
forming for the labours of the botanist a rich supply of the most splendid
plants, and refreshed by copious springs of water from the mountains,
constitute a lovely landscape. Above the limit of vegetation of the
foliage trees, are seen on the slopes of the mountain groups of pines,
while the level ground at the bottom of the valley is laid out in smiling
rice fields. The miserable inhabitants of the village, which looks
gloomily out from among the trees, are not safe from the predatory
onslaughts of ferocious pirates, even among the recesses of the valley.
The streets of the village, hidden between trees, are uncommonly narrow,
so that two men can scarcely pass each other, and the huts are all placed
on purpose close against each other, in order, we were told, to be able
more easily to admit of defence. Our rambles were rewarded with an
abundant collection of specimens, and were particularly instructive in a
geognostical point of view, as satisfying us that the island does not
consist entirely of granite, but that a large proportion of the mountain
is porphyritic.

Another excursion was made by the Commodore and some of his staff as far
as Canton. The Commandant of the station, Commodore Stewart, had for this
purpose placed the gun-boat _Algerine_ at our disposal. The distance from
Hong-kong to Canton is about 87 nautical miles (100 statute miles), and
the voyage took full eleven hours, viz. from 6.30 A.M. to 5.30 P.M.

Canton, the third capital of the Chinese Empire, and its most flourishing
commercial city, which but a short time before had numbered about
1,000,000 inhabitants, was at this period a desolate, almost entirely
abandoned mass of houses, half in ruins, half burnt. The stately European
factories, which had adorned the banks of the river up to the walls of the
Chinese city, were heaps of ashes. The floating town upon the river
itself, the renowned flower-boats of Canton, with their marvellous
splendour and their luxurious beauty, had entirely disappeared, leaving no
trace. Whoever had anything to lose had fled the country. English
sentinels patrolled the walls and occupied the streets of the interior of
the city, and only the very poorest of the mob remained behind, watching
every opportunity of getting the "head-money," which the Mandarins of the
province of Kuang-Tung had offered for every head of a "barbarian" brought
in. "The state of matters in Canton gets worse and worse every day," said
the latest issue of the Hong-kong journals. Since the Americans and
Russians had concluded private treaties with the Imperial Government, and
the English and French allied fleet had gone north to the Gulf of
Pe-Cheli, to treat at Tien-Tsin with the Imperial commissioners, the
Chinese of Canton had been plucking up courage. They conceived the allies
to be isolated; the Russians and the Americans they held to be hostile to
them. The Mandarins and Imperial commissioners launched proclamations by
the dozen at the "foreign devils,"[118] set on foot organized Guerilla
bands, which were called "Braves," who every night discharged rockets
into the city, murdered and pillaged, and kept the allied troops, who were
only 3500 strong (800 of whom were in hospital) almost continually on the
alert.

When the gun-boat _Algerine_ arrived off Canton, the Commodore, although
it was late in the evening, was accompanied by a military escort to the
head-quarters of General Straubenzee, commander of the allied troops. A
stillness as of a grave-yard reigned throughout the city, and not a light
was to be seen. By 10.30 P.M. the Commodore reached the post, and was
most hospitably received by the General. The head-quarters were situated
on a hillock commanding the city, surrounded by the numerous buildings of
a country-seat or _Yamun_, which had been the property of the father of
Governor Yeh, who had acquired such notoriety during the recent warlike
troubles. The ostentatious splendour of the apartments, the splendid ebony
carved work, gave such an idea of the magnificence, the luxury, the
gorgeousness of the Chinese princes, as can only be paralleled by what we
read of the palaces of the emperors of ancient Rome. Yeh himself had by
this time been removed from the political scene, and was a state prisoner
in Calcutta, where he lived in more than monastic seclusion. To judge by
his portrait, which was for sale in all the print-shops of Hong-kong, Yeh
was a fine-looking man with energetic features, and an expression full of
intellect, and, so far as his physical appearance went, seemed to take
after his father, who in his ninety-second year was still tasting joys of
paternity. In his own country, even among the Europeans, Yeh enjoys the
reputation of being not only an able diplomatist, but a man of varied
information as well. While at Hong-kong we were shown some large
anatomical woodcuts, which Yeh had himself borrowed from a European work
on anatomy, and published at his own cost on an enlarged scale,
accompanied by a preface from his pen.[119]

Even more extensive and elegant in its outward aspect than that of Yeh,
was the palace of the Tartar general Pihkwei, now employed for barracks
and the officers of the English and French commissariat, while a much less
pretentious building had been assigned to the Tartar general for his
present residence.

The Commodore had reached head-quarters and was sitting at the tea-table
with General Straubenzee, when an alarm of fire was heard. The "Braves"
had fired a house close by in the hope, it should seem, that the flames
would catch the barracks as well as the powder depot, or at all events
compel the English to withdraw their troops from the post, and give an
opportunity for inflicting some loss on them. Fortunately, however, what
had been set on fire burned quite out, without fulfilling the
anticipations of the "Braves."

In the course of a stroll, which our Commodore took with the General
somewhat later in the night, they perceived that the Chinese kept up a
continual flight of rockets against the sentries and buildings of the
post, from a small eminence not two hundred yards distant, which was
provided with ramparts and cannon, and the Austrian guests greatly
marvelled that no energetic steps were taken to obviate the disorders
produced by these guerilla bands of Chinese, who every night with their
incendiarism and fire-balls kept the city, the head-quarters, and the
pickets in constant alarm, seeing that their inactivity only tended to
animate the courage of the Chinese, while in such harassing service,
unattended as it was with any results, their own forces, already very much
reduced, were proportionately weakened.

The morning after their arrival the Austrian officers, accompanied by the
English commissioner Mr. Parkes, whose imprisonment near Pekin has since
made his name widely and universally known, paid a visit to the sole
Chinese authority still remaining in the town, the Tartar General and
Mandarin, Pi-Kwei. An immense crowd had assembled in the streets through
which the foreigners wended their way, and their reception by the Tartar
General was accompanied by all the ceremonial of Chinese etiquette: three
howitzer salvo-shots, and ear-splitting Chinese music, the General's
body-guard, disarmed, drawn up on the staircase, the General himself,
wearing his Mandarin cap on his head, nodding and laughing more or less to
the foreigners presented, according to their higher or lower rank. The
Commodore was provided with a raised seat. In the course of conversation,
during which Mr. Parkes kindly acted as interpreter, tea was served.
Pi-Kwei inquired as to the objects of the Expedition, and asked the names
of the officers, which, owing to the symbolic nature of Chinese writing,
could not be done but after much difficulty. Pi-Kwei, a man of colossal
proportions, behaved and spoke like a lamb in presence of the small
physically insignificant-looking Mr. Parkes. Like the regents appointed by
the Dutch Government in Java, he was nothing more than the agent to carry
out the orders of the English.

Our departure was not less ceremonious and noisy than our reception: a
number of fire-balls were let off in front of the building, the noise of
which gave much more the impression of an infernal machine than a salute.
The rest of the day the officers spent in reconnoitring various parts of
the city, as far as circumstances admitted, and all returned in the
evening to Hong-kong in the same gun-boat which had conveyed them to
Canton.

While we were lying at anchor in Hong-kong, an extra sheet of the "_North
China Herald_," published at Shanghai, brought intelligence of a treaty of
peace having been signed at Tien-Tsin, by Lord Elgin, on the part of
England, and the Imperial Commissioners, and that it had been dispatched
to Pekin for the purpose of being ratified by the imperial autograph. This
treaty, which contained 56 clauses, invested England with far more
extensive rights than she had hitherto possessed. Especially it was
stipulated that an English ambassador should reside in a palace at Pekin,
and be accorded all the honours due to his rank, and that the Christian
religion should be professed and taught without any restrictions. British
subjects, provided with passes from their own consuls, to be countersigned
by the local Chinese authorities, were to be permitted to traverse the
empire in every direction on business or pleasure; the navigation of the
Yang-tse-Kiang, or Blue River, was also declared free; and in addition to
the five harbours already opened to foreign commerce by the treaty of
Nankin, the English were now to be at liberty to trade with New-Chwang,
Tang-Char, Tai-Wan (on the island of Formosa), Chau-Chow, and Kiung-Chow
(in Hainan), to settle in any of these, to buy and sell house property,
as also to erect churches and hospitals, and lay out cemeteries. Chinese
subjects guilty of crimes or offences against the English, to be punished
by the native authorities in conformity with the law of the land. English
subjects, on the other hand, to be subject to the jurisdiction of the
British authorities, in similar circumstances, and treated according to
British law. All official communications on the part of the English
authorities to be drawn up in English for presentation to the Chinese
Government, and although, for the present, accompanied by a translation,
shall in the event of uncertainty be construed according to the text of
the English original. Article L provides that the symbol [Chinese
character(s)] (Barbarian) shall be discontinued in all official documents,
whether in the capital or the provinces, and the term "English" or
"English Government" be substituted. On the other hand, the Treaty of
Tien-Tsin is silent on the subject of the opium trade, the main point in
dispute, the prime cause of the various wars hitherto broken out! There
was mention made of a revision of the tariff only. Obviously the British
plenipotentiaries thought they would more readily attain their object if
they endeavoured to get this difficult question solved in some less
conspicuous manner. The opium merchants, as well as their antagonists the
London philanthropists, seemed equally dissatisfied that the opium matter
was still left a "pending question." On the whole, however, this was one
of the most marked diplomatic peculiarities of the Treaty of Tien-Tsin.
Instead of rousing anew the passions of the Chinese, and, by wringing such
an open and public concession from that Government, weakening still more
the hold of the Emperor over his own people, and, whatever their
professions of amity, rendering the authorities yet more hostile and
rancorous against the foreigners, the wily English ambassador preferred
quietly to include opium amongst the other articles of import under the
revised tariff, and thus convert it into a common article of import.
Accordingly, opium, like cotton, hides, and stockfish, may now be imported
at a fixed duty of 30 _taels_ (L8 15_s._) per _picul_ of 100 _catties_
(133-1/2 lbs.).

The events of which China was the scene shortly after the signature of the
treaty, the hostilities of the troops in the Taku forts, the desperate
resistance which was made to the advance of the British ambassador, when
the latter, agreeably to the stipulations in the new treaty, was preparing
to travel to Pekin, all combine to prove that, in their professions of
peace and friendliness, the Chinese were not in earnest.

Since that period an army of 20,000 Europeans has dictated a peace to
400,000,000 Asiatics, and their till then deemed impregnable capital; and
on 24th October, 1860, Lord Elgin countersigned a new treaty, which,
together with the clauses contained in the previous Treaty of Tien-Tsin
drawn up two years before, provides for the permanent residence of a
British ambassador in the capital of the Chinese Empire, as also for a war
indemnity of 8,000,000 _taels_ (L2,333,333); throws open the harbour of
Tien-Tsin to foreign commerce, permits Chinese subjects to emigrate,
without any restrictions, to any part of the British colonies, and to take
service there; assigns to Great Britain a portion of the district of
Kow-loang or Cow-loon on the mainland opposite Hong-kong; and, finally,
ordains that the original treaty, and all the various additional articles,
shall be published by placard in every part of the Empire. Never before
had the Middle Kingdom sustained such a humiliation. True, during the rule
of the former dynasty, Tao-Kwang (Light of Reason), an end was put to a
system that had endured for a thousand years, but conditions such as those
that had been imposed by the western nations in the treaties of Tien-Tsin
and Pekin, were altogether unheard of in the history of China, and afford
convincing proof of its weakness and approaching downfal, the more so, as
the late Emperor Hien-fung was a jealous upholder of the old Asiatic
doctrines and state craft. Only the utmost necessity and unceasing
pressure could have induced him to lower his arms before the barbarians of
the west, and to endure that an enemy should have dictated conditions of
peace in his own capital, hitherto inaccessible to foreign nations.
English, French, and American ships of war hold possession of the most
important forts of China. In several provinces of the interior, a rebel
emperor has set up his camp, while on the banks of the Amoor, on the north
of the Empire, Russia is building fortresses, and acting as if she were
quite at home in that region. But all these phenomena, however divergent
the interests, may at present point to one stupendous result,--rousing
the immense Chinese Empire from its thousand years' lethargy, and forcing
the natives who populate it to follow in the great onward career of
civilization, which in our days is rushing with the rapidity of a tempest
through the world!

While the Commodore and some of his staff were proceeding to Canton in the
gun-boat, the naturalists made an excursion to the Portuguese settlement
of Macao, about 35 miles distant from Hong-kong, with which there is
bi-weekly communication by an English steamer. Usually this voyage
occupies from four to five hours, but the _Sir Charles Forbes_ was a small
slow-going tub, and as our departure was delayed several hours in
consequence of a large shipment of chests of opium, for which it was hoped
a better price would be obtained at Macao, and as we had on our way
thither to contend with rain, squalls, and contrary winds, it was dark ere
we reached Macao.

We were not a little taken aback at finding several of the passengers
armed with revolvers. However, these seemingly superfluous precautions
against danger in a pleasure sail of a few hours were well founded. Not
long before, it had happened that the European passengers to Macao had
been assailed by the Chinese on board, and all murdered in cold blood! the
Chinese had stealthily watched for the moment when the captain and
passengers were at table in the confined cabin of the little craft, took
possession of the vessel, and murdered every European on board. The
captain and some of the passengers sprang overboard to save their lives,
but only one man, an Englishman, succeeded in effecting his escape, and
giving intelligence of this terrible affair. After they had possessed
themselves of a considerable booty, the pirates set the vessel on fire,
and set at nought all efforts to bring them to punishment by escaping into
the interior of the country.

The arrangements for paying passage-money, expenses, &c., are apt to
strike a stranger as singular. Gold is absolutely out of use, and the
current coins, such as Mexican dollars, and copper money, or cash, are too
bulky to admit of their being lugged about to pay large amounts. In order
to provide for the expenses of a pleasure party of a couple of days it
would be necessary to take a large bag, which there was the further danger
might disappear somewhere without hands. An excellent arrangement has
accordingly been introduced, by which each passenger pays his fare and
other expenses, by means of a check on any one of the mercantile houses in
Macao or Hong-kong, which is filled up with the entire amount for
collection by the controller, and is cashed on his return. This custom is
also a remarkable example of mutual confidence in public life, even if it
be explained by the fact that the majority of the passengers are well
known, and that China has as yet only been frequented by well-off
foreigners.

The passage from Hong-kong to Macao is not entirely devoid of interest.
The course of the steamer lies at first among narrow canals, between
lofty granite rocks: so soon as she emerges from these, the muddy
disturbed colour of the water indicates that she is now crossing the mouth
of the Canton River proper. Stately ships are seen passing up or down,
while junks and fishing-boats are plying on every side. The majestic
conical peak, 3000 feet high, of the island of Lantao, and the Castle Peak
scarred with a deep furrow from top to bottom, on the mainland of the
province of Quang-tong directly opposite, form the background. The
regularity of the conical shape in these peaks, which seems to point to
their being of volcanic origin, renders it probable that they are either
granite or porphyritic in structure. The mouth of the Canton River is so
wide, that the opposing shores only gradually become visible, the wide
expanse of water, extending on every side till lost in the horizon, giving
the traveller the impression that he is on the open sea.

Already, before the houses of Macao could be very easily made out, we
passed the merchant ships lying in the roads, which cannot approach within
from six to eight nautical miles. The small thoroughly land-locked "inner
harbour," as it is called, lying on the other side of the narrow tongue of
land on which Macao is situate, is only accessible for small vessels and
Chinese junks, which visit it in large numbers.

The first view of the city of Macao is not less charming than that of
Victoria. The long ranges of houses are picturesquely grouped around the
numerous little hills surmounted by forts, which form the greater part of
the isthmus; while the beautiful Praya Grande, where palaces and imposing
mansions are disposed in long array close along the shore, in order to get
the benefit of the refreshing sea-breezes, makes a deep and lasting
impression upon the stranger. Churches with lofty double towers shooting
into the air, and the vast dome of the Jesuit College, at once single the
city out as Catholic, and impart to its external aspect a strong contrast
with the adjoining English colony.

Macao is a favourite resort of the foreigners settled in Hong-kong for
change of air, which in these latitudes seems to be even more necessary
than in Europe. So long as Canton was the chief seat of the European
traders, the Portuguese settlement was used by them as a summer residence
for their families, whither they could themselves occasionally retire from
the bustle of Canton, and the attendant insecurity of life, to spend a few
days of calm enjoyment with their families. On account of the alarms of
war of the previous year, most of the Canton merchants had come down to
Hong-kong and Macao to settle, in consequence of which the latter town has
an unusually lively appearance, while its trade, which had previously been
in a rather languishing condition, has materially improved.

When the steamer makes its appearance in the roads of Macao, it is
immediately surrounded by an innumerable swarm of what are called
Tanka-boats, mostly propelled by women, who with yells and shrieks bid for
the privilege of conveying the passengers to shore. As there is no
suitable landing-place on the eastern side of the roads, the traveller is
conveyed to the shore through the lash of the waves in a small
cockle-shaped boat, just as at Madeira or Madras, and equally
uncomfortably; but although the boat and the mode in which it is navigated
are anything but calculated to inspire confidence, such a thing as an
accident is of rare occurrence.

The naturalists of the _Novara_ found an exceedingly friendly and hearty
reception at the beautiful residence of the Russian Consul, M. Von
Carlowitz, who shortly before had come from Canton to settle in Macao,
with his excellent wife, a very beautiful lady of Altenburg in Germany,
there to await the upshot of the war.

Our first visit the following morning--a bright and beautiful Sabbath
morning--was to the renowned Camoens Grotto, situated in a large
well-wooded park, partly covered with primeval forest, the property of a
Portuguese family of the name of Marquez. All around there reigned utter,
almost sacred silence. Here it was that Camoens, banished from his native
land, wrote his Lusiad. The park with its fragrant shady aisles, its
majestic leafy domes, impervious even to the rays of the tropical sun, its
huge piles of rock round which clamber the immense roots of gigantic
fig-trees, its deliciously cool atmosphere, its soft green velvet paths,
its heaps of ruined walls, and its death-like quietness, seems as though
destined for the asylum of an exiled poet, who, instead of lamenting his
destiny like common men in sullen silence, felt his spirit roused amid
this wonderful tropical beauty to fresh sublime efforts,--"Things
unattempted yet in prose or rhyme!" In an ill-contrived niche in the
substructure of the grotto is a bust, in terra-cotta, of the great poet,
with the inscription, "Louis de Camoens, born 1524, died 1579." On the
broad marble pedestal whereon stands this bust, which savours but little
of artistic taste, various verses from the Lusiad have been engraved with
an iron stylus.[120] Formerly this grotto must have had a much more
agreeable appearance, but the present proprietor thought to beautify it by
making an addition to it, which has resulted in its having almost entirely
lost its original character. From one point within the grotto, called the
observatory, and traditionally used as such by Camoens, there is a
beautiful peep over the inner harbour, with its throng of busy human ants.
Quite close to this singular abode for a poet, is the meeting-house of an
evangelical Christian community, numbering about 200 souls, with a
cemetery attached, which, with its handsome stone monuments and
beautifully laid-out gardens, constitutes one of the most interesting
places of outdoor resort in the colony.

The most extensive and important edifice in the settlement of Macao,
founded in 1563 by the Portuguese, on a peninsula of the same name, about
five square miles in extent, is the Pagoda of Makok and its different
temples, situate on the slope of a hill between picturesque groups of
granite rocks, studded with gigantic Chinese inscriptions and splendid
clumps of trees. At the entrance of this retreat for the gods, is a large
fantastically-adorned Buddhist temple, surrounded by a large number of
apartments, in which reside the priests, and where they carry on their
household duties, and prepare tapers and sycee-paper for the worship of
their deities, and where are also a few private altars to divinities,
whose influence and protection the Chinese ladies of doubtful reputation
do not, it seems, venture publicly to invoke.

Steps cut in the granite rock conduct to the highest point, about 200 feet
above sea-level, on which there is likewise a temple. At the time of our
visit, a number of Buddhist priests in long yellow plaited garments were
ascending to the summit, preceded by flute-players, there to perform their
devotions. On their return they distributed among the poor Chinese
congregated in the chief apartment of the temple, a large quantity of
fruit and other eatables.

While at Macao we visited one of the most respected of the foreigners
settled there, Dr. Kane, an English physician, who has for years resided
in the colony. This gentleman was so kind as to present us with the head
of a statue from the renowned nine-storied or Flower Pagoda (Hwa-tah) near
Canton, which during a visit he paid to that half-ruined edifice in March,
1857, he had found lying on the ground, a fragment from a sandstone figure
on the seventh story, representing a pupil of Buddha. This Pagoda, 160
feet high, was constructed upwards of a thousand years since, which must
accordingly be the age of the relic in question.

The number of inhabitants at present in Macao amounts to about 97,000, of
whom 90,000 are Chinese and 7000 Portuguese and Mestizoes. Of other
foreign nations there are but a very few in the peninsula. The chief
article of commerce in the colony is opium, which finds its way hence into
the interior in large quantities. Hong-kong is in too close proximity, is
too favourably situated, and is inhabited by too energetic a race, to
admit of Macao, especially so long as it remains in the hands of the
Portuguese, recovering its former commercial importance. Portugal derives
but little profit from her colonies, and it is only national pride that
will not hear of this possession, which is more a burden than a source of
aid to the mother country, being disposed of by way of sale to either the
English or the North Americans. However, the maintenance of this colony
costs the Portuguese home Government but little, as the colonists support
the chief expenses themselves. Thus the pay of the Governor, who receives
L1260 per annum, as also that of the military force of about 400 men, and
of a small ship stationed in the harbour, are all defrayed by the
colonists.

Macao is at present the chief point for the shipment of Chinese labourers
or coolies to the West Indies. There are above 10,000 Chinese annually
whom hunger and want drive to sell themselves virtually as slaves to the
traders in human flesh, to drag out a miserable existence far from home.
They are chiefly sent from Macao to the Havanna. We visited the house in
which these pitiable objects are confined till the departure of the ship;
we saw the haggard, reckless look of these wretched beings, who, despite
the dreadful fate that awaits them, hire themselves out to Portuguese and
Spanish kidnappers. In return for a free passage to Havanna, they bind
themselves to work for eight years after their arrival with whatever
master is found for them at four dollars a month,[121] a rate of wage very
much lower than that paid to the labourer of the country, or even to the
manumitted slave. This immense difference however does not accrue so much
to the West India planter as to the speculators who are engaged in the
importation of Chinese, for each of whom a large premium is paid. The
voyage, which usually lasts from four to five months and costs about L70 a
head, is chiefly carried on in French, Portuguese, and--alas! that it
should be so--English and German ships. What sufferings the unhappy
emigrants are exposed to during the voyage, appears from the fact that a
number of them not unfrequently jump overboard, to seek a refuge from
their misery under the waves. Cases have been known in which, owing to
hard fare and mismanagement, 38 per cent. of the emigrants have died on
the passage![122]

The society which takes charge of this trade in exporting men is known as
the _Colonisadora_, and has its head-quarters in the Havanna. Each Chinese
must before leaving Macao subscribe a contract which is for the exclusive
benefit of the society, and by which the poor emigrants explicitly
renounce all the advantage they might derive from certain paragraphs in
the Spanish Emigration Act, passed in 1854, which bear upon the
interpretation of such contracts. As it is usually only the very poorest,
most shiftless, and most ignorant class that emigrates, the contract is
enforced without the smallest scruple, and if afterwards the emigrant in
the foreign country becomes aware of the privations and oppression he has
to submit to in comparison with other workers, the obligations he has
entered into are made use of to invoke the protection of the Spanish
authorities.[123] The fact however that these latter secretly favour the
objections of the colonization society, sufficiently proves that the
interests of a social class and the extension of the labour market in the
island are considered by them as of far higher importance than the good of
mankind.

To the English Government is due the credit of having initiated an
energetic protest against this trade in human beings, and of having taken
such steps as tend to mitigate the evil consequences which cannot but
result from such a system of deportation. Its representative at the
Havanna, Mr. Crawford, was the first and indeed only individual who
ventured to make representations to the Spanish Government as to the
little humanity shown for these poor Chinese emigrants, and to draw public
attention to the system.[124] Under a humane and well-managed
administration of the emigration system in China, it might prove of
immense service to those countries which are eager to absorb labour, as,
owing to the super-abundance of labour in China, a far larger supply as
well as a much higher class of labourers might be procured.

M. de Carlowitz was so kind as to accompany us in our various rambles to
the more interesting sights and points of view, and more especially when
we were busied "doing" the "lines" of the city. On an eminence in the
suburbs, about 200 feet high, is what is known as Monte fort, garrisoned
by 150 men, whence there is a charming panorama, and the eye catches sight
of the Chinese village of Whang-hia, at the period of our visit most
hostilely disposed, and where on July 3rd, 1844, the first treaty of
peace, friendship, and commerce, was drawn up and signed between China and
the United States. Another hill, about 300 feet high, at the outer
extremity of the peninsula, on which many years ago the Portuguese had
erected a fort, of which only the foundations can now be traced, commands
the tongue of land on which stands the city, as well as all the eastern
portion of the island, and amply repays the trouble of ascent. On the road
thither, by which the communication with the mainland of China is mainly
carried on, we came upon the corpse of a coolie, which had apparently lain
for several days in the very middle of the road. A part of the head and
the right hand had been already stripped of the flesh by the
carrion-crows, and enormous swarms of insects had fastened on the upper
portions of the naked horribly swollen dead body. The miserable being had
obviously fallen a victim to want and destitution. His strength seemed to
have failed him while he was earning his miserable subsistence, as two
empty broken panniers were lying close beside him. Crowds of people were
passing daily, men, women, children, even Portuguese taking their
customary promenade on foot or on horseback, without any person giving
himself the least trouble to remove the shocking spectacle. Even the
representations of the foreign consuls seem to have but little influence
on the Portuguese authorities in these matters, and it appears that it is
by no means an infrequent occurrence to see dead bodies lying about. A
hardly less sickening spectacle was presented on the slope of the hill,
where were erected a couple of dozen of small, wretched, filthy huts of
palm-straw, which served for the reception of a number of sick and lepers,
who, shunned and abandoned by all the world, were sinking in their misery
into the grave. Leprosy is regarded by the Chinese as a punishment for
secret sins, and those visited with it are accordingly deprived of all
assistance or attention. Very probably this coolie, whose body we thus saw
lying on the road, was one of those unfortunates who were here digging, as
it were, their own graves.

The isthmus which unites the Portuguese settlement on the peninsula with
the mainland, is barely a quarter of a mile in length by 500 feet in
breadth. Formerly there was a wall built right across the centre of this
tongue of land, which marked the limit of the colony. Here Chinese
sentinels used to march to and fro to protect the Flowery Kingdom. This,
however, did not prevent the "_Macaoistas_," as the inhabitants of Macao
are accustomed to call themselves, from making frequent excursions and
pic-nic parties to the mainland and the adjacent Chinese villages. On 22nd
August, 1848, however, when the then governor of Macao, Dom Joao Maria
Ferreira do Amaral, while riding along the narrow part of the isthmus, was
set upon by a couple of armed Chinese, torn from his horse, and beheaded,
his skull and hand being carried off by the murderers, the Portuguese
pulled down the wall and destroyed the adjoining Chinese fort, so that not
a vestige of either now remains. The government of Macao insisted on the
murderers being delivered up, as also on the restitution of the head and
hand of the victim, but after the lapse of a year the authorities received
an official notification that the murderers had been discovered, and on
confession of the crime had been executed at Shunteh. The head and hand of
the unhappy Amaral were delivered to the Portuguese officials by two
Chinese commissioners, and solemnly interred with the other remains. In
the course of the correspondence with reference to this matter[125]
between the Chinese and Portuguese authorities, it appeared that, owing to
certain stringent regulations he had laid down, Governor Amaral had long
been marked out for destruction by the Chinese population of Macao. The
chief complaint against him was that he had profaned the graves of their
ancestors in the suburbs of Macao, and had constructed new streets right
through them. Every attack of illness, every unlucky speculation, every
unexpected mischance, which happened to any of the Chinese residents in
Macao, was ascribed to the vengeance of those spirits, whose repose had
been so wantonly violated for such an insignificant purpose. The Chinese
have no regular cemeteries for their dead. They inter them anywhere about
the township, simply marking the spot with a stone or an inscription. At
the new-year's festival these graves are adorned in the most gaudy manner,
none, not even of the poorest, being neglected in this respect. This pious
feeling for the dead is in singular and rude contrast with the
indifference with which the Chinese regard the misfortunes of their
neighbours, and the cruelty with which mothers expose their new-born
children, or even leave them to die.

The trade between Macao and the mainland is very active: in the quarter of
an hour that we were upon the isthmus there passed at least 60 men loaded
with goods or provisions, moving to and fro to the settlement. Among these
there were also sedan-chairmen, conveying back to the neighbouring
villages such of the better class of Chinese as had been doing business in
the city. The effect of warlike rumours from Canton and the Pei-ho had
meanwhile become apparent among the European population of Macao. The
insecurity of life and property increased daily. No one could venture to
go a mile or two beyond the city. Even a beautiful pic-nic house, erected
by the foreigners on "Green Island," close by the town, whither during
peaceful times frequent excursions were made by European residents with
their families, had been for months empty and gutted.

The Praya Grande, or rather the shady promenade, at its eastern extremity
serves as a rendezvous for the gay world, and on Sundays, when a band of
music plays here, one can scarcely pass through the crowd.

The Portuguese, who even in their native country are not a handsome race,
lose still more in their physical qualities by the unscrupulous manner in
which they cross with the native races. This circumstance makes the
contrast still more apparent of simple, graceful, pale ladies of the
Anglo-Saxon race, who now and then appear between the ugly dark natives.
In the evening, towards sunset, these lovely creatures make their
appearance in their sedan or other chairs in the Campo San Francisco,
there to enjoy the cool evening sea-breezes. A great number of sedan
porters halt here with their precious burdens, and elegantly-attired
cavaliers saunter about, striving by amiable phrases and flattering
remarks to elicit a smile. While these vehicles form the commonest mode of
conveyance, we also saw there but few saddle-horses, and only one single
carriage, the property of a rich brownish native, baronized for the amount
of 40,000 dollars, and who thought by this means to display his taste,
his luxury, and his nobility!

We had heard so much of certain wonderful singing stones, on a large
island opposite the inner part of the harbour, that several of our party
made an excursion thither. Neither natives nor indeed Europeans could give
us any explanation of this singular phenomenon, but all hold that the
stones must contain metal in some certain proportion, while electricity
and magnetism would do the rest. The naturalists were accompanied to this
mysterious spot by M. Von Carlowitz, Dr. Kane, and a Chinese physician,
Dr. Wong-fun. The estimable and highly-educated Wong-fun had graduated as
Doctor of Medicine in the University of Edinburgh, and had afterwards
enlarged his experience by practising some time in the United States,
since which he had practised the healing art with great success upon his
own countrymen. A European in intelligence and education, he was still a
Chinese in external appearance, and wore, as formerly, a long tail.
Probably Wong-fun adhered to this ancient custom in order the more readily
to indoctrinate his fellow-countrymen with European ideas.

Some small Tanka-boats, in which, as already mentioned, only two persons
can be accommodated at once, and which are exclusively managed by women,
conveyed our party over the bosom of the inner harbour to the opposite
shore. We then proceeded through a beautiful valley, covered with rice
fields, and traversed in its entire extent by a mountain torrent, which
is dammed off, and drives a number of Chinese mills with the small
water-courses. In the background of this valley lies the mysterious spot.
The marvel itself presently became visible in a large expanse of syenite
rock, greatly resembling that in the Oderwald of Hesse. Some of these have
been tilted on the others, and the hard syenite resounds when struck with
a hammer, just as a block of marble or basalt vibrates when struck, with a
bell-like sound. These musical blocks therefore are but little
interesting, unless that the Chinese make use of them to sculpture the
figures of lions and tigers to adorn the entrances of their temples.

After a stay of two days in Macao, the naturalists returned to Hong-kong,
where they had to devote the little time that would elapse ere the frigate
sailed to sorting and packing the collections, and arranging for their
transmission: for the manipulation of packing is, as Humboldt well
remarked, as important as actual science in such undertakings. That
naturalist confers but a small boon on science, whose only care is to
collect, but who takes no pains to preserve, the fruits of his labour, by
an exact indication of the place where found, and such special particulars
as may prevent mistakes, and by carefully guarding against damage to the
objects about to be sent, while on their way.

The kind reception and hospitality of our new friends in Hong-kong
remained undiminished to the very last moment of our stay. We were fairly
overwhelmed with attentions of all sorts, each apparently striving to
make us forget the unfavourable circumstances under which we visited the
Empire of China.

The steamer _Hong-kong_, early on the morning of 18th July, towed us out
through the narrow Eastern Straits, the Ly-e-num Pass, and the
Ta-thong-wun Channel, into the open sea. As we passed alongside the
English frigate _Nankin_, carrying the broad pendant of the amiable and
excellent Commodore Stewart, our band played "God save the Queen," while
the English ensign was dipped, by way of parting salute. A little further
on the Chinese Comprador, who had supplied the _Novara_ with provisions
daily during her stay, had stationed himself in his boat to give us a
parting farewell with a roar of gong-gong, while innumerable rockets
whizzed and exploded in the air.

We found a tolerably high sea outside, but a fine fresh S.W. breeze, under
which we rapidly increased our distance from the shore. In like manner as
when we entered, we had now in getting out to thread our way among
thousands of fishing-boats sailing about in couples, which cruise about to
a distance of even 50 and 60 miles to sea. The steamer which towed us
through the narrow Eastern Channel, and had us just four hours and twenty
minutes in tow, charged the amount of 300 dollars (L63), so that each
minute of towing cost rather over one dollar. After making a tack towards
Lemma Island, in order to avoid the dangerous Nine-pin rock, the wind
sprung up from E.S.E., so that we were enabled to lie our proper course,
and by sundown had cleared _Piedra bianca_.

With fine weather and a fresh S.W. monsoon our voyage was so speedy, that
by 2nd July we were in the latitude of Formosa, but without being able to
distinguish the high land, either on the Chinese coast or on that island,
and by 23rd July we were off the Saddle Islands, at the mouth of the
Yang-tse-Kiang.

Just as we reached this, the door, as it were, through which we had to
enter, the weather chose to change with the utmost suddenness. Calms and
contrary winds, coupled with the powerful current of the mighty river,
sweeping through the islands, prevented our further advance, and on the
24th we had to cast anchor near the easternmost Saddle Island. Close to us
on every side were numbers of other ships equally unfortunate with
ourselves, while the spectacle of the steamers, pursuing their course
without feeling any obstruction, filled us with envy. We had taken a
Chinese pilot on board, and by 25th July were in sight of Gutzlaff, a
small islet of rock 210 feet high, the best land-mark of the "Son of
Ocean," and just before sunset anchored off the outer bar. We now had fair
breezes, and without further obstacles passed over the bar in from 30 to
33 feet water, which in bad weather, however, is exceedingly dangerous. We
were still out of sight of land; even the islands we had already passed
sank below the horizon, and still there was nothing visible but an
unbroken expanse of yellowish-red water, which reflected with the utmost
brilliancy the rays of the sun. A light-ship moored to a sand-bank, and a
wreck on another sand-bank, are, after leaving Gutzlaff Island, the sole
land-marks by which the pilot can hope to keep the channel, which is only
from one to two miles wide in this vast shoreless river estuary. Indeed
the entrance of the Yang-tse-Kiang is regarded as one of the most
difficult feats for a large ship. With favourable wind and weather, the
_Novara_ cleared without accident the 47 miles between the bar and the
place where the Wusung falls into the Yang-tse-Kiang, and on the evening
of the 26th July dropped anchor in front of Wusung. The navigation
presented little that was interesting, yet each man involuntarily felt a
thrill as he reflected that he was sailing in the current of the longest
river in China, whose source lies thousands of miles inland at Khukkunor,
among the Mangolians.

As we neared Wusung, signs of life began to be visible on the river
itself; tall three-masters were passing, bound in or out, and scores of
Chinese junks with their peculiar rig and build. Far above the light-ship
the shore first became visible, low, flat, scarcely above the level of the
river, but green and fertile. A Pagoda of the well-known form of the
Porcelain tower of Nankin and a few lofty trees enable the pilot to take
the bearings of the channel at this point. Only the land on the left is
actual mainland, the shore on the right being the coast of the island of
Tsuning, lying at the mouth of the river. At the mouth of the Wusung, this
southern arm of the Yang-tse-Kiang, as formed by the above-named island,
is about six and a half nautical miles in width, and a little higher up is
further narrowed by Bush Island to a width of four miles.

The first inhabited spot at the junction of the Wusung and Yang-tse-Kiang
is the wretched filthy village of Wusung, which owes its importance solely
and exclusively to the opium boats, which the merchants of Hong-kong and
Shanghai used to station here in the stream, in order more readily to sell
and deliver to the Chinese that forbidden article. Thus the natives took
on themselves the responsibility of opium smuggling, while the foreign
merchants became thereby involved in a conflict with the Chinese
Government. The opium sold per month from the ships stationed at Wusung
amounts to from 2500 to 2800 chests, in value about 500 _taels_ (L150) per
chest (L375,000 to L420,000).

The mouth of the Wusung is the entrance to Shanghai, which lies about 12
miles up the Wusung or Shanghai river, but in consequence of a mud-bank is
only accessible to large ships at spring-tide. Nankin lies up the
Yang-tse-Kiang 180 miles from Shanghai, the channel being so deep that
even a frigate may sail close up under its walls. Six hundred miles
distant from the embouchure of the Wusung lie the three immense cities of
Wu-chang, Hang-iang, and Shan-Keu, containing 8,000,000 inhabitants, the
central point of the internal commerce of China; and about 400 miles
further up are the first rapids of the Yang-tse-Kiang, which completely
prevent all further navigation. Up to this point the mighty river, like
the Mississippi, the Rhine, or the Danube, may be navigated by river
steamers, without the slightest danger or difficulty. What an enormous
trade, what a tremendous development, will ere long be witnessed here, so
soon as, in accordance with the stipulations of the Tien-Tsin and Pekin
treaties, English ships, freighted with goods and necessaries of all
sorts, shall steam up this most splendid of rivers and its tributaries,
and the inhabitants of the far interior shall become acquainted with the
products of European industry, and in exchange shall export to Europe
innumerable articles of new and valuable trade. For it is the greatest
service of the merchant that he not alone opens new channels of commerce,
and by increased exportation of the fabrics of his native land tends to
build up his power, but that he civilizes foreign nations, and enriches
science and industry with innumerable fresh acquisitions.

The larger ships usually lie at anchor at the little Chinese village of
Wusung on the river of that name, just where it falls into the
Yang-tse-Kiang, and here accordingly, owing to the hostilities, we found
upwards of twenty ships of war of various nationalities at anchor. Among
others the powerful American steam-ship _Minnesota_, and the French
frigates _Audacieuse_ and _Nemesis_, an imposing spectacle in these
distant regions, and to which the half-ruined Chinese fort on the tongue
of land between the Wusung and the Yang-tse-Kiang, with its couple of
wretched cannon, presented a tragi-comic contrast. Numbers of Chinese
boats, from the smallest cloth-awning _sampan_ propelled by one man with a
paddle to the large junk with fifteen masts, and sentences painted along
the bends, were cruising in every direction. Ere long a Comprador found
his way on board, who according to custom undertook to provide the frigate
with everything she required.

Commodore Wuellerstorff purposed proceeding with the frigate to Shanghai;
but as it would be necessary to wait for a fair wind, or else to engage
another steam-tug, implying a delay of several days, the naturalists were
permitted to avail themselves of the opportunity offered by the
Comprador's boat to proceed at once to Shanghai, which voyage we were two
hours and a half in performing.

While the number of European merchantmen that we passed, some lying at
anchor in front of Wusung, others sailing up or down stream, was quite
surprising, yet the sight of the river at Shanghai far surpassed all
expectation. Here, close packed together in a channel rather narrower than
elsewhere, was drawn up tier after tier of shipping, a quite impervious
forest of masts, athwart which at intervals the large warehouses of the
European merchants indistinctly loomed, lining the banks on either side.
The newspaper lists at the time of our visit gave the names of no less
than 102 large American and European merchantmen in the Shanghai River, in
addition to which there were upwards of a thousand native junks lying in
the stream with their short crooked masts, the most convincing evidence of
the commercial importance which this place has attained within the short
space of time that has elapsed since by the Treaty of Nankin in 1842
foreign factories were authorized to be erected here.

On the shore the flags of the Consulates of the more important sea-faring
nations fluttered gaily in the breeze from lofty flag-staffs on the top of
the imposing buildings. Hardly had we landed ere we were surrounded by an
ungainly crowd of Chinese coolies, who with their bamboo staves began such
a serious battle among themselves for the right of carrying our baggage,
that it was only by the interposition of the police that several were not
left on the spot severely wounded.

The intelligence that there was in Shanghai not a single house of
entertainment, such as we understand by the name of "hotel" in Europe, was
the less agreeable, as the dwellings of the resident Europeans, where,
under ordinary circumstances, strangers are received with the utmost
hospitality, happened at present to be occupied by the officers of the
numerous war-ships, as well as by members of the two embassies. The only
place where we could be received was what is known as the Union Hotel, a
den in the fullest sense of the word, in which we passed one of the most
uncomfortable nights we ever remember. Myriads of mosquitoes, the true
blood-thirsty "gallinipper," loud-shouting drunken seamen, dogs howling,
intolerable heat, which not even a tremendous thunder-storm that broke
forth during the night could assuage,--such were some of the amenities of
our reception, which, despite our exhaustion, utterly precluded sleep.
With unspeakable longing we watched for the dawn of the morning, and,
thanks to the hospitality of our new friends, we were in the course of the
day fortunate enough to be released from this hideous abode.

The _Novara_ did not remain long behind us. A few days later, on 29th
July, she sailed gallantly up in an hour and a half, from Wusung, on the
top of a spring-tide, and with favourable breezes, and on reaching
Shanghai was welcomed with pride and delight by the German residents
here--the first ship-of-war of a first-class German power that had ever
been seen in the river Wusung.


FOOTNOTES:

[112] The analysis of these hieroglyphics, by which abstract ideas are
sought to be expressed, is extremely interesting. Thus a heart with the
badge of slavery over it represents "anger;" a hand, and the sign for the
middle, signifies an "historian," because it is his duty not to lean to
either side; by the sign of uprightness and motion is represented
"government," because it must always observe probity in the transaction of
affairs; to indicate the idea of a "friend" two pearls are represented
side by side, because friendship is as rare as two pearls, exactly
resembling each other! The well-known French missionary Huc, in his
valuable work on the Chinese Empire, gives a variety of most interesting
particulars respecting the Chinese language.

[113] A very abstruse treatise upon the preparation of the Chinese ink is
contained in the important labours of the Russian Embassy at Pekin,
relating to China, published in German by Dr. Abel and Mecklenburg,
Berlin, F. Heinike, 1858, vol. ii. p. 481. The information is borrowed
from a small treatise which was written in 1398 by a certain
Scheu-zsi-Sun, who had been for thirty years engaged in the fabrication of
the India ink. The author therein mentions how, after he had tried every
known method, and every substance usually employed, without attaining any
result, he at last put them all on one side, mingling only pin-soot with
glue together, and diluting this mixture with but hot water, again kneaded
it thoroughly, and thus succeeded in getting an ink "black and lustrous as
a child's eyes." According to another method, India ink is prepared,
besides pin-soot and lime, of a sort of tincture, consisting of the
following various pigments,--pomegranate-rind, sandal-wood, sulphate of
iron and copper, gamboge, cinnobar, dragon's-blood, gold-leaf, musk, and
glair. This tint is said to be remarkable for preventing the glue from
getting spoiled by age, or the colour changing, and may be thus kept for
any length of time. 1/2 lb. of glue and 1/4 lb. of this colouring matter
are the proportions for one pound of pin-soot. However, only a very small
portion of the different materials used seems to possess the power
ascribed to them, and many are used out of mere prejudice, and not at all
to the advantage of the ink prepared.

[114] This custom is of remote antiquity in Oriental countries, as witness
the circumstances attending the birth of Ishmael, and also of several of
the children of Israel.

[115] Many European residents at Hong-kong and Shanghai have Chinese
mistresses _bought_ in this way, who are bound to live with them only so
long as their masters choose.

[116] The title of this work is:--"_Notices sur le vert de Chine et de la
teinture en vert chez les Chinois, par Natalis Rondot, imprime aux frais
de la Chambre de Commerce de Lyon, a Paris, 1858._"

[117] The Chinese of Shanghai called the plant _Li-lu-schu_, and the
substance obtained from it _Gah-schik_.

[118] We give the following translation of one of these proclamations:
"Listen, O listen, ye detestable barbarians! We, patriots and honourable
subjects of the reigning dynasty, wish to hold up a mirror to you, that ye
may see what ye are doing, and what like you are! Only in speech, and in
no other respect, do ye differ from wild beasts! We have understanding, we
observe laws and commandments; but you are blind and dumb, and will not
receive advice. You must--there is nothing else for it--you _must_ be cut
off to the very last man!... Since you first came to the MIDDLE KINGDOM,
you have done all that you can to destroy us; you have shot at us from
your ships; you have poisoned us with opium, you have erected devils'
houses (churches) within the walls of the city! Nay more, in order to hold
your horse-races, you have profaned graves, and not suffered the dead to
rest in peace! Insatiable as sharks, greedy as a set of silk-worms upon a
mulberry tree, the more you get the more you want. Even our most trifling
profit you have taken to yourselves. Now, however, the cup is full, Heaven
in its wrath has decreed your destruction,--our people shall cut you off
with divine weapons of fire. Hearken now, O people, to the four following
rules for the extermination of the barbarians: All barbarians must be
beheaded, that our reproach may be removed, and our Middle Kingdom be no
longer insulted. So runs the order of the leader!--To none other shall any
disaster happen, no one shall be molested. Whoever strikes back, shall
himself be struck.... The day of vengeance shall be secretly appointed. We
shall circumvent the barbarians with treachery, we shall fall on them
unawares, and destroy them. Natives who are in the habit of attending
their schools, or of serving them, or of trading with them, must leave
them and return to their old pursuits. If they remain, then the subjects
of the exceedingly beneficent dynasty as well as the barbarians, the
diamonds and the hailstones, shall be destroyed together.... After the
destruction of these hideous hordes, their possessions shall be
distributed among those who have distinguished themselves on the day of
battle. So runs the order of the leader!"

[119] Yeh, as is well known, has since died in imprisonment at Calcutta.

[120] In front, Canto X. v. 25; XII. vv. 79-80. On the back, Canto VI. vv.
95, 131, and Canto VIII. v. 42.

[121] Even these four dollars sustain a reduction during the first year,
since the emigrant must for the first year pay one dollar a month to
defray necessaries, partly provisions, partly clothes, supplied to him to
the amount of $12, before his departure.

[122] J. F. Crawford, Esq., British Consul-General at the Havanna, in an
official document respecting the number of Chinese imported in the course
of one year into Havanna proves that in the case of the Peruvian ship
_Cora_, 117 out of 292 coolies perished owing to bad water. In one single
year (1857) 63 ships, of 43,933 tons, cleared from Chinese ports for the
Havanna, with 23,928 Chinese labourers, of whom 3842, or above 16 per
cent., died during the voyage.

[123] We give in the Appendix the original text of one of these contracts,
which the Chinese emigrants have to sign preparatory to their going on
ship-board, together with a translation, and shall leave the reader to
judge whether those are very far wrong who denounce the system as but
another form of slave-trade.

[124] The cruelty and injustice with which the poor Chinese emigrants are
treated, have repeatedly had the most appalling consequences. The "_China
Overland Trade Report_," published at Hong-kong, under date 28th February,
1861, gives the particulars of one such tragedy, which had shortly before
occurred on board of one of these emigrant ships. On 22nd February, the
American ship _Leonidas_ sailed from Canton for the Havanna with a number
of coolies on board. Near what is known as the Macao passage, a tremendous
noise was suddenly heard in the between-decks. Two of the mates, on
descending to inquire into the cause of the disturbance, were attacked
with knives and severely wounded. Meanwhile some of the coolies had
overpowered the captain and his wife, and had inflicted on them several
dangerous wounds. However, the crew ultimately succeeded in driving all
the coolies into the hold, though not till after the 29th had been passed
in constant fighting. In their desperation they sought to set fire to the
ship, by preparing a regular pyre of combustibles, to which they set fire.
Ere long, however, the smoke became so intolerable in the hold, that they
themselves speedily made every effort to extinguish the fire. The ship
returned to Canton. Out of 250 coolies, 94 were dead, of whom some were
shot, some were drowned, some suffocated. Singular to say the French
man-of-war _Durance_ refused to render any assistance. Other accounts
speak in the highest terms of the efforts of a German missionary to put a
stop to this practice of kidnapping, dignified by the name of emigration,
it having not unfrequently happened that young Chinese were openly carried
off to Macao, and there as openly sold. This is the more readily credible,
inasmuch as the Chinese are most desperate gamblers, and after they have
lost all they possess, think nothing of staking their personal liberty.
Thus, a short time since, the son of respectable parents in Sunon was sold
by the Emigration Society at Macao for 40 dols., and it was only by the
most unremitting efforts of the German missionary already mentioned that
the wretched lad was re-purchased for L60, and thus escaped a terrible
destiny. Two other Chinese were shipped at the same time, the bargain in
their case being recognized.

[125] See "Chinese Repository," vol. x., of October, 1849.


          [Illustration: Flower Boat on the Wusung at Shanghai.]




                                 XV.

                              Shanghai.

         Duration of Stay from 25th July to 11th August, 1858.

    A stroll through the old Chinese quarter.--Book-stalls.--Public
    Baths.--Chinese Pawnbrokers.--Foundling hospital.--The Hall of
    Universal Benevolence.--Sacrificial Hall of Medical Faculty.--
    City prison.--Temple of the Goddess of the Sea.--Chinese
    taverns.--Tea-garden.--Temple of Buddha.--Temple of Confucius.--
    Taouist convent.--Chinese nuns.--An apothecary's store, and what
    is sold therein.--Public schools.--Christian places of worship.--
    Native industry.--Cenotaphs to the memory of beneficent
    females.--A Chinese patrician family.--The villas of the foreign
    merchants.--Activity of the London Missionary Society.--Dr.
    Hobson.--Chinese medical works.--Leprosy.--The American
    Missionary Society.--Dr. Bridgman.--Main-tze tribe.--Mission
    schools for Chinese boys and girls.--The North China branch of
    the Royal Asiatic Society.--Meeting in honour of the Members of
    the _Novara_ Expedition.--Mons. de Montigny.--Baron Gros.--
    Interview with the Tau-Tai, or chief Chinese official of the
    city.--The Jesuit mission at Sikkawei.--The Pagoda of Long-Sah.--
    A Chinese dinner.--Serenade by the German singing-club.--The
    Germans in China.--Influence of the Treaties of Tien-Tsin and
    Pekin upon commerce.--Silk.--Tea.--The Chinese sugar-cane.--
    Various species of Bamboos employed in the manufacture of
    paper.--The varnish tree.--The tallow tree.--The wax-tree.--
    Mosquito tobacco.--Articles of import.--Opium.--The Tai-ping
    rebels.--Departure from Shanghai.--A typhoon in the China sea.--
    Sight the island of Puynipet in the Caroline Archipelago.


Shanghai, or Shanghai-Hein (the city near the sea), is divided into the
Chinese city proper, enclosed within walls twenty-four feet in height,
and the foreign quarter, which has been laid out beyond the walls since
the year 1843, and is as much distinguished by elegance as by comfort. Old
Shanghai, only accessible by three of the six gates with which it is
furnished, contains 250,000 inhabitants in a superficial area of nine Li,
or about two and one-third English miles, and, including the population of
neighbouring towns, who are constantly flocking to and fro, about 400,000.
The streets are filthy and singularly narrow, so much so that occasionally
it is difficult for two men to pass each other, the small cross streets
vividly recalling Venice, or the "lanes" of London. It is with difficulty,
and only by a constant succession of cries and hearty buffets, that the
bearers of merchandise can force their way through these intricate
passages, and find their way to their destination. The houses, for the
most part one and two storeys in height, usually consist of shops on the
ground-floor, each with a flaming superscription in gigantic characters,
which, the better to arrest the curiosity of the passers-by, is generally
hung diagonally across the narrow street. The living throng, which
throughout the entire day surges to and fro here, is so immense and so
various that it leaves upon a stranger an impression even deeper than that
made by the crowds and bustle of Piccadilly or Regent Street, on a fine
day in the height of "the season." The grotesqueness and filth of almost
everything that meets the eye rather adds to the singularity of the
spectacle, and while the visitor on the one hand speedily finds ample
justification for extricating himself from the din and confusion, he
nevertheless encounters at every step some new object of attraction and
absorbing interest.

Entering the city through the east gate, on whose walls, by way of example
to the multitude, are suspended in sacks and wicker-work numerous skulls
of rebels and murderers, on whom justice has been done, we find ourselves
in China street, one of the principal streets of Shanghai, and in which
are most of the best class of native shops. It is however no wider or
cleaner than the other streets of the city, and might be termed a "lane"
with far more propriety than a street. We were conveyed within the lofty,
gloomy "enceinte" of the walls in the sedan-chair of the country, after
which, under the guidance of Mr. Muirhead, an English missionary, who in
the kindest manner had offered to be our _cicerone_, we proceeded to
stroll through the town.

Close to the east gate we entered a book-stall, in which were heaped up
immense piles of stitched books. A number of Chinese in white nankeen
jackets, their foreheads smooth shaved, and each with a "tail" behind
dependent to the heels, started forward to inquire the strangers' wants,
and minister to them. Our inquiries however were by no means merely
dictated by the desire to gratify a silly curiosity. A learned countryman,
Dr. Pfizmaier, one of the profoundest of Chinese scholars, had intrusted
us with a list of fourteen rare Chinese books, the purchase of which
seemed to us specially desirable, and we accordingly made every exertion,
with the assistance of our companion, himself well acquainted with
Chinese, to crown our search with success. With one exception we succeeded
in purchasing the entire catalogue, and therewith gladly brought to an end
our wearisome stay of upwards of an hour in the close steaming book-shop,
exposed the while to a more than tropical temperature.

Chinese authors are, it must be allowed, terribly prolix in the treatment
of their subjects, and instances are by no means uncommon in China of
works, especially those of an historical nature, extending to from forty
to fifty volumes! Thus, for example, the "Seventeen Historical classics"
consists of 337 parts:--"Mingschintschuen" (History of the most renowned
ministers and statesmen), of thirty volumes:--"Singpu" (Lives of
remarkable persons), of 122 parts:--the "Encyclopedia of Matuanlin," with
its additions, even reaches the immense number of six hundred
volumes!![126] Books are generally far from expensive in China; for a few
dollars, comparatively, one may, owing to the cheapness of labour and of
cost of production, purchase quite a large supply of ordinary literature.

Adjoining this book-shop is a public bath establishment, where for 16
copper cash[127] (rather less than 1_d._ sterling), one may get a vapour
bath, while six cash more are paid for keeping custody of the habiliments.
The bath is far from being elegant or comfortable, but when one reflects
on such extraordinary cheapness, it seems as though the very utmost had
been attained. It consists of a large apartment, filled with steam, which
is from time to time renewed, by dashing hot water upon stones, maintained
at a high temperature, while ranged in readiness all round are a number of
tubs of cold water for cooling the bather. In one of these establishments
about thirty persons may bathe at once, and as John Chinaman, despite his
filthy manners, is passably clean about the body, as testified by the
pains he is at with his head and hands, these places are as extensively
patronized as they are greatly needed.

Our next stoppage was at a pawnbroker's, an institution which, to all
appearance, has been far longer in vogue in China than in Europe, and is
made great use of by the wealthy as well as the poorer classes. In the
Celestial Kingdom, the same custom prevails as with us of pawning the
winter habiliments in summer, and summer apparel in winter; and this not
so much for the sake of the money borrowed upon them, as to have them kept
in safety and carefully preserved, especially in the case of costly furs.
In China the usual advance is of one half the value, upon a very low
computation of the article pledged, for which the monthly charge is ten
cash per 500, or twenty-four per cent. per annum. Whatever has not been
redeemed at the end of three years, or of which the interest has not been
paid, is put up to auction and knocked down to the highest bidder, the
proceeds going to the benefit of the establishment. The utmost per-centage
allowed by law is three per cent. a month; but it must not exceed two per
cent. in winter, in order that the poor may be enabled to redeem the
articles pledged. The broker gives a ticket for the articles pledged,
which have a definite value, and may be sold in the street. Thieves find
these establishments very handy for disposing of their plunder, as they
deface or destroy the pawn-ticket so as to prevent the rightful owner from
regaining possession of the stolen articles. When a pawnbroker sustains
any loss through theft, or the outbreak of fire on his premises, he must
make good to his customers the value of the destroyed articles that had
been left with him as pledges. If, however, the fire has broken out in the
house of a neighbour, he is only bound to pay one half of the loss he may
sustain. The establishment is managed by fifty individuals, whom the
concourse of people flocking in to pledge or redeem property keeps in
constant activity.

Considering the notorious and openly avowed indifference everywhere
manifested throughout China for the poor, the sick, and the unfortunate,
the number of charitable institutions to be found in all parts of China is
very surprising, all which, as has lately been proved, do not owe their
origin to the introduction of Christianity, but had been in a flourishing
condition for a long time previously. Thus in several of the streets of
Shanghai, we came upon hospitals for children and foundlings ([Chinese
character(s)]), of the latter of which the one we visited was founded by
voluntary contribution so far back as 1710. This humane institution has a
landed property of about 30 acres, by the produce of which, as well as
frequent public collections, it is supported. In 1783, this orphan
hospital was amalgamated with an asylum for old and decrepit persons, and
others incapacitated for labour, and one wealthy Chinese gentleman
provided 3000 taels[128] for this praiseworthy object, but somewhat later
this joint plan was abandoned, and the Orphan Asylum remains to this day
self-supporting, while the poor, the sick, and the aged are relieved every
month at the Custom-house out of funds specially set apart.

At the period of our visit we found thirty infants in the building, who
had been deposited by their mothers in a basket suspended in a recess at
the entrance. After the new-born child has been deposited, a signal is
given with a bamboo-stick, after which the receptacle is turned inwards
and the innocent without delay taken charge of. Each child has its own
wet-nurse or attendant.

The building is lofty, roomy, and passably clean, but the children, one
and all without exception, have a sickly appearance, and seem to suffer
much from eruptions and affections of the eye. There was not one child
above two years of age. It is worth recording that every one of these
children was of the female sex; their male offspring, even when
illegitimate, the mothers seem much less disposed to part from. It
frequently happens, moreover, owing to the low considerations in which the
female sex are held, that even legitimate children of that sex are
occasionally committed to the silent receptacle of the foundling's basket.

We inquired of one of the overseers what was the destiny of these unhappy
children when they grew up, but could get no satisfactory reply. We were
informed that they were occasionally adopted as children by those who had
no family. But more extended inquiries leave us rather inclined to believe
that these poor waifs of humanity constitute a not inconsiderable
contingent to that unhappy class of beings who, carefully brought up,
clothed, and fed by speculative foster-mothers, are at a suitable age sold
for concubines to the well-to-do Chinese.

One very remarkable charitable institution, for which there is no
parallel in Europe, is the Tung-jin-tang ([Chinese character(s)]) or Hall
of United Benevolence, founded by a number of philanthropists in 1804, for
the interment of the poor. This establishment, through its legacies,
donations, and voluntary contributions, speedily became so wealthy that it
has been enabled to take up, in addition to its original business, other
objects of a not less humane nature. It pensions poor widows of
respectable families with 700 cash (about L1 8_s._) per month; it presents
persons above 60 years of age, if sickly and unable to work, with 600 cash
(about L1 4_s._) a month, and provides, free of charge, wooden coffins, as
also digging implements, for those who are too poor to inter their dead
relatives. Another humane occupation of the society is the interment of
coffins containing dead bodies, which used to be exposed on the bare
ground in various parts of the city. Finally, it was the intention of the
founder of this charitable institution, so soon as the money should
permit, to erect schools for the poor, to provide warm clothing in winter
for the helpless, as also to buy up animals destined for the
slaughter-house, and set them at liberty again.

The proceedings connected with the direction of the institution are
transacted in public, and the managers for the time being are bound to
furnish for each year a detailed report[129] of the management. This
humane institution has since its foundation undergone many reforms, and
at the period of our visit was confining its sphere of usefulness to three
main objects: 1st, The pensioning aged and broken-down persons of both
sexes, with 600 cash a month. These however were not supplied with the
money, but were for the most part taken into the house itself, or at least
supported through it. 2nd, The dispensing free of charge of various
so-called universal medicines, for headache, stomach-complaints, fever,
diarrh[oe]a, spasms during the unhealthy season (June to October). On the
3rd, 8th, 13th, 18th, 23rd, and 28th of each month (that is, on every date
ending with a 3 or an 8), during the continuance of the sultry, damp,
unhealthy season there was also provided for the sick and poor, gratis,
advice from Chinese physicians in the great hall. 3rd, The furnishing
coffins for the interment of those who died without means, or on payment
in part by families not altogether penniless. In one of these extensive
magazines we saw a coffin bearing the number 1084, which was just coming
into requisition. During 36 months 1000 coffins and upwards had been
supplied to poor families for the interment of their dead! As we were
leaving the building, we remarked in the principal apartment a large
quantity of paper, partly written upon, partly in shreds, all heaped up.
On inquiry as to the object of this collection, we were informed that it
was for no industrial purpose, but solely to be ascribed to the profound
respect the Chinese have for every sort of writing. They regard written
leaves as positively holy, and are particularly careful that no written
paper shall chance to fall into improper hands, that might make a wrong
use of it. For this reason the society pays for every pound of old waste
paper which the poor of Shanghai pick up in the street and bring to the
Institution three copper cash, and when the pile has attained a sufficient
height it is set on fire at a particular season.

Built in close proximity to this "Hall of United Benevolence" is the
sanctuary of the medical profession, or, as Mr. Muirhead translated for
our benefit the gigantic Chinese inscription over the portal, "the
sacrificial hall of the medical faculty." This is a temple erected at the
expense of the nation to a celebrated Chinese physician, whose stature, in
an easy, erect attitude, cut in wood the size of life and richly gilt, is
erected upon a platform somewhat resembling an altar. Part of the drapery
consists of gigantic leaves, while his folded hands clasp a lotos-flower.
In front of the image is placed the inscription: "The shrine of the spirit
of the King of Medicine." Above the idol are the following words in
Chinese, cut in the stone and gilt, "The divine husbandman and sacred
ruler!" and thereafter, "For all ages the instructive teacher."

This renowned physician had, it seems, instituted many experiments on
himself with new healing remedies, and according to popular belief had
attained to an exact knowledge of all that was going on in the human
frame, so that he could point out the seat of the malady by simply placing
a piece of common window-glass upon the pit of the patient's stomach, and
looking into it!

Adjoining this College of Health is the city prison, or Tschi-hin, in
which, when we saw it, were confined about 100 prisoners in the various
wards. In that set apart for the worst class of criminals, we saw about
40, heavily shackled and manacled. Three of these were confined in low
wooden cages, about three feet in height and width, and four feet in
length, and fastened to each other by iron chains running through. These
men also wore iron rings on their feet. One of these unfortunates was
sentenced to 70, and each of the other two to 60, days of such durance,
without being suffered for one moment to come out from the cage, which was
placed on the ground, and like a hen-roost, was provided with perches
running through it, so as to interfere still further with freedom of
movement. Their food consisted of rice and vegetables. According to their
own showing, these three were sentenced to this terrible punishment in
consequence of some affray, but we had reason to believe that some more
serious matter was the real cause of their having this penalty inflicted
on them. We gave the unhappy wretches a few pieces of silver. Each hastily
secured the donation in a corner of his cage, and seemed in his forlorn
condition doubly sensible of the value of a metal whose influence,
especially in China, is so powerful, so all-pervading, and so infallible.

One very peculiar institution is the Wei-kwan, a sort of Council Chamber,
situated on the N.E. side of the city between the walls and the river, in
which all matters in dispute between mercantile men are adjusted, and in
conjunction with which is a temple in honour of the goddess of the seas
(Tien-Mu). In the centre of the council-room is a large elegantly-shaped
iron pan (Schang-Lu), in which the merchants and seamen frequenting the
hall burn slips of paper, on which are written the wishes of those making
their offerings. Also money, fruit, &c., are here sacrificed, and Chinese
mariners, whose "junks" have come unscathed through a storm, or have been
preserved, make their thank-offerings in the shape of elegant little
models of their ships, which are placed in various parts of the building.
This hall was founded in 1270 by the Sung dynasty, on a site where certain
Chinese believed they had observed that the tumultuous tide of the Whampoa
river gradually lost its violence, as it approached the spot, a phenomenon
which to them seemed of marvellous significance. Under the Yuen and Mui
dynasties the temple was repeatedly plundered and burnt to the ground, but
was rebuilt through the influence of a Tao-priest. In 1735, an imperial
edict ordered the observance of certain religious ceremonies from time to
time, an example which has been followed to the present day.

Directly facing the goddess of the sea (called also Kwan-Yin, Queen of
Heaven),[130] who is represented by a life-size figure placed at the
bottom of the apartment, a large stage is erected, on which Chinese dramas
are represented for their entertainment from 10 o'clock in the morning
till nightfall.

In one part of the immense pile of buildings there are also provided
dwellings for such Chinese merchants as visit Shanghai from the interior
of the kingdom, and have neither friends nor relatives in the city with
whom they can take up their residence, for public taverns are in China
only frequented by the very lowest classes. We entered one of these
Chinese hotels, which we had come upon during our ramble, and inspected
the eating-rooms and bed-rooms, which are usually situated on the first
floor. The usual charge is from 100 to 140 cash a day for board (4_d._ to
6_d._), and from 20 to 40 cash for lodging (1_d._ to 2_d._). The gloomy,
filthy, cavernous aspect of each room makes even a moment's stay
intolerable. The victuals supplied consist chiefly of rice, vegetables,
and fish. In the interior, board and lodging in these taverns is very much
cheaper, and the well-known and highly meritorious English missionary Dr.
Medhurst, who, in 1845, traversed, in the dress of a Chinese, a large
portion of the silk and tea districts, relates that the customary charge
for supper, bed, and breakfast next morning altogether amounted to 80 cash
only, or about 3-3/8_d._![131] In the streets of Shanghai, the
eating-houses are greatly out-numbered by the tea-houses, where one gets a
cup of tea for 6 cash (1/4_d._). These, like our own cafes, are laid out
with little tables, stools, and benches. As soon as a guest enters and
takes his seat, a Chinese attendant brings a cup, throws into it the
proper quantity of tea-leaves, and pours boiling water upon it. After the
lapse of a few minutes the hot light yellow liquid is hastily swallowed,
but avoiding the leaves which are swimming on the surface, and usually
serve for a second or even a third infusion. These tea-houses are crowded
with visitors throughout the day, who sometimes transact business here
over a cup of tea and a pipe of oiled tobacco, sometimes resort hither to
wile the time listlessly away.

The chief place of amusement, however, of the native population of
Shanghai is the Tea-Garden (Tschin-Huang-Mian), or temple of the Emperor,
which contains numerous gardens laid out in Chinese fashion, and booths of
all sorts, besides the attractions of jugglers, singers, actors,
soothsayers, musicians, and mountebanks, all driving their respective
avocations. The whole scene is eminently characteristic of the
grotesqueness of Chinese taste. Artificial canals and tanks filled with
green stagnant water, redolent of miasmatic effluvia, amid which the Lotos
opens its lovely white blossoms, quantities of zig-zag bridges with
beautifully carved balustrades, islands with artificially constructed
rocks and grottoes, subterranean passages, flags of all shapes and sizes,
bearing the most bombastic inscriptions--such are the chief attractions of
a Chinese People's Garden, every large town boasting one such, erected at
the expense of the State, in which from early morning till late in the
evening a vast crowd of human beings is incessantly surging to and fro,
intent on pleasure, dissipation, or profit. The rabble, however, have not
access to every part of the Tea-Garden, a certain portion being set apart
for the recreation of the chief officials of the city (Tau-Tai). This
portion, shut off by a lofty wall, is elegantly laid out, and is made
attractive with all manner of dwarf trees nursed with great care and
expense, besides the usual grottoes, artificial hills and precipices,
pavilions, &c. Hither the head magistrate occasionally resorts to pass the
warmest hours of the day, and dozes away undisturbed by the cares of his
onerous responsibilities. All the public gardens of China present almost
the identical features of the one we visited; a park without artificial
islands and wooden bridges, without canals (in lieu of paths), without
pools of stagnant water thickly covered with the broad leaves of the
_Nelumbium_, would, in the eyes of a Chinese, be deprived of its chief
pleasure and its greatest attraction.

Close to the Tea-Garden is the largest Buddhist Temple within the city
walls, in which throughout the day the over-credulous Chinese kneel before
their idols, and with many reverences murmur their set formulas of
prayers. Like everything else in China, even religious observances are
regarded from the most practical point of view. They think they have done
enough when they have gone through a certain round of outward ceremonies.
The condition of most of the temples, the utter neglect of some, and the
various employments of others, indicate that the Chinese either has no
sense of the sanctity attaching to such places of devotion, or else
attaches but little value to the act itself. The men rarely enter the
temples. It is only the women who, to satisfy the cravings of the heart,
have recourse to invoking the Deity. Frequently one sees a worshipper
approach the attendant sitting in the porch of the temple, in order to get
their horoscope calculated by him for a few cash. For this purpose she
shakes with eager devotion a box of bamboo-cane filled with thin wands,
until one of these wands springs out. The words inscribed on each wand
furnish the oracle-expounder with an infallible sign, by which, after
consulting one of the books of Chinese wisdom spread out before him, he is
enabled to pronounce the answer of the divinity to the prayers preferred
by the poor dupe. The most prolific source of revenue of the temple and
its ministrants, consists, however, in the sale of the gold and silver
tissue paper,[132] which plays so important a part in the worship of the
Chinese, and owing to their zealous and frequent use are heaped up in
immense piles, for consumption by fire in a gigantic furnace.

Much more edifying than the interior of the great Buddhist temple with its
troops of swag-bellied idols in their parti-coloured apparel, some with a
good-humoured leer, others sulkily scowling on the beholder, is the
appearance of the temple of Confucius[133] in a remote quarter of the
city. In this extensive building, at once elegant and simple, and with
numerous halls and corridors, the scholars undergo their examination for
the service of the state; here the Government officials at stated seasons
perform certain religious ceremonies, and here all the _literati_ assemble
for the discussion of grave questions of debate. The main hall has its
red-tinted walls covered with Chinese and Tartar inscriptions, all of
which refer to Confucius, his doctrines and his wisdom. At intervals, a
number of tablets let into the wall inform the visitor that this edifice
is devoted to the instruction of the virtuous, and the cultivation of the
endowments. At the same time every person who passes this in a sedan-chair
or on horseback, whether an official or one of the people, is compelled
to quit his vehicle and traverse the consecrated space on foot. Over the
entrance to the right is written: "His virtue is comparable to Heaven and
Earth;" and above the door to the left we read, "His teachings comprise
all the wisdom of ancient and modern days." Behind the temple is a smaller
edifice, dedicated to the five progenitors of Confucius. The temple itself
is similarly surrounded with various apartments, all, as their bombastic
inscriptions announce, devoted to the honour and advancement of knowledge.
One of these chambers is dedicated to the god of Literature, another to
the guardian spirit of Science. The latter is curiously represented as a
figure holding in one hand a _stylus_, in the other a lump of silver,
emblematic, we presume, of "man through wisdom attaining unto riches."

In every city throughout China there is, as well as a tea-garden, a temple
in honour of the great teacher Kong-fu-tse, whose knowledge and whose
moral system, 2400 years after his mortal pilgrimage, instruct and gladden
not merely his own countrymen, but all admirers throughout the world of
what is noble and virtuous.

Among the various monasteries of the city, we visited one of the Taouists,
called the Du-Kung or Great Mirror (probably of Virtue), where strangers
provided with introductions are received and entertained at 150 cash
(6_d._ per diem). This cloister, whose sole inhabitants are some five or
six Chinese monks, is situated close to the wall, and forms one of the
best points whence to obtain a view of the entire city.

The Taouists, who follow the Tao, the "way of knowledge," and arrogate to
themselves a more profound insight into the mysterious powers of nature,
as well as more special acquaintance with and definite powers over good
and evil spirits, are disciples of the doctrines of Lao-tse,[134] and are
extensively scattered throughout the country, although at present, in
consequence of their losing themselves deeper and deeper in a slothful,
sensual mode of existence, their proselytism is proceeding at a much
slower ratio than formerly. It is purely accidental that there is
immediately adjoining the Taoui monastery a convent known as that of the
"White nuns," a small one-storey building, kept however singularly neat
and clean. Here we saw six Buddhist nuns, with close-shaven heads and in
long white dresses, which gave them quite a masculine aspect. They
received us with much courtesy, and escorted us round the various
apartments with considerable _empressement_. They were mostly widows, who
pass their lives here in calm retrospective contemplation, and occupy
themselves with preparing little articles for the Buddhist ritual, such as
censers, tapers, printed sacrificial papers, &c., with which apparently
they contrive to support themselves. These associations (Ni-koo) were
usually founded by legacies and donations by pious Chinese, and are
exceedingly useful as providing an asylum for poor, helpless women, weary
of life. Many widows withdraw into these abodes of peace, there to pass
the rest of their lives, free from the tumult of the world, in the
exercise of devotion and of works of neighbourly love and charity.
Nevertheless, if we are to believe common report, works of piety are not
the only objects occasionally pursued in these Buddhist convents, and the
web of intrigue and amorous adventure, of which they have frequently been
the scene, has not a little tended to lower the estimate in which these
religious societies are held, and even threatens to cut short their
existence. A people of such a materialistic mode of life, and such
ant-like industry, as the Chinese, who rarely know what it is to have one
holiday in the entire year, must involuntarily look with argus-like eye on
all religious communities, which pass their time in luxurious ease and
exemption from care, without in any way advancing the well-being of their
fellow-creatures by either mental or physical labour.

In the course of our peregrinations through the streets of Shanghai we
also came upon the shop of a Chinese apothecary (Yak-Tien), which
externally bears a considerable resemblance to a similar establishment in
Europe, but widely differs in respect of details. The Chinese Materia
Medica is especially abundant in patent medicines, the use and application
of which, it must be allowed, is frequently of the most extraordinary
nature.

According to the latest researches of Dr. Hobson, of whose important
services in the diffusion of European medical science in China we shall
have much to say in a future page, we are acquainted with 442 drugs from
among the three great kingdoms of Nature, which must be kept in every
well-stocked Chinese drug-store, of which 314 belong to the botanical, 78
to the animal, and 50 to the mineral world. We shall, however, in this
place only indicate those of which Chinese physicians avail themselves
most frequently in the preparation of their medicines, such, for example,
as birds' nests, dried red-spotted lizard, the fresh tips of stags'
antlers, the shell of the tortoise, dogs' flesh, bones of animals,
preparations from various parts of the human body, whale-bone,
oyster-shells, skins of snakes, shark's maw and fin, tendons of deer and
buffalo, dried silk-worms, their larvae and excrement, bamboo shavings, the
bear's gall, preparations from human _faeces_, scraped rhinoceros and
antelope horn, rabbit dung, cuttle-fish bone, dried varnish, dried leeches
and earthworms, red marble, refuse of ivory, preparations from toads,
petrifactions, old copper money,[135] snow-water,[136] human milk,[137]
&c. &c.

These pharmaceutics are brought from various parts of China, as well as
from Japan, Siam, and the Straits of Malacca, and constitute an important
and profitable branch of commerce. Many of them are sold at the druggist's
in the raw state, when they are used as sympathetic remedies, amulets, or
generally for external use. The Chinese druggists sell their medicaments
for the most part in the form of powders or pills. These latter are
usually made up in a capsule of bees-wax for greater facility of
administration, so that the dose as it comes from the shop resembles
those small wax-cakes used by house-wives for waxing their thread. One
such cake contains four or six pills, called _Tzi-pau-tan_, or very costly
pills, which are used as a sort of universal specific against fevers,
affections of the digestive organs, headaches, &c. &c.

The most valuable and costly article in the Chinese pharmacop[oe]ia is,
however, the Ginseng (_Panax Ginseng_, or _Panax Quinquefolia_), which is
chiefly found in Mantchooria and the deserts to the north of the peninsula
of Corea. The circumstance that the Ginseng is still a monopoly of the
Chinese Government, only a few privileged individuals being annually
permitted to purchase a certain quantity for its weight in pure gold, has
much more to do with its efficacy as a panacea than the benefits conferred
by its curative powers. The roots are about the size and thickness of a
man's little finger, and break short off when bent. When cleaned they are
transparent, and of a dark amber colour.

Of the Ginseng there are three qualities sold in the Chinese drug-stores.
One leang or ounce of the best (the largest and finest) costs 50 dollars,
of the medium quality five dollars, and of the most inferior quality one
dollar. The Ginseng root is also found in Virginia, Pennsylvania, and
Canada, and is thence exported to China, but the Chinese prefer that of
their native forests, even though these are very much dearer, and there is
hardly any difference to remark between them. As the plant is only found
in the wild state, and obstinately resists all attempts to cultivate it,
its collection among the forests of North America is attended with great
hardship and expense, and whereas in former years the profit realized on
this article of commerce by English and American merchantmen amounted to
from 500 to 600 per cent., it is now reduced to a very moderate
proportion.

A more general subject of interest is presented by the shops where is sold
the porcelain-ware, the manufacture of which dates from a very remote
period of Chinese history, and was already a flourishing trade at the
commencement of our historic epoch. Indeed we may reasonably assume,
notwithstanding the beautiful specimens of the art which from time to time
are brought to light, that this special branch of industry is at present
in a state of decline, while of many kinds of porcelain manufacture no
examples can now be shown, as the secret of their manipulation has
perished. What usually interests Europeans in these shops is what is known
as "crackle" porcelain,[138] the upper surface of which everywhere
presents broken lines, so that the entire vessel appears as though it
consisted of numbers of small pieces cemented to each other, the whole
having very much the appearance of Mosaic. But this description also is no
longer manufactured of the first quality in the present day. Antique
porcelain is of extraordinary value, but specimens of modern manufacture,
such as small figures, mannikins, &c., are very cheap, and are much the
same as those imported to Europe.

One marked partiality of the Chinese is their fondness for suspending
grasshoppers in small elegant baskets of bamboo strips, or twisted wire,
in which, whatever the season or the weather, these little captives keep
up a constant pleasant chirping. This custom is of great antiquity, and
while one even now finds among the populace of the present day some of
these chirpers thus carefully tended, there once was a time when the
grasshopper was the object of universal adoration, and enjoyed all the
honours of Fashion. They were indebted for this singular good fortune,
according to the abbe Grosier,[139] to a poor scholar under the Thang
dynasty, in the 7th century of our era, who to relieve his poverty fell
upon the singular expedient of trading in these insects. He went into the
country, selected the most beautiful insects he could find, constructed
elegant little cages for them, and returning to the city offered them for
sale in the most frequented streets of Tschang-gan. The idea was novel,
and the wealthy upper classes speedily found a charm in having the music
of the fields thus transplanted into their houses. The Empress, the
Queens, the ladies of the Palace, in a word, every one was eager to
possess these songsters of the meadow. There was actually an enactment
passed for the supply of the Imperial Palace with the requisite number of
these insects. The fashion rose to a perfect mania--the little Zirperu was
encountered at every corner--it was taken out whenever a call was
paid--the whole city resounded with its shrill cry. The fine arts, and
every branch of industry, felt its impulse. There was no textile fabric,
no embroidery, no design, no vessel, on which it did not conspicuously
figure. It was represented in metal and in jewellery, and no handsome lady
thought her toilette complete, unless she sported a grasshopper among her
hair. This mania has died out in China, but the buzz of the insect still
continues to furnish matter of amusement for the populace and children of
all classes, and they are still caught in large quantities, and exposed
for sale in the streets. Singular to say, all ancient and modern writers,
if we are to judge by their delineations, describe these insects as
_cicadae_, whereas it was shown and proved by the researches of one of the
zoologists of the Expedition, that the insect is no _cicada_, but a
species of grasshopper (_Decticus_), which, so far as appears, has never
hitherto been described. Very probably the circumstance that the noise
made by each of these insects is very similar, gave circulation to this
error of upwards of a thousand years' standing, whence people would
without further examination take it for granted that the insect confined
in the cage belonged to that species whose place in natural history, and
whose special musical qualifications, mankind had so long been familiar
with. One of these grasshoppers was kept for months in such a cage on
board our ship, and chirped away lustily, fair weather or foul, even when
confined in a close cupboard. On the other hand, some _cicadae_, with
which similar experiments were made, lived only two or three days in
captivity. None sang, unless when teased, or when a number more were
introduced into the vessel, thereby incommoding them, and none took
nourishment. It was obvious that the _cicadae_ possessed none of those
characteristics which would enable them to be kept in captivity as pets,
whereas, on the other hand, the grasshoppers and crickets were especially
adapted for that purpose.

We were anxious to visit a variety of other interesting places, ere
quitting the sultry, gloomy Chinese city on our return to the more genial
European quarter. But evening was already setting in, and after sunset the
gates of the city are closed, and neither Chinese nor European can after
that hour obtain access to the city. Whoever is belated must find shelter
for the night in the house of some hospitable friend, until with the first
break of morning the gates are re-opened, communication is restored with
the foreign quarter, and the previous day's scene of bustle is renewed.

The next object which excited our interest was a Chinese school. Ascending
a wooden staircase, we enter a room, quite empty but for a table and
stools, in which a haggard woe-begone Chinese, with long tail and rod in
hand, is walking to and fro, while at a table some dozen of boys of from
eight to twelve are engaged in reading. Their loud accents may be heard
down in the street outside. The cost of the schools for the people is
chiefly defrayed by voluntary subscriptions, foundations, &c. &c. The
children of the middle classes pay for nine months' instruction, three
Spanish dollars. Many teachers have more than a hundred scholars, and thus
earn about 1000 dollars per annum. These, it is true, are exceptions, but
teaching as a profession seems on the whole to be fully better remunerated
in China than in European countries. There it is in much higher
estimation, and receives better recompense. The wealthy Chinese usually
engage private tutors for their children, who, as among ourselves, usually
form part of the family. Elementary education is almost universal
throughout China. There are but few Chinese who are not at least able to
read and write. One very gratifying instance of the prevailing religious
toleration, well worthy of example in the Christian states of Europe, is
the presence of Protestant and Catholic places of worship in the midst of
Buddhist temples, and other edifices dedicated to heathen worship. The
American Episcopal church, erected in 1850, at the expense of a wealthy
merchant and ship-owner of Boston named Appleton, at a cost of 6000
dollars, already numbers eighty converts. It is an extremely simple yet
neat-looking place of worship, quite in the style of the chapels in the
Western portion of the American Union, and has in connection with it a
school numbering about forty native scholars. Every Sunday morning at ten,
a sermon is preached, which is attended by most of the foreign community.
Far grander and more imposing in plan and fittings is the Catholic
cathedral of Tong-Kadu, confessedly the finest place of Christian worship
throughout China. The construction of this building was commenced by
voluntary subscription in 1846, and completed in 1852, the total cost
amounting to 230,000 _leangs_, or about L65,000. Within there is a large
organ, constructed by one of the lay brothers of bamboo pipes, whose
saddening yet inspiring notes, heard in the festivals of the Church,
invite the Christian community far and wide to devotion and instruction.
At present this cathedral is under the charge of a bishop of the Order of
the Jesuits.

Our road from the Chinese city to the European quarter led us past an
establishment which bore interesting testimony to the industrial activity
of the Chinese. It is an oil factory worked exclusively by natives, and
giving employment to about 400 workmen, besides 80 draught oxen. The oil
is extracted from indigenous beans, and is so copious, that 1400 _catties_
(1750 lbs.) of oil are procured daily, which is worth 74 _cash_ per
_catty_ (about 3-3/4_d._ per lb.), and is used both for cooking and for
light. The residuary oil-cake, after expression of the oily matter, is
used as manure.[140] A workman may earn at this description of labour from
100 to 200 _cash_ a day (4_d._ to 8_d._).

As we left the manufactory, and were bending our stops towards the little
Eastern gate, our gaze was suddenly attracted by a spacious and elegant
mansion, evidently the property of a well-to-do Chinese. This, as we were
informed by our companion, proved to be the residence of the Wuong family,
which ranks among the five oldest and most distinguished families in
Shanghai. There is to be seen in the neighbourhood a small stone memorial
shaped like a mausoleum, which, with the Emperor's permission, was erected
by the inhabitants of the district in which she lived, to commemorate the
benevolence and philanthropic exertions of the mother of Wuong. The custom
of honouring ladies distinguished by their virtues and benevolence, by the
erection of temples, cenotaphs, &c., is by no means unusual in China, and
is in marvellous contrast to the almost slavish treatment which the female
sex usually meets with. Nevertheless, in the city and environs of Shanghai
alone there are ninety such triumphal arches and memorials to as many
exemplary and philanthropic ladies. The majority of these were married,
and some had attained a very great age, one having died at 104 years, and
another at 115 years of age![141]

In the house of Wuong, who stands in high repute among the Europeans as a
merchant and ship-owner, we were received with the most gratifying
hospitality. As soon as we entered the house, an attendant immediately
presented tea in small cups, which, in conformity with the usages of the
country, had to be swallowed in all its native bitterness without
admixture of sugar or milk. Immediately after an old nurse made her
appearance, and struck up with our excellent conductor, Mr. Syles, who
seemed to be everywhere welcomed by the Chinese, and was well acquainted
with the family, a long conversation upon the most diverse subjects. At
length the master of the house himself made his appearance, a dignified,
stately man, arrayed in a light elegant grey silk frock, but in deportment
and externals not differing in the very least from his Chinese attendants,
and himself conducted us round the house. He seemed to feel pleasure in
the opportunity of baring to the view of a stranger the very penetralia
of his beautiful abode. We wandered through numerous apartments simply
yet elegantly furnished, with various antechambers and corridors, among
which were interspersed little plots laid out with dwarf plantations,
artistically-designed grottoes, and "rookeries." In one of the rooms was a
"punkah," an article of furniture rarely met with in a Chinese household.
On reaching the library or study, our host bade us be seated, while he
again ordered tea to be served. This small but pretty apartment was
covered all round with inscriptions in Chinese (chiefly maxims from
Confucius), which, written on rolls of white paper, were suspended on the
walls. While sipping our tea, and engrossed in conversation, an attendant
appeared with somewhat thick cloths, steeped in hot water, with which to
wipe our faces and hands. The evaporation of the moisture lowers the
temperature of the skin, and has so refreshing an effect, that one cannot
but feel surprised that this custom is not more extensively patronized in
hot countries, or put in practice by ourselves during our hot sultry
summers.

With respect to ourselves, what appeared most to interest our Chinese host
in his silken attire was our apparel. He felt over and over again the
black alpaca coat, which was worn by one of the members of our Expedition,
and remarked, "these Western races are truly marvellous people; they wear
far more clothes than we do, yet they perspire less." And thereupon Wuong
mopped his face twice with the towel, which in the mean time the attendant
had again dipped in the hot water, and thoroughly wrung out. As we were
taking our departure, our courteous host accompanied us to the threshold.

In the portico were a number of wooden tables lacquered with red varnish,
on which were inscribed in large golden letters of the Chinese character
the titles of honour of the family of Wuong, which on festive occasions
were drawn in front of the head of the family as he sat on his sofa.

After this ramble through the Chinese town, we returned to the "Strangers'
Quarter," where we came upon a widely different mode of life. Here
everything is arranged upon the European model, and the attention is only
diverted by those minor accessories, in which the climatic conditions have
necessitated some variation. The houses are universally lofty, roomy, and
agreeable, usually surrounded by a garden, and many of them present an
almost palace-like aspect. More even than to the merchants in Broadway is
the designation of "merchant princes" applicable to the foreign merchants
of China and the East Indies, for it is among them beyond any other class
on the globe, that there prevails a luxury almost princely in its
magnificence. In such a place as Shanghai, which can present to the
educated foreigner such a meagre equivalent for his numerous intellectual
privations, each man endeavours in the readiest possible way to render his
material existence as comfortable and agreeable as he possibly can. This
leading principle one sees illustrated and carried out in practice in the
splendid designs of their residences, and the exquisite refinement and
comfort of their internal arrangements, as well as in the scrupulous
attention paid to the cellar and the "cuisine."

On the ground-floors are the counting-house and stores, on the first floor
the drawing-room, the dining-room, and the sleeping-apartments. All these
various chambers are decorated with as much attention to comfort as good
taste, and almost every single article bears on it the solid,
unmistakeable impress of its English origin. Even into the most minute
details all the genuine comfort of an English drawing-room is introduced,
increased even, if that be possible, by the adoption of a few customs
peculiar to the peoples of Asia, such as mats of fragrant materials placed
before the doors and windows, Punkahs, which, kept in motion by Chinese
servants, keep up a constant current of fresh air, while through the
verandah, or the open glass casement, where the family sit swinging to and
fro in an American rocking-chair, a delicious cool breeze blows in the
mornings and evenings. A well-appointed numerous household is constantly
hovering around, eagerly intent to anticipate the slightest wish of their
employers. Probably in no part of the world are there more intelligent or
punctual servants than the Chinese. They get through the utmost variety of
work with consummate tact, method, and facility. Everything is done
rapidly and noiselessly, and one is served with the utmost regularity,
without being pestered with too much attention.

The members of the _Novara_ Expedition experienced in Shanghai the most
hearty hospitality. Even the presence of the various embassies, and the
momentous nature of the operations of which the Gulf of Petcheli was the
scene, proved no barrier to a most flattering reception being accorded to
this the first maritime Expedition of a German power. Foreigners of the
most widely divergent races and standing,--consuls, missionaries,
merchants, naturalists, journalists,--each in his own way vied with the
rest in ministering to our comfort, and in aiding us in the prosecution of
our objects.

One of the most distinguished of the physicians and missionaries of the
London Missionary Society, Dr. B. Hobson, who since 1838 has resided at
Canton in the honourable capacity of a "medical missionary,"[142] and who,
a few months before our arrival, had, in consequence of the outbreak of
hostilities, removed to Shanghai, was so kind as to furnish us, out of his
own rich treasures of Chinese lore, with much valuable information, and
acquainted us with the various objects aimed at by the praiseworthy
activity of the London Board of Missions. This body by no means confines
its operations to the diffusion of tracts and works relating to
Christianity published in the Chinese language, but combines
simultaneously with that sphere of action the excellent idea of
ministering to the physical necessities of the poor and sick Chinese, and
of helping them in their need. While able, eloquent Dr. Muirhead presides
over the missionary schools, and the not less zealous Mr. Wylie
superintends the printing of the books, our highly-educated friend Dr.
Hobson takes charge of the hospital, the cost of which is defrayed partly
by the Missionary Society, partly by the European community.

The building itself is rather small and unpretending, and can at most
accommodate only thirty patients. But it was erected chiefly for those
cases which in England it is customary to classify in the general category
of "accidents," injuries, that is, sustained unexpectedly, or in a riot,
&c. &c. Every day between twelve and one o'clock a consultation is held,
and treatment provided gratuitously. Hither flock hundreds of invalids, to
avail themselves of this benevolent arrangement, and while Dr. Hobson is
busy giving orders and dispensing drugs in his small apartment, a native
convert in the waiting-room is preaching the Living Word to those who come
for advice.

We passed an entire hour in the dispensary, not merely for the purpose of
witnessing the various descriptions of cases, mostly of a surgical nature,
but also to catch many an instructive remark from the lips of Dr. Hobson.
Thus he remarked, as the result of a medical practice of more than sixteen
years, that the Chinese are uncommonly soon affected by the use of mercury
and quinine. A very small dose of either of these drugs very speedily
shows a marked effect. Oddly enough, quinine, as a tonic and febrifuge, is
unknown in the Chinese pharmacop[oe]ia, and is almost exclusively
prescribed for the cure of the opium-smoking form of mania.

In China, a physician is treated with great distinction, and is usually
designated as szi-yay (the honourable teacher). Of late years cholera
(tschan-kan-tschui, literally "the contracting of the tendons") and
small-pox had committed fearful ravages among the populace, and the
appalling havoc committed by the latter-named disease gave occasion for
the publication by the English missionaries of a short treatise translated
into Chinese, on the importance of vaccination. Among children especially
the mortality caused by this fell scourge was very great, and the
instances of _leucoma_ and loss of sight resulting from the disease appear
to have been very numerous.

Dr. Hobson, who in 1851 had published a volume of Physiology in the Canton
dialect, has also completed a handbook of Practical Surgery, with 400
woodcuts, and, like the preceding, had had it printed by native workmen.
Even the drawings were drawn on the wood and cut by native artists after
English originals. Many of the scientific phrases contained in these works
must have required to be entirely reconstructed, or else expressed by a
circumlocution. Dr. Hobson intended to follow up these two splendid
undertakings with a fresh work upon Pharmacology, as also a treatise upon
the diseases of women and children, both, like their predecessors, to be
in the Canton dialect, as that most universally used.

The Chinese, however, possess themselves a pretty comprehensive medical
literature, whence we may infer that from the earliest times they paid
special attention to the science of medicine. According to a Chinese
tradition, the Emperor Schi-nung, 3200 years before our era, collected a
"Materia Medica," and 570 years later, the Emperor Hwang-te is said to
have written a work with the title "Sonwan" (open questions in medicine).
The celebrated work, "the Doctrine of the Pulse," by Wang-shu-fo, was
written in the reign of Tsche-Hwang-te (the book-burner), about 510 B.C. A
second edition of this work was published in the reign of Kang-he, in the
year 1693 of our era. About A.D. 229 the Chinese physician Tschang-kae-pin
wrote the first Chinese work which, in addition to the theory of medicine,
also contained prescriptions. The great "_Materia Medica_" of China was
compiled by Li-tschi-kan, and was published by his son during the reign of
Wan-Leih, about A.D. 1600. The most important medical work in Chinese is
the E-tsang-kin-ksen, or "the Golden Mirror of Medical Authors," collated
by Imperial authority from the best works of earlier native authors,
especially from the "Nan-king," and the writings of Dr. Tschang-kae-pin.
This was published in 1743 (the seventh year of the reign of Keen-lung),
and consists of thirty-two volumes 8vo, with upwards of 400 woodcuts.[143]

The information furnished us by Dr. Hobson with reference to the terrible
forms of leprosy in China are of so much interest, general as well as
special, that we believe we shall not transcend the scope of this work, if
we give in these pages the valuable data upon the subject in all their
completeness.

The Chinese consider leprosy as the most appalling of diseases, since,
while resisting all means of cure itself, it attacks others, and they
accordingly avoid in the greatest terror all those who are smitten with
it. Like the people whom Moses brought out, the Chinese regard leprosy as
a direct consequence of impiety, an expiation for sin committed. For this
reason those afflicted with leprosy are rarely regarded with pity. No hand
of sympathy is stretched forth to give aid, no heart feels itself impelled
to alleviate their hopeless condition, and thus the most wretched of all
are in the eyes of the masses simply objects of disgust and of horror.
Leprosy is called Lae in Chinese. In the Imperial dictionary of Kang-he
Lae, is described as a very evil kind of disease, which breaks out upon
the skin in the form of blotches and pustules. Gutzlaff and others
acquainted with Chinese make use however of the words Ma-fung to express
leprosy, which is also used by native writers to indicate the disease.

The Chinese physicians consider leprosy as a subtle, penetrating,
poisonous effluvium which has infected the blood. They profess to
recognize 36 different kinds of leprosy, among which they enumerate every
form and variety of Lichen, Scabies, Psoriasis, and Syphilis. Common as
the disease is in Southern China, it is unknown in the North; its area of
manifestation seems to be confined within the tropics. It is, however,
related of many Chinese in good circumstances, that when attacked by
leprosy they have removed to Pekin, where after a two years' residence
they have lost all trace of the infection, which, however, broke out anew
immediately on their return to the South.

Leprosy does not seem by its physical effects to shorten life. There are
in China numbers of aged people attacked with this disease, and in the
Lazar-house at Canton there is still living an old leper upwards of
eighty, who has long found an asylum in that hospital as an incurable.
Suicide is not uncommon among those thus sorely smitten, when they usually
poison themselves with an over-dose of opium, hang themselves, or drown
themselves, for death, they say, makes them once more clean. Although the
Chinese believe in the hereditary transmission of leprosy, they
nevertheless think that the disease becomes of a milder type in the third
generation, and entirely disappears in the fourth. Marriages never take
place with the offspring of leprous parents or grand-parents, but on the
other hand the lepers and their children intermarry among themselves. A
leper however of the fourth generation would only ally himself with a girl
of the same degree of exemption. The children of such a union would be
considered sound and free from leprosy, and would no longer be excluded in
any way from social rights.

But the Chinese believe leprosy not alone hereditary, but also infectious
through the very slightest contact. Hence the father abandons his own
child; the children flee from their parents: they will not eat and drink
with them, will not sit in their company, will not use the chairs which
have been sat upon by the leper, until at least the surrounding atmosphere
has been fumigated with a torch. Even the law declares leprosy to be a
contagious disease. A wealthy leper durst not venture to leave his own
room, where he is excluded from all communication with the outer world,
without exposing himself to the danger of being arrested by the police,
and mulcted in a heavy fine, or else sent to what is called the Leper
village near Canton, an abode of human woe and misery, which even the
leprous regard with horror.[144]

As the Chinese physicians regard leprosy as a taint of the blood, and in
their treatment adopt Hahnemann's principle of _similia similibus
curantur_, they prescribe by way of remedies the most repulsive and
disgusting substances which they can select from their _Materia Medica_,
such as the saliva of the toad, beetles, snakes, worms, scorpions,
centipedes, &c. &c.

Dr. Hobson considers leprosy, when once fully developed, to be incurable.
Such remedies as arsenic, salts, acids, in short alteratives, occasionally
prove efficacious at an early stage of the malady, as also Iodine baths,
and mercurial friction. External remedies however are usually found to be
unavailing in reaching the root of the disorder, its seat lying deeper
than an ordinary affection of the skin.

Of late years the seeds of the Tschaul or Tscharul Mugra (one of the order
of _Flacourtiaceae_), have been administered for leprosy by several English
physicians in India, and certainly, in some instances, with such results
that the most sanguine hopes were entertained of its efficacy in all cases
of leprosy. Dr. Hobson informed us that Dr. Mouatt, of the Medical
College, Calcutta, who was the first to discover the remarkable properties
of this plant, sent him, when he was at Canton, a considerable quantity of
these seeds for the purpose of experimenting with them.[145] They were
ground into a coarse powder, and in that state administered twice a day
at considerable intervals in doses of about 60 grains, the external sores
being at the same time rubbed with the oil pressed out of the seeds. The
cure must be persevered in without interruption for six months, and must
be from time to time aided by saline purgatives. The first symptom of
improvement shows itself in an abatement of the prominence and redness of
the eruption, and the appearance of white scales all round it. This remedy
has long been known to the Chinese, but those who are acquainted with the
active curative principle contained in the seeds of the Tscharul Mugra,
keep the secret to themselves in their own interest.[146] Dr. Hobson
assured us that he had cured two cases of leprosy taken early, and in a
very mild form, by the administration of these seeds, and had seen several
greatly improved by their use; but this experienced physician is, like
others, distrustful of the efficacy of the seeds of Tscharul Mugra in
cases of fully developed leprosy, which, according to his view, is
pre-eminently a taint of the blood,--a poison which can never again be
eradicated from the system. In cases of scrofula, these seeds have been
found serviceable.

Like their brethren of the London Missionary Association, the various
missions of the United States of North America display the most
praiseworthy zeal and activity of co-operation upon every question.

That eminent philanthropist, Dr. Bridgman, who had, for more than a
quarter of a century, been an active and highly esteemed missionary, was
in 1858 at the head of the American Episcopal Mission, and was one of the
oldest, as also among the most highly respected, denizens of the little
foreign settlement. This meritorious citizen died at Shanghai, on the 29th
of November, 1861, after having spent upwards of thirty years in China in
the promotion of the Christian faith and the advancement of knowledge,
deeply lamented by foreigners, as well as by the Chinese, who always found
him their true and confident friend. This gentleman had the kindness to
assemble under his simple but kindly roof the various members of his
mission, who are no less useful in increasing our acquaintance with the
Chinese language and literature than in diffusing the blessings of the
gospel, thus furnishing the members of the _Novara_ Expedition with an
opportunity of personal intercourse with these gentlemen. We here became
acquainted with Mr. Wells Williams, so highly esteemed and so widely known
for his profound historical and philological works[147] respecting China,
as also with Messrs. Syle, Aichison, Macy, Jones, and Blodgett,
missionaries distinguished for their extensive acquirements in Chinese;
and in the course of this agreeable and interesting intercourse were so
fortunate as to obtain information respecting a variety of topics, many of
them suggested by Dr. Pfitzmaier, and recommended by him to our
investigation. On most of these topics accurate intelligence was in the
course of our voyage transmitted to the Imperial Academy of Sciences; of
the remainder elaborate and comprehensive particulars are reserved for the
scientific publications of the Expedition.

We may, however, more closely investigate here one topic of universal
interest, namely, the latest researches respecting the very remarkable,
little known, half-savage tribe, known as the Miau-Tze.

These extraordinary human beings are usually encountered in the provinces
of Kwei-chan, Yun-nan, Szechuen, Hunan, Kwang-si, and the western part of
Kwang-tung. The wild tribes of the island of Formosa belong, on the
contrary, to an entirely different race. In the Imperial Dictionary of
Kang-hi, the sign [Chinese character(s)], _miau_ (a compound of the words
"flower" and "meadow"), signifies "germinating seeds," "blades of grass
springing from the seed-vessels." The sign [Chinese character(s)], _tsz_,
on the other hand, is that usually employed to express son, or descendant.
In accordance with this explanation, the Chinese also seem to consider the
Miau-tze as children of the soil, as aborigines, or indigenous inhabitants
of the country. In their descriptions of this singular people they divide
them into "Sang" and "Schuh." _Sang_, ordinarily used when speaking of
fruit, signifies "green, unripe,"--_schuh_ again means "ripe," or, when
speaking of food, the former signifies "raw," the latter "thoroughly
cooked." By these means they discriminate them into the savage independent
"green" Miau-tze, and the subjugated more civilized "ripe" Miau-tze. The
subjection and civilization of these latter are however as yet very
problematical. As in days long gone by, so up to the present hour, the
Miau-tze are restless and troublesome neighbours to the Chinese. Dr.
Bridgman has lately translated into English the sketches made by a Chinese
scholar upon the Miau-tze, during his travels in the province of
Kwei-chan, by which he has added greatly to our stock of information
respecting those "children of the soil;" the work consists of two volumes
in 8vo, containing about 82 sketches or delineations. Each of these fills
one page, the handwriting being condensed or expanded according to the
amount of the contents, while that opposite contains an illustration
elucidatory of the text. This very rare work divides the Miau-tze into 82
tribes according to their customs, more or less savage, very few of whom
possess any trace of a written language, recording the most important
events simply by certain marks on a stick, or by what are called
"tallies," and subsisting upon wild fruit, fish, and the flesh of wild
animals. They usually go about barefooted, are very scantily clad, lead a
life full of privation and hardship, and in all their troubles have
recourse to the invocation of the evil spirits. Only very few of their
race follow agriculture, or any branch of industry, or worship Buddha in
their festivals.[148] Some of these however seem to be more or less
crossed with Chinese blood, as, for example, the Tsche-Tsai-Miau, in the
district of Kutschan, whither the rebel Ma-san-pai formerly fled with 600
of his followers, when his attempt, under his feudal leader, Mu-san-Kwei,
to overthrow the reigning dynasty, failed of success. Many of these
fugitives formed connections with the native women, and their descendants
are now known by the name of the six hundred savage Miau families.

Adjoining Dr. Bridgman's residence, is a school maintained at the expense
of the mission, in which twenty-four Chinese girls are during five years
instructed in reading and writing their mother tongue, in arithmetic, and
in the rudiments of Christianity, after which they are provided with a
small portion and married to Chinese Christians of good character.
Selected under the idea that very favourable results may be anticipated,
if the various subjects in which the scholars are instructed are imparted
to them in their native language, English is entirely omitted. Interesting
and extraordinary, however, as it is to hear American ladies imparting
instruction in the Chinese language, this method of teaching has many
drawbacks, and the mission itself and society in general would derive far
more advantage, if these poor females should be instructed in English,
thus widening the horizon of their knowledge.

In the boys' school, also supported by the mission, another method of
teaching is in use. The children learn an epistle first in Chinese,
afterwards in English, when they are called upon to translate the Chinese
into English. Thus we heard one lad rehearse the Book of Ruth, first in
Chinese, and then in English. He was then examined in English upon the
meaning of certain passages, when he replied with great accuracy in the
same language. Education in these schools is mainly intrusted to ladies.
Two of these, Miss Jones and Miss Conover, displayed remarkable
attainments in Chinese, besides their really marvellous store of
information. None of the teachers are married, while none of the wives of
the missionaries interfere with the school, but employ themselves in
superintending the education of their own children. We found forty Chinese
boys receiving their education at the expense of the mission, whose
parents have to sign a written engagement that they will not withdraw
their children from the institution for a period of ten years, in fact,
till the completion of their education. This precaution is absolutely
necessary, owing to the fickle nature of the Chinese, else it would be a
by no means rare occurrence for the parents to insist on the child
returning home, possibly just at the critical moment when the beneficent
influence of Christian culture is beginning to spring up in the soul. On
the whole, this mission has splendid results to show. We saw one scholar,
who at present forms one of the staff of teachers, and speaks and writes
English absolutely better than his native language. Another young Chinese,
sent out at the expense of the mission, spent eight years at Yale College
in Massachusetts, and at present earns his maintenance by translating
English documents into Chinese and _vice versa_, for the mercantile houses
of the place.

Dr. Bridgman is at once founder and president of the first scientific
association in Shanghai, the "North China Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society," including among its members almost all the foreigners resident
in Shanghai, who assemble regularly every winter for intellectual and
literary recreation, and publish from time to time in a periodical of
their own, details of the efforts, adventures, and experiences of their
colleagues in promoting the objects of the association.

An extraordinary meeting was held in honour of the _Novara_ voyagers, at
which about forty persons were present. The President, Dr. Bridgman,
welcomed our commander and his subordinates with a few cordial remarks,
which was responded to by Commodore Wuellerstorff, after which the writer
of these lines had the honour to deliver in English a brief address,
touching on the chief aims of the Expedition and its scientific objects,
stating that its chief purpose was less the promotion of purely scientific
knowledge, than by ample, long-continued practice to provide material of
suitable quality for our youthful budding navy, to unfurl the standard of
Austria in localities where it had never before been seen, to effect
treaties of commerce with foreign nations, to knit the various capitals
which we should visit in our cruise by the tie of science, to open
correspondence with their various institutes, and to make collections,
chiefly of those objects of natural history, the acquisition of which,
owing to their great value or the difficulty of transport, is almost
impossible to the single traveller. The hearty reception which had been
accorded the Expedition in Shanghai rendered it doubly incumbent on us to
explain the various purposes we had in view, and the original points of
inquiry to which we were restricted by the track definitely assigned to
us, as also to account for the shortness of our stay in each port, and the
fact that our prescribed route led us sometimes to visit places either
politically or nautically well known.

After the close of this short lecture, several of those present rose to
speak, amongst others the United States Plenipotentiary, Mr. Reed, who
expressed his sincere pleasure at having been privileged during his stay
in China to meet with the commander of an Austrian frigate engaged with
his gallant companions in so grand a mission.

Mr. Reed spoke in high terms of the scientific exertions being made by
Germany, and recalled in animated terms the splendid services of A. von
Humboldt, whom the news of the death of Washington (14th Dec. 1799) found
already occupied in scientific research in the primeval forests of South
America, and who still (August, 1858) continued to display such marvellous
intellectual activity.

Besides Mr. Reed, we also made the personal acquaintance of the French
Plenipotentiary, Baron Gros; the ambassadors of England and Russia were
already gone, the former to Japan, the latter to the Amur. We were
introduced to Baron Gros at the house of M. de Montigny, the French
Consul, who during a residence of many years in China has occupied himself
not alone with upholding the prestige and influence of "_la grande
nation_," but has also rendered conspicuous services to science and
agriculture. To him is due the credit of having in 1847 dispatched to
Europe the first seeds of what is called the Chinese sugar-cane (_Sorghum
saccharatum_), and of having introduced to agriculturists that remarkable
species of grass, with which, in consequence of its many useful qualities,
hundreds of thousands of acres have since that period been planted in
various parts of the globe. M. de Montigny distinguished the members of
our Expedition in every way, and presented them with numerous specimens of
seeds from Northern China.[149]

The visit paid to Baron Gros by two of the naturalists left by no means an
agreeable impression. The French ambassador is a tall, commanding,
powerfully-built man, about fifty years of age, with a full, round,
beardless face covered with freckles, and hair of a light colour. He
seemed pleased to speak of himself and his connections, and repeatedly
proclaimed himself an admirer of German men of science, who was in
correspondence with M. von Humboldt. "You know," quoth the Baron,
apparently desirous of explaining his meaning, "he that wrote the Kosmos."
The two members of our Expedition coloured up; to pronounce the name of
Humboldt to German men of science, and deem it necessary to state his
literary claims, was sufficiently embarrassing. One of them endeavoured to
turn the conversation to the gulf of Petchi-li, whence Baron Gros had just
returned after the ratification of the treaty of peace. He showed them a
hasty sketch of a portion of the great wall of China, to which he had paid
a visit when in the gulf of Petchi-li, and had made the sketch on the
spot. The natives with whom he came in contact during his stay in the
North he described as destitute and poor to an extraordinary degree, but
anything but hostile to foreigners. They asked for with eagerness and
seized with avidity the entrails of animals which the sailors were about
to throw away; on empty bottles being thrown overboard, they swam a
considerable distance to rescue them. With respect to the political events
in the Pei-ho and Tien-Tsin, his Excellency, whether out of diplomatic
reserve or for other reasons we do not know, preserved profound
silence.[150]

A variety of circumstances, however, may have contributed to make the
Baron less susceptible to every other thing than his everlasting "I."
Baron Gros had in fact been subjected to the very great inconvenience of
the Propellor _Audacieuse_, which had been brought from France, having
suddenly become unseaworthy, so that he had to abandon her. She was making
from 100 to 140 tons of water per diem, and there was nothing for it but
to have the vessel taken with all speed to the docks at Whampoa for
repairs, while the envoy had to return to Europe by another opportunity.
Moreover, the Baron had been attacked by a disorder of common occurrence
in hot countries, namely, a furuncle, which is exceedingly painful, and
obstinately resists every remedy. Whoever is of a constitution liable to
such attacks is never free from them till he gains a colder climate. In
the case of the unfortunate Baron, these went on continually increasing,
and on one of his compatriots being asked in society what was the cause of
the absence of the French ambassador, replied with an arch look, "_le
pauvre baron a quatre-vingt cloux_." In fact, the annoyance caused by this
malady is redoubled by the little sympathy accorded to those afflicted
with it, who are only rallied or laughed at.

Another personage who, at the period of our stay in Shanghai, attained a
rather unenviable notoriety by his strange conduct, and did but little to
raise the reputation of France in these latitudes, was the Marquis de
Chassiron. By his marriage with one of the Princesses Murat (since dead),
he was allied to the Emperor of the French, whom he occasionally spoke of
in an off-hand way as "mon neveu, l'Empereur." Meagre, wizen,
spindle-shanked, and ringletted, in coloured check pantaloons, blue
frock, open-work cravat of Gros de Naples, and dancing-master's pumps,
resembling much more a second-rate Paris dandy than a diplomatist, it
seemed as though he must have been dispatched to this out-of-the-way part
of the world for quite other than a diplomatic object, although he took
great pains to spread the report that he had been appointed the successor
of Baron Gros in the Embassy.

One day the Commodore and some members of the Expedition received an
invitation from the kind and hospitable English Consul, Mr. Brook
Robertson, to be present at a reception at the Consulate of the Tau-Tai,
or highest Chinese official of the city.[151]

We the more readily congratulated ourselves on this invitation, as, owing
to the sudden departure of the Tau-Tai, we missed the opportunity of
paying him a visit in his own palace in the city. Punctually at the
appointed hour, 2 P.M., a formal procession was seen approaching the
buildings of the English Consulate. In front were carried numerous titles
and insignia, then the Tau-Tai in a large and handsome sedan-chair, and
finally a noisy "following," in the shape of a rabble of servants. Mr.
Robertson received the Tau-Tai at the threshold of his house, and greeted
him with the customary Tschin-Tschin, moving the hands closely folded a
few times over the breast.

All present kept the head covered, making in like manner a few
Tschin-tschins, and then accompanied the visitor to the reception-room, in
which were five stools, the seat of honour being on the left. As soon as
the Tau-Tai was seated, the rest took their seats, and a proposition was
made in consequence of the truly tropical heat, contrary to Chinese
notions of courtesy, to divest one's self of one's head-gear. The
Mandarin, at all events, seemed as little loth to lay aside his
funnel-shaped straw-cap, with its blue button and peacock's feather, as
the Europeans present to doff their uniform caps.

The presentation of the commander and the author of this narrative by Mr.
Meadows, who acted as interpreter, gave the Tau-Tai an opportunity of
inquiring of the English Consul whether our frigate had been at the gulf
of Petcheli. Mr. Robertson replied that the _Novara_ was the first
war-ship of a German power which had ever visited the Yang-tse-Kiang and
Wusung rivers, and that the frigate was bound on a voyage of scientific
discovery. This led to a running fire of questions and answers, during the
course of which two attendants were engaged alternately in filling a small
pipe with tobacco, which they handed to the Tau-Tai. The latter drew a few
puffs, permitted the smoke to escape through his nostrils, after which
his pipe was again replenished with a small supply of tobacco.

We next had an example of the custom, already mentioned, of wiping the
face with a hot damp towel, one of the attendants dipping a rather thick
piece of linen cloth in a tub of hot water, which was then wrung out, when
the cloth was presented to the Mandarin, who, without in any way
interrupting the conversation, from time to time wiped the perspiration
from his brow.

The Tau-Tai had a well-made, handsome figure, pleasing, rather
intelligent, features, a round, smooth, delicate face, without any trace
of beard, eyes as usual drawn up at the outer corner, small elegant hands,
and beautifully tapered fingers, with very long nails. His dress was very
simple; he wore, for the sake of coolness, a shirt made of thin bamboo
shoots, with a long, yellowish, loose surcoat, white drawers, and, instead
of the usual Chinese shoe with its high cork soles, or white thick
gaiters, he wore light shoes of European make. His head was covered with a
cone-shaped straw-hat of very fine texture, with a red tassel and blue
knot in the midst, and a dark green peacock's feather, extending
horizontally backwards.

Business over, a table was covered, and the Tau-Tai invited to partake.
According to the Chinese custom, only confectionery, preserves, and fruit
were handed round. The liquids consisted of sherry, liqueurs, Chinese wine
or Samschoo (made from rice and imbibed from cups in lieu of glasses), and
green and almond tea. The Mandarin drank to all present, and seemed to
take more to sherry and Maraschino than to his own native drinks. The slim
liqueur bottle, with its neat gilt label and the thick cork stopper,
seemed especially to attract his attention.

After a few commonplace observations, the Tau-Tai once more turned the
conversation upon Austria, and remarked he had never before heard of that
power. Mr. Meadows endeavoured to prompt the memory of the Chinese
official, produced Muirhead's universal geography translated into Chinese,
turned up therein the section relating to Austria, and handed the book to
the Tau-Tai, who had the entire passage read to him by one of his
attendants, that he might "get up" the country from which the strangers
had come who were seated on his left and right hands.

The inquisitiveness of every Chinese now displayed itself in a series of
inquiries as to the principal products and articles of export of the
Empire, and he expressed a hope he should ere long see more of the
"Austrian Mandarins" in Shanghai. The _Novara_ travellers on their side
with a patriotic pride, readily pardonable under the circumstances,
endeavoured through the medium of the Government interpreter to leave the
best possible impression of their native country upon the mind of the
Tau-Tai, by giving a glowing description of the Austrian Empire, its
natural advantages, and its people. Of numbers the worthy man seemed to
have no definite idea, for the remark that the Empire contained (1st
August, 1858) very nearly 40,000,000 inhabitants seemed greatly to
astonish him, although this is probably barely one-tenth of the population
of the Chinese Empire.[152]

Just as the Tau-Tai was preparing to set out on his return, a tremendous
tumult was suddenly heard in the street. It seemed like a popular
insurrection, and servants were forthwith sent out to ascertain the cause
of this unexpected shindy, who came back presently with the intelligence
that an English sailor had struck a coolie of the suite a blow on the face
with his fist, so violent that he was seriously injured, and was bleeding
profusely. The Tau-Tai made his appearance on the portico. As soon as the
injured man saw his master approaching, he flung himself before him
imploring aid, and exhibiting his face streaming with blood, and the wound
gaping open. The Tau-Tai ordered the man to rise, and delivered him to the
Chinese police. Occasionally when a Chinese receives a wound in a quarrel
of this nature he will abstain from wiping off the blood-stains from his
face for weeks together, finding, it should seem, some satisfaction in
being able to exhibit them. This done, the procession resumed its march.
In front strode a man who from time to time administered a sounding thwack
to the gong, after which he rushed through the streets bawling like a
Stentor, that the people might crowd on one side and leave the Tau-Tai
space to pass unobstructed. The rear was brought up with police,
catch-poles with long bamboo poles, and the executioner with his axe--the
never-failing attendant on such occasions,--who accompanies it, however,
only as a sort of allegorical personage, to impress upon the yelling
crowds around the consequences of disobedience, and of rebellion against
constituted authority.

The only important excursion we made from Shanghai was to the Jesuit
Mission of Sikkawei, twelve miles distant. Our excellent host, Mr. James
Hogg, of the well-known firm of Lindsay and Co.,[153] and Consul for the
Hanse towns, to whose great kindness we are deeply indebted, was so kind
as to order his pretty little yacht _Flirt_ to be got ready for our
accommodation, and we set off, accompanied by the heroic Mr. Gray, of the
American house of Russell and Co., who lost one foot while fighting
against the Tai-ping rebels before the very gates of Shanghai. As the
Europeans are in the habit of using these pleasure-boats as residences
during their visit to the interior, so as not to be dependent upon the
somewhat uncertain hospitality of the Chinese, they are provided with
every accessory to comfort, being fitted with a neat cabin, a small
library, boudoir, berth-cabin, &c. They usually carry an immense spread of
canvas, and during calms are propelled like the native boats with one big
oar from the stern, which serves at the same time as a rudder. The sail up
the Wusung, in which upwards of a hundred sail of merchantmen, and above a
thousand junks, were lying at anchor, was very interesting. Many of the
junks lying off the Catholic cathedral of Tonka-du displayed a flag with a
white cross on a black ground, in token of the religious faith of the
crew. Here also we saw for the first time some Siamese ships, built in
Siam, for the most part on European models. Of these we counted eleven. By
way of ensign, they had an elephant rather nicely drawn, sometimes on a
red, sometimes on a blue field, according to the fancy or the taste of the
owner. These vessels have Siamese crews and English captains, and are
armed with ten or twelve cannon, so that his Siamese Majesty can at a
moment's notice use his little fleet of merchantmen for warlike purposes.

The channel, 200 or 300 fathoms wide, which unites the Wusung with the
internal network of small rivers, is called the Wuang-Po, a designation
which some authorities assume to be the name of its constructor, while
others maintain that it is derived from _wong_, yellow, and applies to the
colour of the water, just as Whampoa, near Canton, signifies the yellow
anchorage. Nothing has so much contributed to that immense activity of
commerce, which we marvel at among the Chinese, as their vast canal
system, the introduction of which was pursued with such energy in the 7th
century.[154] The innumerable artificial canals, with which the whole
north of China is intersected, and which by their admirably planned system
of arrangement unite all the lakes and navigable rivers of the Empire with
each other, make it possible to voyage through every province of the
Empire without having once to leave the boat. They atone for the great
want of good roads, and even make the absence of railroads less
perceptible in a country where the value of labour is so unprecedentedly
low.

As soon as we leave Shanghai behind, with its immense commercial fleet,
the scenery beyond becomes tame. The banks on either side are low, and far
as the eye can reach not a single hill is to be seen, not even a rising
slope--nothing but a flat alluvial soil, every inch of which seems
diligently tilled, or otherwise made useful.

After we had sailed several miles in the _Flirt_ we came to a branch of
the great canal, where we shifted into a smaller but not less elegant
boat, the property of Mr. Gray, which drew less water, and in which we
were to reach the Jesuit mission. At this season, however, owing to the
lowness of the water, navigation was only continued with great difficulty,
and notwithstanding the astonishing dexterity with which our worthy Lau-tu
(the old chief) conned our craft through the sharp bends of the river, we
were at last compelled to halt, and perform the rest of the distance,
about two miles, on foot.

We now found ourselves strolling through fields planted with rice and
cotton, through cabbage and vegetable gardens, occasionally even over
graves, which rose in mounds here and there along our path. Sometimes in
the distance we could descry small villages and solitary farm-houses.

In Sikkawei we found about twenty Jesuits, French and Italians, all of
genuine Chinese appearance, with heads half-shaved, long queues stretching
to the ground, loose yellow clothes, and velvet shoes with thick cork
soles. This had a striking, almost theatrical effect. We were ushered into
the reception-room, and there offered refreshment. The conversation soon
became brisk, which added to the singularity of the scene, as the seeming
Chinese, sitting in a circle round the table, and smoking perfumed tobacco
out of small long-stemmed pipes, began, in fluent French or liquid
Italian, to discuss Paris, Naples, Vienna, or politics and art.

This Mission is supported by the Propaganda of Rome, as also by voluntary
contributions. About 80 pupils, chiefly children of poor parents, are
instructed in the Chinese language and literature, in reading, writing,
arithmetic, and drawing, and in the tenets of the Roman Catholic faith; on
the other hand, little anxiety is manifested for their instruction in
French or English, or in providing them with any practical mechanical
instruction. In this mode of education the main object seems to be to
enable the students more readily to reach the highest offices in the state
by imparting to them a thorough grounding in Chinese literature, and by
these means to ensure for them religious influence and protection.
Accordingly, strenuous efforts are made to increase the number of
scholars, and in order to facilitate this aim, as in the case of the
Indians of Central and Southern America, their observance of various
heathen rites is connived at, as, for example, the worship of their
ancestors, the ceremonies at the death of a relation, &c. &c.

One branch of art, in which some of the scholars have, owing to their
having naturally a turn for it, attained considerable proficiency, is
wood-engraving. In the church attached to the Mission are shown a number
of altar-ornaments, chiefly figures very beautifully carved in wood, the
work of a Jesuit of Spanish extraction, whose talent and enthusiasm seem
to have laid the foundation of this school of image-carvers. In what is
called the model-room are numbers of figures and busts designed by the
practised hand of the brother alluded to. Here too are some heads of the
Saviour, very beautifully executed in clay by the Chinese scholars, as
also Madonnas, busts of Queen Victoria, Prince Albert, and the Emperor
Napoleon III. These are doubly extraordinary, when we remember the slight
instruction and very scanty assistance bestowed on them while in course of
execution; their actual value however is small, for at present, as none of
the Jesuits in the Mission have any very decided taste for the art,
instruction in it has almost entirely ceased.

The achievements of the present members of the Society of Jesus, in China,
suffer greatly, measured by the standard of what was accomplished by their
renowned brethren in previous centuries; one looks in vain for the high
attainments, the self-sacrificing zeal, the practical talents of other
times, and Sikkawei, with its present spiritual occupants, cannot leave a
very pleasing impression on any unprejudiced Catholic. There is an utter
lack of all those qualities which once formed the renown and the title to
admiration of the Jesuits in China. One looks for, but fails to find, a
library corresponding to the dignity of the Mission, or mathematical or
medical instruments, or a chemical laboratory: in lieu of these there seem
to prevail a deficiency of Christian toleration for these unmistakeable
adjuncts of true education and enlightenment. At all events, we judged as
much from a remark made by the brother who accompanied us round the
building, who spoke some words in Chinese to the gaping crowd of
long-tailed scholars, who kept pressing upon us, and then turning to us,
observed in French,--"I have informed our pupils that our present guests
are Roman Catholics, and therefore _true_ Christians, because we
occasionally have English visitors at the Mission, and they are heretics."
Apparently the intolerant padre was reckoning without his host, for there
were several Protestants among the party!

Throughout the province of Kaing-su there are at present 80,000 Chinese
Catholics, that is to say, who profess Catholicism, though having but a
very superficial idea of its spirit and its reality.

In returning to our boat we availed ourselves of the mode of conveyance in
most common use in China, the sedan-chair, or couch. The ordinary
sedan-chair differs little in exterior form and interior arrangement from
those still occasionally used in some of the out-of-the-way, old-fashioned
towns, both of Germany and England. Owing to the extreme cheapness of
labour, the least well-to-do classes of Chinese are able to avail
themselves of these convenient conveyances, the use of which is doubly
agreeable in such a hot climate. Indeed, long journeys are very frequently
made by this mode of transport. As a rule, the sedan-bearers get over from
twenty to twenty-five miles per diem, charging for that distance one
dollar, in addition to their food, consisting of tea, rice, vegetables,
and cakes. Baggage and merchandise of all sorts are conveyed by coolies,
each carrying with ease 110 _catties_, equal to 146 lbs. With such a
burthen he will trudge over lofty mountain passes, and without much effort
will cover thirteen miles a day. If special dispatch is required, the
burthen must be reduced one-half, when the coolie, keeping at the trot,
will get over double the distance in one day; what is gained in speed
being lost in power.

On our return to Shanghai, we visited the celebrated six-storied Pagoda,
Long-Sah, which is traditionally said to have been erected about A.D. 250,
during the period of the Three Empires. Of all the Pagodas hitherto known,
not even excepting the well-known specimen at Canton, it is the best
preserved, and forms one massive, wide quadrangular tower, about 150 feet
high, arranged in six stories, one of which has running around it a richly
carved balcony. The pyramidal roof has turned-up angles, to which are
suspended bells, which when agitated by the wind give forth their music.
From the highest story, to which access is obtained by a stone staircase,
there is a rather agreeable, pretty extensive view over the country, and
its cultivated surface, stretching away till, at 200 miles from Shanghai,
to the north and north-west, rises a range of mountains, of which of
course not a glimpse is to be seen hence, the prospect in this direction
having no defined limit. This panoramic view gives an excellent idea of
the characteristics of a Chinese landscape, the various methods of
cultivation, the situation of the valleys, and, above all, the ceaseless
tide of traffic, as evidenced by the almost innumerable artificial
water-channels which intersect the country in every direction. Quite close
to the Pagoda is a Buddha temple, the well-known Lung-hwo, erected A.D.
230. Of the seventy Buddhist and Taouist temples of the province this is
the largest and most beautiful. The rear of the edifice is adorned with
countless figures, sometimes of colossal dimensions, in wood, plaster, and
porcelain, richly carved and gilt. There is also a female statue among
these Chinese saints, the attitude strongly suggestive of a Madonna.

This temple is plainly in connection with the Pagoda, and the various
small chambers behind it seem to have been destined for the accommodation
of priests and devout pilgrims. According to an old Chinese tradition this
temple owes its erection to the following circumstance:--a queen from the
south, who had anchored her boat one night in the Whampoa Channel near
Wusung, suddenly beheld a light shoot up amid the tall grass, and rise
towards heaven, in consequence of which she gave orders for a temple to be
built on the site.

One of the most interesting episodes of our stay at Shanghai consisted in
a genuine Chinese banquet, given by a wealthy native merchant, named
Ta-ki, a warm friend of all foreigners, in honour of the Austrian
Expedition. The huge invitation cards, written, according to the usual
practice of the country, in Chinese characters upon blood-red paper, and
folded in envelopes of the same brilliant hue, were sent round to the
residences of the guests some days beforehand.

At 8 P.M. the feast began. Ta-ki's house, like those of all the wealthy
Chinese, is surrounded by a massive wall, six or seven feet in height, and
painted white. After passing through a narrow gateway, the visitor finds
himself at once in the usual apartments. These were adorned for the
occasion with large coloured lanterns, which despite their numbers shed a
mild and most agreeable light.[155] Along the walls, which were richly
gilt, hung quantities of sententious native maxims, written with Indian
ink, sometimes in Chinese characters, sometimes in Tartar, on white or
yellow rolls of paper. The greatest attention appeared to have been paid
to the preparation of the reception-room, whose form was a rather narrow
oblong, in which at the far end was erected a platform, where a strolling
company acted Chinese theatricals. The musicians sat on the stage. The
company belonged to one of those innumerable wandering troops which are
engaged for a day or two now by the community, now by wealthy Mandarins,
to give some theatrical representations, which it seems must in China
form the accompaniment of every important event, whether joyous or
sorrowful.

At those performances which are given in public, the multitude is admitted
gratis, and of this privilege they avail themselves to the utmost. Each
man selects the best seat for himself, on the street, in a tree, or on a
roof. Mandarins, however, and rich private individuals have their own
little stage scenes in the interior of their usually spacious mansions, in
which from time to time they have theatrical representations for the
amusement of a small circle of friends. Some Mandarins even go the length
of having their own players, who receive regular annual pay, and form part
of the household.

Notwithstanding the very extensive collections of Chinese plays, with
several of which the learned classes of Europe have been made acquainted
by the valuable labours of Julien, Bazin, Remusat, and others, there are
but a very few of true literary value. The plot of most of them is
exceedingly simple, the actors themselves specify the characters they are
to play; between each scene there is usually a lack of connection, and
frequently the most telling scenes and situations are marred by the most
arrant trash, or the coarsest jests. Only a very small number of these
rise above the level of the buffoonery of former ages, and judging by the
accounts given by travellers, who have been present at such entertainments
in even the large cities, including Pekin itself, the dramatic art would
as yet seem to be in its infancy in China.[156] The company which was
assembled in the hospitable mansion of Ta-ki, to do honour to the members
of the _Novara_ Expedition, was not calculated to impress them favourably
with the scope of the Chinese drama. The piece appointed consisted of
events in the ancient history of China, for which Chinese dramatic poets
have a special predilection, owing to the abundance of material from which
to choose, although the multitude seem to have but little sympathy with
it. Even our host, who spoke the Canton-English, as it is called, could
give us but little explanation or enlightenment as to the plot, and
contented himself with repeatedly remarking that the piece related to
"old, old times!"

Notwithstanding the universal custom, according to which women are not
permitted to enter a theatre, so that even the female characters have to
be played by men dressed to represent the part, the majority of the
present troupe were girls of from 14 to 20 years of age, who, stained red
or white, and elegantly arrayed, appeared mostly in Mandarin dresses on
the stage. The most outrageously absurd of the scenes were those most in
favour with the numerous domestics who, besides the invited guests, formed
the audience. Thus, there was a roar of laughter when a nurse entered with
a child in her arms, which had the face of an old soldier, with grey
beard, whiskers, and moustachios. They sang a long, rather melancholious
ditty, and then retired, without there appearing to be the slightest
connection between this and the following scene. We noted the evident
predilection of the Chinese actors for a high-pitched falsetto tone of
voice when speaking, which, by the way, must render their assumption of
female parts much more easy, and on the present occasion they probably
were desirous of giving us a specimen of their skill in this
accomplishment. The music on such occasions is, if possible, even more
discordant and monotonous than the delivery, and is not confined to merely
accompanying the couplets, but continues to play during the intervals till
the ear is utterly wearied.

At the close of each act a large board covered with a red cloth was
brought on the stage and placed beneath the feet of the actors; on this
the steward of the house placed a present for the troupe about four
dollars' worth of copper _cash_, which was forthwith carried away. This
was apparently the only intimation to most of the spectators that a piece
was ended, and a fresh one about to begin.

After these theatrical representations had lasted about an hour and a half
a long pause ensued. One longed to escape outside into the fresh air, to
get rid of the wearying sensation of the performances, and the stifling
heat which prevailed in the room. The guests were at liberty to walk
without obstruction through the various apartments of the extensive
residence, and accordingly stumbled upon rooms which are usually, as it
were, hermetically sealed to a foreigner, viz. the apartments of the
women. Ta-ki carried his hospitality even this length, and presented us to
his wives, as also to his grey-haired mother, seventy years old, for whom
he showed the utmost love and respect. Ta-ki's wives, four or five in
number, had "assisted" at the theatrical performances, each seated on
elevated seats expressly prepared for them, and behaved with the greatest
courtesy and ease of manner. They seemed not to have the slightest thought
of showing off, or of tittering or joking with the strangers. All were
attired in silk, and most tastefully decorated with jewels; all had the
usual painfully distorted small feet, which greatly interfered with their
powers of locomotion. They did not attend at the banquet, but had their
food served in the private apartments.

For supper the quondam theatre was converted into a banqueting-hall. But
there was no long wide table set out as in Europe, only small
four-cornered tables covered with red cloth, at each of which three
Europeans and one Chinese took their seats; the duty of the latter being
to do the honours to his companions in the name of the host, who took his
seat beside the Commodore, and to minister to their comfort.

As it was the object to give us the most accurate idea possible of a
genuine Chinese repast, everything was eliminated which could in any way
interfere with the design, and we had accordingly to begin with dessert
and conclude with the soup, as also to convey the various descriptions of
food to our mouths with thin strips of ivory ("chop-sticks"), instead of
knives and forks.

The peculiarity of Chinese usages, so directly opposed to those of Europe,
became likewise strikingly apparent in the course of the meal. And as in
China the mark of courtesy is to keep the head covered instead of removing
the hat, so the place of honour is on the left hand; the ancestors are
ennobled instead of the descendants (which is at once more sensible and
more economical); the characters in writing run from right to left instead
of the reverse; the mourning colour is white instead of black; the natives
carefully extirpate every sign of a beard, instead of cherishing it as a
symbol of mature, dignified manhood; thus also meals begin with the food
with which we terminate ours, confectionery and fruit. When we were all
seated, each table was forthwith covered with a profusion of the most
varied dishes on beautiful plates of stained porcelain, and while we were
still engaged in attempting to discover the mysterious ingredients of
these, the Chinese who was doing the honours at our table was exerting
himself to select and lay before us the most dainty morsels of each dish.
In performing this part of his functions he thought only to act with more
care and attention, in drawing each of the twain chop-sticks between his
own lips and withdrawing them before he fished up a fresh piece and laid
it on our plate! The dexterity with which all Chinese use these
chop-sticks, which are usually made of ivory, ebony, or bamboo, borders
on the marvellous. In their hands, held between their fingers, they become
like a pair of pincers, with which they can pick up the smallest objects,
and can eat rice-grains, beans, or peas as easily as they can separate the
flakes of a fish from its skin, or remove the shell of a hard-boiled egg.

As to the ingredients of the dishes presented, we must frankly avow that
by far the greater number were utterly unknown to us, for the Chinese
cuisine, oddly enough, sets great store on making the materials
unrecognizable, and altering their natural flavour by various recipes and
culinary mysteries. According to the inquiries which we made of our
carver, our host seemed so anxious to fulfil to the letter his promise to
give us a real Chinese repast, that he had resolved on not sparing us a
single one of the rarer dainties of Chinese epicures. Thus we not only had
swallows' nests, lapwings' eggs, and steamed frogs, but also roasted
silk-worms, shark-fins, stag and buffalo tendons, biche-de-mar, bamboo
roots, sea-weed, half-fledged chickens, and various other natural
delicacies. The table was supplied at least three times with fresh
delicacies, and we believe we do not exaggerate when we estimate the
number of different dishes at not less than half a hundred. Meat of all
sorts was at a discount, and was served up in small morsels ready
carved;[157] on the other hand, rice and vegetables were presented in
every imaginable form. During the meal one young girl, who had played a
part in the dramas, was incessantly occupied with filling for each guest a
very small cup with a warm beverage distilled from millet, thus carrying
out the code of Chinese civility, that the cup should never be suffered to
be empty, and therefore, that however little has once been drunk it must
forthwith be replenished. Of the juice of the grape the Chinese make no
use, although there are many districts in the country which are eminently
adapted to the growth of the vine. All the native drinks consist of
nothing but poor-flavoured, highly-perfumed drinks, chiefly distilled from
millet and rice, and known by the general name of Samshoo, although this
name is solely applicable to that obtained from rice, which somewhat
resembles arrack. After the meal is over there are no spirits presented,
but only tea, usually the common green tea, or else a tea prepared from
almonds. The Chinese are, on the whole, a very temperate people, and even
their passion for smoking opium is rather a vice among the masses of the
coast provinces and the large towns, than of the interior of the kingdom.
During the banquet, as well as after it, there were further theatrical
exhibitions, but the guests, who had been sufficiently wearied with the
first of these, preferred to retire quietly to their own residences, and,
seated in a rocking-chair on the delicious verandah, to recall all the
peculiarities of the entertainment at which they had been present.

The rites of hospitality to strangers were not, however, limited in
fulfilment to Ta-ki, since the various consuls settled at Shanghai, as
well as several of the English, American, and German merchants, invited
the members of the Expedition to dinner-parties given in their honour,
each vying with the rest in refined courtesy. An especially pleasant
memory attaches to one indication of this feeling, the spontaneous
offering of a number of Germans to our commander and his associates. We
were sitting in the house of Mr. James Hogg, the Hanseatic Consul, when
from the garden there suddenly arose a serenade of men's voices, singing
German melodies. Surprised and deeply affected, the entire company rose
from table and strolled into the garden, but the serenaders were concealed
behind a group of trees, and as they withdrew, singing, the last cadence
of a thrilling patriotic song was heard melting in the distance!

The Germans already constitute a by no means inconsiderable portion of the
foreign community of China, and it is painful to observe what slender
encouragement and support their energy and industry have as yet met with
from the various governments of Germany. The number of Bremen ships which
visited the harbour of Shanghai has of late years equalled that of the
United States, and would be very greatly increased if the German
mercantile community and the home-shippers to the Chinese market could
depend upon protection such as the English and French can rely upon. The
German States, such, for instance, as the Hanseatic Towns, Prussia,
Oldenburg, have indeed unsalaried Consuls here, but the shrewd, material
Chinese people require something more than an empty intercession--they
require to be convinced by an unmistakeable physical ability to back these
representatives. Many a crying injustice, which the helpless German
merchants and ship captains have to put up with without hope of redress in
the various ports of China, would not and dare not occur if but a single
German ship-of-war were stationed in Chinese waters. What the effect is,
under similar circumstances, of even one single small boat was well
illustrated by Mr. Alcock, formerly the English Consul at Shanghai,[158]
who with a small English brig blocked the mouth of the Yang-tse-kiang, and
did not suffer one single "junk" of the many hundreds stationed in the
river to put to sea under threat of firing into them until the Chinese
Government had paid attention to his demands, and surrendered for trial by
an English tribunal the murderers of an English missionary. The bare
menace of closing the river sufficed to secure the Consul in his rights,
and he speedily saw his various demands complied with. Only a month or two
later a Bremen captain sustained such severe losses through the wilful act
of the Chinese Government that he had to sell his ship, the energetic
protest of his Consul to the native authorities meeting no other
attention than an insulting chuckle over the powerlessness of the German
empire.

In consequence of the Treaty of Pekin securing to Europeans the
unobstructed navigation of all canals and rivers throughout the Celestial
Empire, the trade with China is becoming so rapidly developed, that some
remedy of this sort is imperatively needed,--if German commerce and
industry would avoid receiving a serious check, if she would not be
supplanted by other and more fortunate nations, in the endeavour to avail
herself of the great alteration for the better in the facilities for trade
in China.

The activity and energy of the English in opening up new outlets for their
native manufactures were here astonishingly visible. Hardly are the
ratifications of peace exchanged, opening the most important rivers and
harbours of the Empire to free commerce with the subjects of England, ere
the country has been surveyed and explored in every direction. A number of
English merchants ascended the Yang-tse-kiang as far as Hang-kow[159]
(mouth of trade), a city containing several millions of inhabitants,
which, in consequence of its extraordinarily advantageous site, has
already been described by Huc as the chief emporium of the 18 Provinces,
and whence all the foreign trade radiates into the interior. Others
undertook a land journey from Canton to Hang-kow; a third company ascended
the Pei-ho and visited Tien-Tsin, while yet a fourth were contemplating
the formidable undertaking of boating it up the Yang-tse-kiang from
Shanghai to Hang-kow, whence they thought of penetrating via Thibet into
British India.[160] Already information has been obtained from a variety
of these excursions, which were undertaken specially in the interests of
commerce, such as justify the most glowing expectations as to the trade
with the Yang-tse-kiang and the Pei-ho.[161] Hang-kow promises to be a
most important depot for the exportation of tea, while Tien-Tsin promises
to be not less important as an entrepot for the importation of
manufactures of every description. By the opening of these two additional
harbours, Shanghai and Canton will fall off in their ratio of increase
hitherto, but general commerce will on the whole receive a new impulse.

To the merchant and shipper, the latest intelligence from China as to the
enormous development of commerce and trade at numerous spots of the
Central Empire, hitherto undisturbed by European civilization, must be
positively astounding. It is a rich mine of the most valuable material,
which the _China Overland Trade Report_ and the _North China Herald_
presents to its readers, rendered doubly valuable through the influence
of that Freedom of Speech, which makes every mercantile nation participate
in the very latest information as to these experiments and their results.
For, so far as concerns our present direct intercourse with China, a time
must come, when more accurate notions will penetrate into even Austrian
commercial circles as to the wants of a population, and the natural wealth
of an empire, which embraces a superficial area of 3,000,000 square miles,
with a population of 400,000,000 souls, and whose entire foreign commerce
already amounts to L36,000,000, apart from the impulse which recent events
must lend it.

Notwithstanding the immense variety of natural products of the Chinese
Empire, the chief articles of export hitherto have been tea and silk, and
we shall therefore confine our attention to a few important particulars as
to those two articles.

The introduction of silk cultivation into China, one of the most ancient
industrial pursuits of the Empire, is due, if we are to believe a native
legend, to the consort of the Emperor Hwang-te, who reigned B.C. 2640. The
first mention of the mulberry tree and of silk occurs in the
Schoo-kiu,[162] "the Book of exalted solid learning--the Book of Books,"
as it were, a collection of the most ancient historical annals of the
Chinese Empire, which was compiled B.C. 484, by Confucius, from the
memoranda of former writers of history, as well as from the information
furnished by ancient monuments. Even empresses in those halcyon times did
not deem it beneath their dignity to collect mulberry-leaves and feed the
silk-worms, while various treatises were composed by imperial pens,
respecting the cultivation of that most useful plant. The interest taken
in silk-rearing by these the highest personages in the Empire, has
remained unbroken to our own day, and quite recently a Chinese governor
enriched the already copious literature upon this subject with a
comprehensive work, written with the laudable object of stimulating the
inhabitants of the silk-producing districts to a more extensive and
improved system of silk cultivating.

The two best species of mulberry, those which are best adapted for the
consumption of the worm, are: "Loo" (_Morus alba_), with long leaves,
little fruit, and firm roots, which flourishes chiefly in North China, and
"King" (_Morus nigra_), with narrow leaves, more abundant fruit, and
altogether a hardier plant, which grows chiefly in the South.

According to old Chinese notions, there are eight different species of
silk-worm, which spin their cocoons at various periods[163] of the year
between April and November.

The chief silk districts lie in the northern part of the province of
Tsche-Kiang, and the principal silk marts are the following cities:
Hoo-chow-foo, Hang-chow-foo, Keahing-fu, Nantsin, and Shoo-hing, which lie
in a sort of semi-circle about 150 miles from Shanghai.

The silk is not grown in China by wealthy landed proprietors, and "thrown"
in huge establishments, but by millions of husbandmen, each of whom calls
but a small patch of land his own, and plants it with mulberry trees,
thus, like the bee, contributing his own share towards increasing the
universal stock. During the season specially devoted to the silk-worm, old
and young, lofty and lowly, throughout the silk districts, are busily and
earnestly engaged night and day in tending the worms and winding off the
silk. When the crop is being gathered in, the chief merchants send their
agents to all parts of the chief silk districts, in order to collect and
buy up these small quantities (varying greatly in value, as may be readily
imagined), and depositing them in regularly assigned warehouses, where
they can be sorted according to quality. This done, the silk is packed in
bales of 80 _catties_, or about 106 lbs. weight, and conveyed to Shanghai
for sale, where it is once more subjected in each mercantile house to the
examination of the special "silk Inspectors," or "Testers," after passing
through whose hands, it is sorted according to quality for shipment to
Europe.

Three distinct qualities of raw silk are known in commerce, viz. Tsatli
[Chinese character(s)], Taysam [Chinese character(s)] (the big worm), and
Yuen-wha, or Yuen-fa [Chinese character(s)] (the flower of the garden).
These three leading descriptions are again subdivided into a great number
of sorts, which are usually known by the name of the trader, or his "hong"
(business).

The annual production of silk in China is estimated to amount to from
200,000 to 250,000 bales, or from 20,000,000 to 25,000,000 pounds' weight.
This, however, is a very superficial estimate; that silk cultivation,
however, must be enormously developed in China is obvious, not alone from
the immense home consumption of the article, but also from the
circumstance that, notwithstanding the immense increase in exports during
the last ten years, the price of silk has not merely remained stationary,
but is on an average absolutely less than at a period when barely
one-fourth of the quantity now exported found its way to England and
France. The price of silk is usually reckoned in Taels,[164] on the
estimate of a bale averaging 100 lbs. English. Between Shanghai and London
the bale loses on the average three per cent. in weight. There is also
usually an allowance made of 15 per cent. for cost of transport and
incidental charges from Shanghai to any English port.

On the average only one-fourth of the entire quantity of silk produced in
China, or about 6,000,000 lbs., is exported annually, of which by far the
largest quantity, perhaps as much as nine-tenths, goes to England and
France. In 1843-44, the total export from all China was only 5100 bales.
In 1859, the export of raw silk from Shanghai alone was 75,652 bales!

Besides the raw silk there are annually exported from China a large
quantity of silk-stuffs manufactured in China, crape shawls, &c. &c., to
the value of from L400,000 to L500,000, the majority of which find a
market in the United States.

The social condition of the Chinese silk-spinner is not less deplorable
and poverty-stricken than that of the workmen of Europe, who are similarly
engaged in the preparation of this costly article of luxury. As in Lyons,
in Spitalfields, or among the Silesian Mountains, the Chinese silk-weaver
lives and dies in the most abject misery, and the delicate and beautiful
fabrics of his loom are produced in a wretched hut of such mean
dimensions, that he is sometimes compelled to dig a hole in the soil in
order to find room for the treadle. However, the Chinese weaver appears in
so far better off than the same handicraftsman in Europe, that he has less
to dread from the severity of the climate, and can purchase more food,
even though his remuneration be smaller, than the weaver can possibly do
in Europe, owing to the much higher price of even the commonest
necessities of life.

The recent revolution in Chinese foreign relations will exercise a
permanent influence on the silk culture of China, and, considering the
exceedingly low rate of wages in that country, the time cannot be far
distant, when one may purchase Chinese silk in Europe more cheaply than
home-grown silk, when manufacturers will find it more profitable to
purchase this most important raw material in China, than in Italy or the
South of France. Acute business men in Hong-kong and Shanghai assured us
that it only needed an impulse from without to increase the silk
manufacture of China tenfold, and supply the annual demand for silk of the
entire globe, which, if we are to believe encyclopedias and such like
authorities, amounts to from 12,000,000 to 15,000,000 lbs. What makes
Chinese silk especially suitable for the European market is its possessing
in great perfection the two chief qualities of substance and colour,
while, on the other hand, it is inferior to that of Europe in the fineness
and glossy feel of its fibre. In Europe the silk is wound off from a
limited number of cocoons, whereas in China it is left to the discretion
of the workman to spin it from few or many cocoons as he pleases. Hence
results that inequality and unevenness in the texture of the thread, a
defect which cannot possibly be remedied by after-manipulation, and which
accordingly completely prevents its employment in the manufacture of the
more costly fabrics. This drawback, which is the main reason why Chinese
silk does not rule the European market, will however admit of being
remedied without any difficulty, so soon as the silk districts become more
easily accessible, by the introduction of European labour and machinery,
when this valuable and costly product will gain materially both in
fineness and suitability.

Only a few years since German and Austrian merchants attached but a small
value to Chinese silk as suited to our market, and it seemed to them a
positive absurdity, when any one spoke, as we ourselves repeatedly have
done from a profound conviction of its truth, of the future influence
exercised over the silk markets of the world by the influence of this
Chinese raw material. Now-a-days we hear that there is scarcely one single
silk factory which can hold its ground, unless, in addition to French and
Italian silk, it imports Chinese silk, while the demand for that material
increases from year to year, and has very probably not yet attained the
one-hundredth part of the development of which it is susceptible.

Tea (_Cha_[165]) ranks next to silk among the articles which have raised
the trade with China to such an importance. The cultivation of the tea
plant is of far later date than that of the mulberry tree, and its leaves,
although used by the Chinese as a curative from the third century of our
era, only came into general use, as providing a universal drink, towards
the end of the sixth century.[166] Statesmen and poets sounded the
praises of the new beverage, and while the one employed this excellent and
beneficial gift of nature to fill the treasury by the imposition of a tax,
the others chanted the praise of the plant in their hymns and songs, and
thus, probably without intending it, contributed to increase the revenue
of the Government.

"Tea," writes one of the older Chinese authors, "soothes the spirit,
softens the heart, dispels languor, restores from fatigue, stimulates the
intellect, and arouses from indolence; it makes the body lighter and more
brisk, and quickens the faculty of observation."

The tea plant first attracted the attention of Chinese naturalists in
Wu-yi, or, as the English term it, the Bohea[167] district, which enjoys
to this day a great reputation for the exquisite quality which grows on
its hills.

At present the cultivation of the tea plant extends northward as far as
Tang-tschao, in the province of Shantung, southward as far as Canton and
Kuang-si, and westward as far as the province of Yun-nan. As, moreover,
the tea plant likewise abounds in Japan, the Corea, and the Loo-Choo
Islands, as also in Chusan, Tonquin, and Cochin China, we may assume that
it flourishes over about 28 deg. of latitude and 30 deg. of longitude, within
which it can be cultivated without being affected by severe alternations
of temperature. That part of North China, however, which lies between 27 deg.
and 33 deg. N., seems on the whole to furnish the finest sorts,[168] where the
mean annual temperature ranges between 61 deg.7 and 68 deg., and in which fine
weather with a rise of temperature follows upon a heavy rainfall; the
latter being as necessary for the speedy and luxuriant growth of the
leaves, as the former is for eliciting their fragrance and other valuable
qualities.

To form an idea of the enormous amount of tea which is annually cultivated
in China, it suffices to remark that, after deducting the immense quantity
consumed, there are more than 70,000,000 lbs. exported annually.

It is not our intention to give a disquisition upon the cultivation and
preparation of the tea, the drying (_poey_), roasting (_tschoo_),
perfuming and colouring of the leaves, in short, the long tedious process
to which this valuable article of commerce is subjected from its
collection on the fertile green slopes of the bush-covered hills of Bohea,
till its arrival at the port of shipment in a form suited for exportation.
We prefer here to confine our attention to a consideration of those
experiments which have recently been made in China with respect to tea
cultivation.

There are of the tea plant an almost endless variety of qualities, but
only two species, viz. _Thea viridis_ (green tea), and _Thea Bohea_,[169]
and even these two have such few points of difference, that quite lately
they were described by Fortune as one and the same species. Thus, too, it
has been asserted in our own day that the green and black varieties of tea
sold in Europe do not, as is universally supposed, belong to two different
species of tea, but that the difference of colour, shape of leaf, flavour,
&c., is exclusively due to varieties in the mode of preparing them for the
market, and that the manufacturer is able to make from the leaves every
description, black or green, which is required in commerce. Thus in the
celebrated tea district of Ning-tschan, where in former days black tea was
exclusively grown, there is now procured green tea from the same species
of plant, apparently because its cultivation pays better, while the
quality remains in its olden repute.

The black tea, which constitutes four-fifths of the entire export to
England, is grown of a particularly fine quality in the district of
Kien-ning-foo in the province of Fo-kien, and is known to commerce by a
variety of names, chiefly derived from the localities in which it is
grown, or those of their proprietors. On the other hand, the green sort
selected for exportation is chiefly met with on the slopes of the chain
of hills between Che-kiang and Ngan-hwui. Besides those descriptions
actually prepared on the spot where they grow, there are also an immense
variety of teas manufactured in Canton from all sorts of black and green
tea. The tea-growers of Canton are reputed to colour their green teas
artificially, by sprinkling them with a mixture of Prussian blue and
pulverized chalk, after which they subject them to a rolling motion for a
considerable time in heated copper pans.[170]

One most important element in tea cultivation is the method adopted to
impart a certain bloom, an artificial fragrance, which it does not possess
in the natural state. This process of "scenting," as it is called, which
is practised exclusively for the foreign market, is termed by the Chinese
_Hwa-hiang_. The flowers which are used for imparting this fragrance, and
the growth of which, like the invisible fields of odoriferous herbs near
Cannes, in the South of France, forms a most important branch of
cultivation near Canton, are chiefly _Jasminum sambac_, _Jasminum
paniculatum_, _Aglaia odorata_, _Olea fragrans_, _Sardenia florida_,
orange-blossom, and roses. The method of "scenting" consists simply in
placing a definite quantity of the flower-blossoms, varying according to
the strength or feebleness of the odour, in juxtaposition with about 100
lbs. of dried tea-leaves, where they are suffered to remain from 24 to 48
hours. Thus 40 lbs. of orange-blossom, 50 lbs. of Jasmin, 100 lbs. of
_Aglaia odorata_, are reckoned the equivalent respectively of 100 lbs. of
tea-leaves. The extraordinary costliness of these fragrant blossoms[171]
has caused a very general suspicion to prevail, that the leaves thus
"scented" are afterwards adulterated with large quantities of the common
teas. And as it is an ascertained fact that 60 lbs. of such tea can impart
a similar fragrance to 100 lbs. additional by merely mixing the two
together, without any apparent diminution of fragrance, it seems more than
probable that similar admixtures, very possibly in a still more profitable
proportion, are being silently carried on every day in the warehouses of
the tea districts.

Since the suppression of the East India Company's monopoly, and the
opening of the Five Ports, tea has somewhat fallen in price, but has in
consequence gained in far greater ratio in respect of quantity shipped.
The value of a picul of tea is at present about 18 or 20 taels (L5 12_s._
6_d._ to L6 5_s._), so that the pound costs 1_s._ 1_d._ to 1_s._ 2_d._
Notwithstanding the unexampled cheapness of hand labour (60 to 70 cash, or
2-1/2_d._ to 3_d._, per diem), it is not possible to procure _good tea_
below this limit, although the various descriptions vary extraordinarily
in price according to their quality and the districts they come from. The
lower classes in the tea districts purchase for themselves the raw
unprepared leaves just as they are plucked, for about 1_d._ per pound,
and as it takes about 4 lbs. of the fresh leaves to make 1 lb. of dry
leaves, it may be calculated that the tea, as drunk by this class, must
cost from 4_d._ to 5_d._ per lb. Moreover, it is customary to add some of
the less costly descriptions, more especially in districts at some little
distance where the tea plant is cultivated.

The first historical document referring to the introduction into England
of tea as a beverage, is an Act of Parliament in the year 1660 (the year
of the Restoration). At that period China tea cost sixty shillings the
pound, which of course limited its use to a very narrow circle. At present
there are 30,000,000 lbs. imported into England[172] annually, or more
than one half of the entire export from the Central Empire, the consumer
in London paying about 3_s._ per pound on the average.

Of late years attempts have been made to cultivate the tea plant at the
foot of the Himalayas, in Java, and in the United States. In Hindustan,
whither only a few years ago that well-known and enlightened gentleman,
Mr. Robert Fortune, dispatched 24,000 plants, selected from among the
finest tea districts, the experiment has already proved successful, and
even remunerative. The cost of growing is about 10-1/2_d._ per lb. for
one description, which fetches 2_s._ per lb. in the London market. That
grown in Java has hitherto been viewed with disfavour in Europe, but in a
few years more it must make its way. The result of the experiments in the
United States we have yet to learn. Mr. Fortune, who was intrusted by the
Patent Office at Washington with superintending the introduction of the
tea cultivation into the Southern States, and who in virtue of many years'
scientific researches in China may be regarded as an authority upon this
subject, is of opinion that the possibility of cultivating tea in the
United States does not admit of a doubt, since the plant not only
successfully resists frosts, but even, in a measure, benefits by them, it
being a well-known fact that it flourishes better in the northern than the
southern climates of China. It is questionable, however, whether its
cultivation can prove remunerative in a country where labour is still so
exceptionally high. Will the tea plant repay the immense cost of
cultivation, and compete successfully with the product of China? The next
few years will settle this question, if it be not choked by this unholy
fratricidal war, which is raging within the freest and most glorious
confederacy of modern times.

We enjoyed the good "fortune" while at Shanghai of becoming personally
acquainted with Mr. Fortune, and of gathering these valuable particulars
from the very lips of that distinguished naturalist and traveller. While
reserving for consideration elsewhere the subject of various little known,
but most important, articles of export from the vast Empire of China, we
cannot refrain from indulging in a few remarks upon some useful products
of that country, which seem to us of more than merely commercial
importance. Among these we shall notice first one of the most valuable
rewards bestowed by Nature on human industry, the so-called Chinese
sugar-cane (_Sorghum_, or _Holcus saccharatus_), which deserves the
earnest attention of all European proprietors of land, as it grows in its
native country quite in the northern districts, in fact in latitudes where
the ordinary cane (_Saccharum officinale_) no longer flourishes; because
frost and cold are much more conducive to its growth than the opposite
extreme, so that it would seem to be specially adapted for cultivation in
Southern Europe.

The first attempt to cultivate this cane in Europe was made, if we are
rightly informed, at the Hyeres islands by Count David de Beauregard, from
seeds which M. de Montigny had sent home to the Geographical Society of
Paris, while other attempts were made at the same time in various parts of
France by the _Societe d' Acclimatisation_. The results surpassed the most
sanguine expectations. From the stem there was obtained a juice from which
sugar and alcohol, syrup and brandy, can be easily made. The abundant
leaves, five or six feet long, furnished a considerable quantity of cattle
with most nutritive food; the seeds were used as food for poultry, and
were even substituted with advantage for barley in the provender supplied
to horses, so that the experiment at once repaid its cost, while in
addition to the foregoing, the flour obtained from the seeds was found to
furnish a highly nutritive, wholesome article of diet for man. Dr. Adrian
Sicard, to whom the agricultural world is indebted for a very exhaustive
analysis of the Chinese sugar-cane, has established, by conclusive
researches, that its leaves are also specially adapted for the manufacture
of paper, as well as for various colours or dye stuffs. As to the
remunerative value of the _Sorgho_, it is more than 230 per cent. more
productive than beet-root, which in France produces on the average 2160
kilogrammes per hectare, while the _Sorgho_ makes a return of 5000
kilogrammes.

The mode of cultivating this useful plant differs in no respect, as we
repeatedly had occasion to observe, from that of maize or Indian corn. The
season for sowing varies with the temperature of the country, between the
months April and July. The seed when sown in the beginning of April will
be ripe about the middle of August, or in 135 days, while that sown in
mid-July will not be ripe before the end of November, or about 140 days.
In France the experiment has been made of bathing the seeds in tepid water
for periods varying from 24 to 48 hours before sowing, which resulted in a
much more speedy bringing forward of the plant. In like manner experiments
were made of sowing the seeds with and without their husk, the result of
which was that the former took 15 days, and the latter only 10 days to
sprout. It is recommended to plant the seeds in furrows sufficiently
separated from each other according to the conditions of soil and
irrigation, so far as is possible.

The period of germination of the _Sorgho_ is rather long, but once that
period is passed, the most favourable results are sure to follow, even
should the most unusual alternations of temperature ensue, provided the
thermometer does not descend below 27 deg.5 Fahr. The _Sorgho_ requires about
five months to attain its full ripeness, when it is usually of a
pale-yellow colour, streaked with red. It is occasionally subject to
different maladies, some of which attack the root, others the pith. In
like manner the larvae of certain noxious insects have been remarked on
occasional specimens. But the origin of all these drawbacks has been as
yet far too little inquired into, and they are of too rare occurrence to
permit of any definite information respecting them being as yet available.

On the whole, the cultivation of the _Sorgho_ may be regarded as eminently
successful in the South of France, as well as in Pennsylvania, U. S.
(which has a much severer climate than Venetia, Dalmatia, or the lower
course of the Danube). Very probably we may also succeed in naturalizing
the _Sorgho_ in suitable parts of Austria, and introducing there the
cultivation on a commensurate scale[173] of a plant, which bids fair not
merely to prove far more profitable in cultivation than any other member
of the vegetable kingdom in any part of the earth, but at the same time
seems destined at no distant period to be the means of supplying the
civilized world with one of its most vitally necessary articles of food,
by means of free white labour, without the assistance of slavery![174]

Another plant, which it seems likely might be advantageously introduced
into the southern districts of Europe, is the _Mo-chok_, one of the most
graceful kinds of bamboo found in the forests of China, which grows in
greatest luxuriance on the limestone slopes of the province of
Tschi-Kiang, in a climate ranging between 90 deg.5 in summer, and 20 deg.3
(Fahr.) in winter. The erect, smooth, elegant stem shoots up to a height
of from 60 to 80 feet. The lower part of the tree is usually free from
branches, which usually begin to spring from the trunk about 20 feet from
the ground, and are very delicately leaved. These and two other species,
the _Long-sin-chok_ and the _Hu-chok_, are used in the manufacture of
sieves, baskets, furniture, &c., while the tender shoots form a most
nutritious and delicately flavoured vegetable. The stem of the plant is
moreover available for the manufacture of paper.[175]

Writing paper is manufactured from it as well as packing paper, and one
very coarse quality is mingled with the mortar by the Chinese masons. Mr.
Fortune has introduced the Mo-chok into China, where, especially in the
north-west provinces, it promises to come on well upon the slopes of the
Himalaya.

Of the other plants which grow in China, which are not indeed suited for
transplanting to a colder climate, yet merit attention on account of
their produce, we shall briefly notice the varnish tree, the tallow tree,
and the wax shrub.

The varnish tree (_Vernix vernicia_), a sort of sumach, which grows in
greatest luxuriance in the provinces of Kiang-si, Chi-kiang, and Szechuen,
furnishes that varnish which, partly in a semi-fluid, partly in a dry
state, comes to market in whitish cakes, and is worth, according to
quality and demand, from 40 to 100 dollars per picul of 133 lbs. In the
preparation of this lacquer, the reputation of which has extended over the
globe, 6-2/3 lbs. varnish, 13-1/2 lbs. water, 41-2/3 lbs. nut-oil, 16-2/3
lbs. of pigs' gall, and 33-1/3 lbs. of vinegar, are mixed together till
the whole assumes the consistence and appearance of a shining black paste.
The fact that many Chinese lacquered wares, especially those prepared in
Foo-chow, vie with the renowned manufactures of Japan in beauty and
lustre, leaves room to suspect that the Chinese workmen have received some
instruction from their Japanese fellow-craftsmen.

Vegetable tallow (_Schulah_, or _Schu-kau_, tree fat) is obtained from the
_Stillingia sebifera_, the so-called tallow tree, and, judging by the
experiments made with it, promises under an extended system of cultivation
to become a tolerably profitable article of export. The tallow tree
flourishes throughout the southern provinces, but is chiefly found in the
island of Chusan and the coasts adjacent. The tallowy substance procured
from the seeds, which externally resemble nuts, is sold in cakes of from
90 to 130 lbs. at from 7 to 12 dollars.

Vegetable or tree wax (_peh-lah_) is a waxy substance, which the _coccus
pela_ or _flata limitata_ deposits, apparently as a protection to its
eggs, on a sort of ash tree, on whose twigs and boughs it is deposited
like snow-flakes. It is gathered after the first frost, and purified by
melting it in a cloth held over hot water. Apparently the process is
varied by dipping what has been collected in a silken sack into hot water.
It melts at 81 deg. Fahr., and in consequence of its unusual stiffness is much
used for admixture with bees-wax and other descriptions of fats used in
the manufacture of tapers. The candles hitherto made in England of this
substance have commanded a large sale, and only the circumstance that as
yet but a small quantity has found its way into commerce, prevents its
being much more extensively cultivated. The price of _Peh-lah_ is rather
high, as it fetches about L11 10_s._ per 133 lbs.

Passing from the various natural products furnished for export by China to
a consideration of those articles[176] of European industry, for which the
Chinese market supplies an ample demand, we find that their number is
considerable, while they represent a value of upwards of L5,000,000. In
these pages, however, we propose to notice only that article which is the
most profitable, and undoubtedly forms the chief staple of import in all
the harbours opened to foreign commerce, viz. opium. Opium (_a-pien_), the
solidified sap of _Papaver somniferum_, was, as every one knows, up to
quite a recent period, a monopoly of the Anglo-Indian Government, by whom
it was cultivated under the superintendence of agents in the various
provinces of Hindostan, and sold to the trade by public auction in large
quantities at a time in the markets of Calcutta and Bombay. It seems to
fulfil among the Chinese the function of the various spirituous liquors of
Europe; at least every attempt to introduce among the Chinese a taste for
ale, whisky, sherry, port, champagne, and claret, has hitherto entirely
failed. Indeed there is probably no country of the globe where, in
proportion to population, there is so little spirituous liquor introduced
as into China, what is imported being almost exclusively for the
consumption of foreigners. The Chinese is emphatically a born
"tea-totaller," or friend of abstemiousness, for the native drinks,
substitutes for wine, which are obtained chiefly from rice and millet, are
only used on special occasions, and then only in small quantities. During
our entire stay in Chinese waters, we never saw one single Chinese drunk,
and heard in every quarter that any such cases are rare and quite
exceptional. On the other hand, the consumption of opium is continually
increasing, and the quantity of solidified poppy-juice annually imported
amounts to from 75,000 to 80,000 chests, which at current rates represent
a value of from L7,500,000 to L10,000,000. There are four descriptions of
opium that come to the Chinese market, viz. Benares (_Ku-ni_), Patna
(_Kung-ni_), Malwa (_Peh-pi_), and Turkish (_Kiu-ni_ or golden dung). Of
these the Patna and Benares are reckoned of finer quality, and
consequently are more sought after, than that imported from Malwa, but
both descriptions are preferred by the Chinese to the Turkish, and even to
that produced at home.[177]

The custom of opium-smoking is of comparatively modern introduction among
the Chinese. It was about the commencement of the 18th century,[178] that
the practice of mingling opium with tobacco as an antidote against
toothache, headache, and pains in the body first began to prevail. Chinese
sailors and merchantmen, returning from the islands of the Bornese
Archipelago, had learned from the natives to inhale it as an anaesthetic,
which, depriving them of all activity, brought the most delightful visions
before their eyes. It is unquestionably the prohibition of wine to the
believers in the Koran which first directed their attention to this
narcotic substance, which the Western Asiatics swallow in pills, the
Hindoos chew, and the Chinese smoke. In 1750, there were imported into
China from Turkey, Persia, and Bengal, chiefly by Portuguese merchants,
some 200 to 250 chests according to official return (of 140 lbs. each),
ostensibly for medical use. Nothing could be more welcome to the entire
Empire than a means of passing the intervals of relaxation from the hurry
of business, in a state of absolute exemption from all anxiety, rocked in
the most delightful slumbers! In 1773 the East India Company sent a small
portion of opium to China by way of speculation. Seven years later they
founded an Opium Depot in Larke's Bay. In 1781 the Company sent 2800
chests (of 140 lbs. each) at one single shipment to Canton, where it was
purchased by a "Hong," or Association,[179] for trading purposes. The
Company found itself compelled, however, to re-export a quantity, as at
that period there was not in China a sufficient demand for such a supply.
The first regular shipments began in 1798, when 4170 chests were sent to
the account of the Association in China, and then sold at Rs. 415 (about
L41 10_s._) per chest.[180] Since that period the import and consumption
have been steadily increasing at a geometric ratio, and a table now before
us, drawn up with great labour and industry by Dr. Medhurst, informs us
that between 1798 and 1855 there were imported altogether 1,197,041 chests
of opium from Bengal, which, after deducting all expenses of cultivation
and shipment, represented a net gain to the East India Company of
L67,851,853.[181]

Relying on the splendid profits secured to the East India Company, and its
colleagues settled in China, by the opium traffic, no one troubled himself
in the slightest with the many protests of the Chinese Government, any
more than the anathemas launched at opium dealers and opium-smokers by
English missionaries and philanthropists. The dealers, growing richer day
by day, contented themselves with laconic replies to the more virulent of
their antagonists, to the effect that they were but supplying a want
originating in a national custom, and that it was as futile to attempt to
prevent the Chinese from smoking as to restrain Europeans from the use of
spirituous liquors. Both when abused are productive of much evil, and even
then opium was productive of far less destructive ravages on the human
organism, and was never followed by such appalling catastrophes as those
resulting from alcohol. The dark side of the opium traffic has since been
so fully exposed, that but little more remains to be said, and although
even the most sanguine persons have ceased to hope that the trade can
ever be entirely suppressed, yet it is at least consolatory to know that,
according to the best calculations, the number of opium smokers throughout
China, in a population that is to say of 420,000,000, is not above
4,000,000 to 5,000,000, and that an ordinary smoker does not on an average
consume more than one mace or about one drachm[182] of opium, worth about
90 cash, or 3-1/2_d._ The provisions of the new tariff, by which opium may
be imported unrestrictedly on payment of a fixed duty of 30 taels (about
L10) per chest when water-borne, and 20 taels (about L6 10_s._) when
imported by land, must materially effect the opium trade as hitherto
carried on, and may very possibly alter the views at present entertained
by the Chinese Government with reference to this important article of
commerce, in proportion as its treasury begins to be replenished by such a
high rate of duty.

Although for European readers the chief interest of China is to be found
in its relations with foreign countries, we yet cannot take leave of it
without a few remarks on the momentous political movement which has been
on foot since 1849 in several provinces of China, and claims, in
consequence of its peculiar religious nature, universal interest.

Hung-sin-Tsuen, the originator and head of this rebellion, was born in
1813, in a village near Canton, and while yet in his early youth was, in
consequence of his precocity, removed from tending his father's flocks to
be a scholar in the village, where he pursued his studies with such zeal,
that a year later he took several degrees as a teacher. On one of his
visits to Canton, he made the acquaintance of a Protestant missionary,
with whom he long corresponded, and from whom he received a variety of
tracts translated into Chinese, and books, by way of presents. In the
course of a serious illness with which he was assailed about this period,
he had numerous visions, and is said in his delirium to have insisted on
being hailed Emperor of China. Gradually Hung and his friend and zealous
adherent Fung-Yun-San became, through erroneous or wilful
misinterpretation of the works of various missionary societies, the
founders of a new creed, a sort of free, semi-Christian sect, which, as it
could not long subsist without coming into collision with the reigning
Government, very speedily assumed a political character. It is an
indubitable fact that at first the religious movement was supported by the
Protestant missionaries, and the views of its founders forwarded by every
means in their power, with the object of using it to prepare the soil for
the promulgation of Christianity. When about entering his forty-first
year, Hung formed an alliance with American missionaries stationed at
Canton, studied their books, after which he returned to the province of
Kuang-si, where he published writings descriptive of the alleged
manifestations of the Deity, gave himself forth as a poet,[183] and at
the same time issued proclamations under the designation of the "Heavenly
King." The severity with which the regular Government treated the
insurgents, and all who consorted with them, only served to augment their
ranks, to which the mysticism of their doctrine contributed in no small
degree; for the credulous masses have in all lands the same love of the
marvellous and unintelligible. Such a result only increased the courage,
the energy, the arrogance of Hung. He no longer was content to announce
himself as "the mouth through which God the Father, and Jesus the Elder
Brother, declared their will;" he now proclaimed boldly the intention of
himself and his followers to overthrow the unworthy Mantchoo dynasty, and
raise to the throne a new native dynasty, that of the Tai-ping, or
universal peace. Although stigmatized by the official _Pekin Gazette_ as
"local banditti," they were nevertheless strong enough in March, 1852, to
storm even such a populous city as Nankin, where they set up a
provisional government, and have since fortified it as their
head-quarters. At the time the Tai-ping rebellion first broke out, Yeh,
the then Governor of Canton, thought he would readily be able to suppress
it by the summary process of chopping off the heads of all who were
supposed to be in correspondence with them, and thus had as many as 800
executed daily.[184] It was no longer quite safe for a native to show
himself in the streets of Canton, unless provided with a paper of
identification. For this purpose, four-cornered pieces of a sort of white
cotton fabric were worn, on which was printed a sign in red. These cotton
strips served as countersigns for those friendly to the reigning dynasty,
and were worn concealed from view, but so as to admit of being at once
shown in case of need. Dr. Pfitzmaier, who has examined this sign, is of
opinion that it is simply a union of the three signs [Chinese
character(s)] which, so far as the two last are concerned, seem to have
been compressed together and abbreviated, so that only the initiated could
understand its significance. The learned sinologue is of opinion that this
hieroglyphic, signifying "to offer hand and heart," or "to offer the
original (own) heart," has nevertheless no meaning apart from the centre
figure, which, however, is unusually distorted, so that the whole may
also mean [Chinese character(s)] Kia-hoei, "to yield grace and
benevolence," or may be applicable to him who wears it, "one who enjoys
the all-embracing Imperial clemency."

The religious direction of the Tai-ping movement, coupled with its
apparent Christian tendencies, its results, and, above all, the last
hostile proclamation of the Pekin Government against foreigners, roused
the sympathies of both Europeans and Americans in favour of the
insurgents; and in the English papers of Hong-kong and Shanghai, the
policy was vigorously and repeatedly advocated of turning the insurrection
to their own advantage; while in a religious point of view it was
recommended to avail themselves of the favour shown to the Scriptures by
the Christian sect of the Tai-ping, which was also so amicably disposed to
foreigners, who at all events were more likely to prove a bulwark and
support to English Protestantism than the deceitful, promise-breaking,
idol-worshipping Mantchoos. Letters and communications, which from time to
time were published on the visit of Protestant missionaries in the
insurgent camp, were apt to propound the most favourable ideas about the
insurgents and their strivings after religious truth, and to attach to
their victories and successes the most glorious hopes with respect to the
spreading of Christianity in China. Fortunately the English Government did
not suffer its policy to be affected thereby, but continued to observe the
strictest neutrality. Only in those cases where, owing to the advance of
the rebels, the interests of British subjects or of universal commerce
seemed to be endangered, communications were held with the "Heavenly King"
or his ministers, or to protest against the injury and limitation of trade
with the earnestness and depth of impression which Armstrong guns are apt
to impart to diplomatic dispatches. Thus the insurgents were prohibited
from approaching within 10 Li of the city of Hang-kow, by this measure
protecting not alone their own property, but the entire city from pillage
and destruction. During the last war the interests of the insurgents were
kept entirely in the background, and during the stay of the _Novara_ at
Shanghai, which had likewise been repeatedly threatened by the insurgents,
we could gain but little enlightenment as to the nature and direction of
the movement.

However, since the Treaty of Pekin has thrown open the navigation of the
most important rivers, and thus facilitated communication with the
interior, there has been a better opportunity than hitherto for
intercourse with the Tai-ping, as also for obtaining a clearer insight
into its present condition, as well as the object and inevitable
consequences of their tenets. People are beginning to consider it more
calmly, and even the missionaries seem gradually abandoning the
expectations they had formed, of finding in it a means of helping the
cause of Christianity, albeit a former missionary, Rev. J. C. Roberts, who
in 1847 had spent several months with Hung, is at the present moment a
sort of minister of foreign affairs in the insurgents' camp at Nankin. The
latest information respecting the Tai-ping enters so fully into the
character of the whole movement, and so clearly develops its tendency,
that no apology is needed for laying before the readers of every class a
brief sketch of the more important and significant dogmas.

The Tai-ping translations of the Old and New Testament, though in the
whole tolerably correct, yet are in certain parts so imperfect that they
implanted the most erroneous ideas in the head of the "Celestial King." He
conceived his own visions and revelations as far more important, and of
far higher authority, than those of Holy Writ. His mission, as he himself
states it, is to be followed by a new revelation, accompanied by numerous
miracles, and a third book will be given to the world, which is to
supersede the Old and New Testaments, and be called the "_True_
Testament." According to Hung, both God and Christ have appeared in the
human form. Christ is not equal to the Father, that is solely God; he is
also brought into connection with other redeemers, and has a wife and
children in heaven.

The Celestial King and his son form with God and Christ a Quaternity in
Unity. The corporeal presence of the Celestial King is that of the
Godhead, and in the distempered imagination of the Tai-ping the government
now existing in Nankin is assuredly that of heaven itself!

The Tai-ping suffer no one to preach against their creed, because that
would be to diminish the authority of their chief, and damp the ardour of
their hopes. In their various proclamations it is expressly declared that
Hung-sin-Tsuen is the brother of the Saviour, the Son of God, without any
other distinction than such as must exist between an elder and a younger
brother. They maintain that there is a celestial mother as well as Father,
a heavenly sister as well as a heavenly Brother, and that the recently
defunct King of the West, Fung-yun-san, one of Hung's oldest adherents, is
now married to the heavenly sister. They hold to the opinion that not one
of such of their revelations as clash with the Old and New Testaments, can
be decided by such ancient books of religion. Their revelations being the
newest, are on that account the most entitled to belief.

In a letter of greeting addressed by Hung to Roberts[185] the missionary,
on the occasion of the arrival of the latter at Nankin, in October, 1860,
Hung narrates his heavenly journey in 1837, the repeated miraculous
interference of the Father and the Son in his favour, as also the
revelations made to the Eastern King. He professes to have seen the Father
and Christ, the heavenly mother and the heavenly sister. He is himself
"the Way, the Truth, and the Life," just as Christ is. He warns Roberts
repeatedly, that implicit belief in this is of the highest importance, as
otherwise he can neither be useful in this world nor blest in the next.
After such an exposition, Christian missionaries will scarcely be suffered
in the insurgent's camp if they dare to preach against such errors, not to
say blasphemies.

There are but few religious ceremonies. The Tai-ping, indeed, call one
day of the week the day of prayer, and it happens more through oversight
than intention to be fixed upon the Saturday, but so far as external
sanctity goes there seems to be no special attention paid to it. They buy,
and sell, and delve just as on other days. On the previous night about ten
o'clock two or three cannon-shot are fired to announce the approach of the
hour of prayer, and that the day of worship is at hand. Every family is
engaged for an hour in devotion and praise. All strangers who have been in
communication with the Tai-ping in Nankin state that, even in the capital
where he has been resident for seven years past, that dignitary does not
observe the Sabbath in any way, either by preaching, prayer, or expounding
of the Scripture; there are no exhortations or pious admonitions; they
have neither church nor temple; their sole divine service consists in each
one reciting in his own house English hymns, and repeating a few prayers,
while divers offerings are made, such as tea, rice, and the flesh of slain
animals. They offer their prayers kneeling, after which they close the
proceedings by singing a hymn standing. An English missionary, who arrived
at Nankin with the conviction that the insurgents were genuine sincere
Christians, made, after a short stay, the following severe but just remark
concerning them: "I found to my regret no trace of Christianity, but a
system of the grossest idolatry substituted for it, and arrogating its
name. Their notion of God is so distorted, that it is, if possible, still
more erroneous than that entertained of the Supreme Being by other
idol-worshipping Chinese. Their conception of the Redeemer, to whom they
pay equal honours, is crude, and thoroughly material. Their prayers, far
from giving the impression of a true reverence of God, have much more the
appearance of an idolatrous mockery of sacred things!"

An English merchant, who accompanied Sir Hope Grant on his reconnoitring
excursion up the Yang-tse-Kiang, and spent a week in what used to be
called Nankin, now the celestial capital of the Tai-ping, gives the
following characteristic sketch of them: "The insurgents take no interest
in and do not encourage trade, except in muskets and ammunition. To our
representations how unwise it was to lay waste towns and villages, and
shut out commerce, they promised, after peace was concluded, to erect
schools and other similar institutions, and professed their willingness to
promote trade, but 'for the present,' they went on, 'we must, before
anything else, make the hills and the rivers subject to our power.' On the
whole I found the condition of the rebels far better than I had expected.
They are comfortably clothed and well fed. The population of Nankin
consists exclusively of officials. No one not connected with the
administration of the army is admitted within the gates of the city. The
majority of the inhabitants, who number about 20,000, are prisoners and
slaves from every part of the empire. Although employed in most arduous
work, they get no pay, but are simply clothed and fed. I remarked an
extraordinary number of beautiful young women in elegant silken stuffs
from Sutschan. There were also prisoners of war from Sutschan and other
places, who, however, were by no means inclined to lead a very Christian
and moral life in the celestial capital. The city of Nankin, as well as
its suburb, the beautiful ancient cemetery of the Ning dynasty, and the
far-famed porcelain Pagoda, are all utterly destroyed; instead of the
broad well-paved streets of former times the stranger has now to pick his
steps through heaps of bricks and rubbish. The palaces of the kings of the
Tai-ping dynasty are glaringly conspicuous among all these ruins. They
must have been entirely rebuilt, for the old Yamuns and temples, like the
whole of the Tau-Tai City, have been demolished utterly.

"The rebel chief inhabits a large palace. His household consists of 300
female attendants. He also, in virtue of his rank, has 68 wives supported
for him. No one but the kings (of whom there are 11 or 12, but only two
are resident in Nankin) is permitted to approach his sacred person.
Probably Hung is little more than a mere puppet in the hands of his
ministers. It is he who mainly keeps the rebellion on foot. Discipline is
far better maintained among the long-haired insurgents than the imperial
troops, and many of the younger soldiers have pleasing manners.

"The kings or Wangs, on the other hand, seem exceedingly lazy and
vicious, and when they make their appearance, with a theatrical attempt at
assuming a dignified deportment, clad in the yellow costume of a
mountebank, and with a tinsel crown upon their heads, they present a most
ludicrous aspect. Not one of these so-called kings understands the
Mandarin dialect, so widely diffused among the educated classes;--not one,
except Hung himself and Kan-wang, has a better education than one of his
coolies.[186] They have linguists at their elbow, who do their reading and
writing for them.

"The arms of the Tai-ping are very wretched, and the bare fact that they
are able to make head against the Imperial troops, speak volumes for the
utter helplessness and incapacity of the Imperial Government. I have not
the slightest expectation that any advantage will accrue to civilization
or Christianity from the religio-political movement of the Tai-ping. No
Chinese will have anything to do with them. Their whole activity consists
in burning, murdering, and devastating. They are universally detested by
the people; even those inhabitants of the city who do not belong to the
'Brotherhood' detest them. For eight years their head-quarters have been
at Nankin, which they destroyed, nor have they as yet made the slightest
attempt to rebuild it. Trade and industry are forbidden. Their taxes are
three times higher than those of the regular Government. They take no
measures to staunch the wounds which they have inflicted on the people,
nor do they occupy it as though they had any permanent interest in the
land. They take no pains to tap those slow but sure springs of revenue, or
to increase the resources of the state. They lay themselves out to
maintain themselves by plunder. Nothing in their organization gives hope
for any amelioration of the present or consolidation of power in the
future; there is nothing in the entire history of the Tai-ping to enlist
sympathy or compel confidence in a movement which, under the mask of
religious reform, conceals the most hateful self-interest and terrorism,
and under the pretext of spreading peace amongst men, brandishes the
scourge of destruction and desolation among the provinces through which it
has passed."[187]

On the 11th of August the _Novara_ quitted her anchorage off Shanghai, and
with the steam-tug _Meteor_[188] fastened to her side availed herself of a
spring-tide to make her way into the Yang-tse-Kiang. Off Wusung we awaited
the arrival of the post, after receiving which we were on 14th August
towed as far as Gutzlaff's Island. Here we had once more to lay to, owing
to calms and currents, till at last on the 15th August a fresh breeze
sprang up from the S.E., and enabled us to make an offing.

The temperature had materially altered during the last few days. After a
cycle of oppressive heat the weather had suddenly changed to severe
squalls, with a marked fall in the barometric column. The thermometer,
which while we were lying off Shanghai marked from 86 deg. to 93 deg.2 Fahr., now
indicated in the morning only 68 deg. Fahr., and during the day never rose
above 77 deg. Fahr. The number of fever cases, which had reached the number of
seventy, began gradually to fall off. Several cases of dysentery forthwith
began to show symptoms of amendment.

Considering the latitude we were in, and the season of the year, the
barometer stood unusually high (30 deg.100), and although this might be
attributable to the constant prevalence of easterly winds, we nevertheless
knew we were approaching the period when the monsoon changes, and little
reliance was to be placed on the steadiness of that from the S.E.
Accordingly on the 17th the wind shifted round to N.E. by E., while our
course was due S.E. This however rendered it necessary to tack, if we
wished to pass to the northward of the Loo-Choo group, whereas we could
run free and with a fair wind through the southern channel. The sun set
behind a bank of dense clouds on the horizon. The western sky was tinged a
deep red, and the stars shone out with uncommon brilliancy, but with a
sort of trembling ray. The barometer fell slowly but steadily; the sea
began to heave perceptibly. Our course was now changed to S.E. by S.

The following morning the breeze freshened, and drew somewhat further aft;
the sky was covered with clouds massed together, those to the N.E. of a
very dark, almost black, colour. Wind and sea were now rising, the sky
became more and more obscure, the barometer kept falling--there was every
indication of the approach of heavy weather.

The 18th August, the birthday of our Emperor, was duly celebrated far on
the open ocean, in the middle of the China Sea. All was prepared for
Divine worship, which was to be celebrated at 10 A.M. on the gun-deck, in
presence of the staff and the entire crew. The Commodore had invited
several gentlemen of the staff to dinner. On land no one thinks of
consulting the elements, when such a festival is to be observed, nor do
the guests waste many thoughts on wind, rain, and heavy seas, as they
assemble in their comfortable chambers. At sea, on the other hand, the
conditions are altered. Wind and weather are the masters here, whose
behests the sea-farer must attend to. This was our case on this 18th of
August.

First, Divine service had to be dispensed with, because the sea became too
heavy, rendering it necessary to close the port-holes in the gun-deck,
where, as already mentioned, the service was to be performed. As the hour
for the festival drew nigh, the elements gave unmistakeable evidence of
their determined hostility; there was no room any longer to doubt that we
were about to do battle with a regular Typhoon.[189] This species of
storm, which is very customary at the change of the monsoons in August,
September, and October, when the N.E. trade suddenly veers round and
becomes the S.W. monsoon, is, like the tornado of the West Indies, the
Pampero of the eastern coast of South America, and the hurricane of the
Mauritius, a whirlwind of the most colossal proportions and most
tremendous fury, by which the atmosphere is swept in a circle at an
astonishing velocity around a central point more or less calm, which does
not, however, remain stationary, but is continually progressing, and hence
they are usually termed _cyclones_, or circular storms, to distinguish
them from those other storms in which the wind moves in a straight line.
It has been reserved for scientific investigation to explain the
extraordinary regularity of the laws in obedience to which the masses of
air, in the case of such storms occurring in the Southern hemisphere, move
in the direction of the hands of a clock, whereas in the Northern
hemisphere they are rotated in an opposite direction. In like manner, the
direction of the centre round which the _cyclone_ is raging has been
definitely ascertained, so that, provided with these data, it is not
merely possible for the navigator to hold aloof from the dangerous
central point of these circular storms, where the best and stoutest ship
that ever floated must almost to a certainty be swallowed up, but even to
avail himself of the wind to reach the edge of the _cyclone_ (the breadth
of whose path is from 300 to 1000 miles), and thus make a rapid and
prosperous passage. By mid-day the wind had increased to such an extent
that we had to take in most of our sails, and reef the rest. The sea now
rose, and many of its waves came thundering upon our decks. The vessel was
tossed to and fro with such violence that everything which had not been
made fast, or was attached to the vessel, began to lurch from side to
side. Nevertheless, the invited guests sat down to table, made the seats
and the table fast, and, such at least whom the violent rocking did not
make sea-sick, partook of a pleasant and joyous meal. But even these
precautions did not prevent numerous unpleasant accidents. One tremendous
lurch of the ship, which took us unawares, suddenly set adrift a number of
our mess, who rolled over and over each other upon that unstable floor,
amid a hideous chaos of tumblers, bottles, plates, and crockery. Chairs
and _fauteuils_ had their legs broken, everything breakable went into
irretrievable smash, the convives escaping serious injury only by a
marvel. Once more they took their seats at table, where only the bare
cloth gave promise of security, and endeavoured to anchor themselves more
firmly. When, at the conclusion of the meal, our Commodore gave the usual
toast, and his guests emptied their glasses to the health of the reigning
monarch, the band attempted to strike up the National Anthem, and a hearty
cheer resounded above the groaning of the ship, the howling of the wind,
and the sullen roar of the ever-increasing waves, as they lashed against
the ship's sides.

The sun went down behind clouds, as we went careering along under
close-reefed main sail and storm stay-sail over a confused sea, running
mountains high, and with huge heavy grey masses of cloud and mist close
overhead; the barometer was still falling, and as night closed in the wind
sung mournfully, yet with almost deafening noise, through the masts and
rigging. The wind now shifted and sprung up from N.E. by N., which being
an additional sign that the centre of the _cyclone_ was receding, we felt
assured that we were on the right side to keep clear of it. By midnight
the wind came still further round, till it stood steadily at N.E., when it
acquired fresh strength, and blew a most violent hurricane. The centre of
the _cyclone_ had once more altered its course, and begun to move in our
direction.

Our position at noon (27 deg. 25' N. and 125 deg. 23' E.) was the most
unfavourable possible. We had a N.E. wind, and were in the N.E. section of
the typhoon, whose centre, as is customary in these storms, was moving in
a N.W. or W. direction, and therefore threatened the more readily to
overtake us, that our course lay S.E. through the wide channel, which
leads from the Chinese Sea into the open ocean between the Loo-Choo
Islands and the Meiaco-sima group. There was now no other egress possible
than by steering W. by S. to get away from the advancing centre of the
whirlwind, on which course we would have to steer for the N. extremity of
the Island of Formosa.

The night of 18th and 19th of August was, in the fullest sense of the
word, a night of storms. Towards midnight we once more set double-reefed
foresail in order to lie our course of west by south. Had we calculated
aright the course of the centre of the _cyclone_, the wind as we advanced
should have drawn ahead, as we were now keeping it on our larboard beam.

Daybreak of the 19th found us beneath a gloomy, angry-looking, cloudy grey
canopy on every side, the clouds hanging quite low, till they seemed to
brood upon the surface of the sea, now lashed into fury by the violence of
the storm. The look-out could scarcely see a cable's length clear of the
ship. Deluges of rain, lashes of spray, driven on board by the tremendous
violence of the wind, enveloped us in a strange, half-mysterious
obscurity. Towards the N.E. a compact bank of bluish grey clouds indicated
the centre of the _cyclone_. The motion of the ship was so violent that
one of her quarter-boats got filled with water, which at every lurch was
washed upon the frigate's quarter-deck like a small cascade. Sometimes
they became so full that they threatened to wrench the davits from their
fastenings. The gun-deck was afloat with spray lashed on board with each
pitch of the ship, while the foam flew high up upon the mast. The waves
crossed each other in every direction, huge conical masses rising suddenly
to a height of 25 or 30 feet, as far as one might guess, and then as
suddenly subsiding. It was the genuine pyramidal sea of the true
_cyclone_, of which vessels caught in these furious circular storms are
even more apprehensive than the fury and strength of the hurricane.

The wind, which now began to draw to the westward, indicated that thus far
we had shaped a proper course, and that the course of the _cyclone_ lay
towards the N.W. Under these circumstances it was deemed most prudent to
make the Marianne Islands, and to avail ourselves even of the hurricane in
order to perform a rapid voyage. We accordingly now laid our course to
steer S.E. by S., through the centre of the channel south of the Loo-Choo
Islands. Considering the width, 120 nautical miles, of this channel, there
was reason to hope that, despite the errors in reckoning which were to be
expected amid so many man[oe]uvres, and considering the impossibility of
getting astronomical observations, and the influence of the sort of
currents which those hurricanes usually set in motion for a short period,
we might make our way through it in safety.

The wind remained steadily in the N.W., and at first was on our port
quarter. Towards noon, however, it came round to N.W. by W., so that we
were now running dead before it. We now set double-reefed foresail so as
to make quicker progress. Towards 6 P.M. the hurricane woke up to its full
strength; squall followed squall, the universal covering of cloud in
which the heavens seemed wrapped looked as though it reached to the very
waters, and the air was quite filled with spray, till when standing at the
ship's stern it was barely possible to distinguish the forecastle. The
storm, sweeping along above the seething water, had a singular piercing,
almost metallic, note, quite unlike the singing and whistling made among
the sails and cordage. Staggering along under close-reefed fore and main
sail, and double-reefed top-sail, the frigate pressed on through the thick
night, going 14 miles an hour, through the strait between Loo-Choo and
Meiaco-sima, out of the China Sea into the Pacific Ocean, whither she was
being hurried along with such impetuous, irresistible violence by the
wind, that not even the most experienced seaman could make head against
it, but had, when passing from one part of the ship to the other, to warp
himself along by means of a rope made fast fore and aft.[190] At 4 P.M.
the barometer stood at its lowest (29 deg.302, the temperature at the same
period being 66 deg.02 Fahr.), where it remained without sensible alteration
for several hours. At last, towards 9 P.M., it began slowly to rise, the
surest indication, and therefore most welcome one, that we were increasing
our distance from the central point of the storm. About 11 P.M. the
clouds suddenly lifted on S.S.E., the horizon began to widen; there was no
longer a doubt that the worst was over.

At dawn on the 20th the masts and cordage showed a thick incrustation of
salt, thus giving unmistakable evidence of the great height to which the
spray had been driven. The wind was now W.S.W., and the barometer had
risen to 29 deg.5, so that we had now merely an ordinary gale to deal with,
and might look upon the _cyclone_ as expended. Science had indicated the
method of evading the centre of the circular storm, and even of making the
very hurricane subservient to our ends in driving us along our destined
course!

At 8 A.M. the sun began to be visible by fits and starts, long enough,
however, to permit us to make an occasional observation. According to this
we were only one mile out of our position by dead-reckoning. During the 24
hours, inclusive of the period during which we lay to, we had run 218
miles in a general direction of S.E. by E. During the afternoon the sky
cleared. The sea was still high, but the atmosphere gradually became
clearer and more transparent, till by sundown even the large banks of
clouds on the N.E. which continued to mark the centre of the _cyclone_ had
entirely disappeared. The _Novara_ during this tremendous storm had proved
herself a thorough sea-boat, nor was there any particular damage
noticeable on the occasion of the careful inspection to which her sails,
masts, and rigging were subjected, immediately that the weather became
more favourable. Her masts and sails, which in such a warfare of the
elements she might so readily have had carried away, were all found to be
uninjured, and only a few plates of her copper sheeting had been loosened
by the fury of the waves, while those still clinging to the ship had been
rolled up like so much paper, by the tremendous pitching of the good ship.
The quarter gallery too, which when the frigate was running before the
wind was exposed to considerable danger, had sustained but little damage.
Such unfortunately was not the case with a small menagerie of rare birds
and monkeys, which had been placed in cages carefully covered with linen
in this, ordinarily the most sheltered, part of the vessel. The covering
had been torn away by the hurricane, and the wind had so tossed the poor
things about, that all their feathers were knocked off, and they presented
a most pitiable appearance. The quadrupeds too, whose cries and lowings
during the storm had already testified to their misery, were found to have
suffered severely. Two oxen and several sheep died on the 19th. All the
surviving animals lost flesh terribly during 48 hours, while those that
had been the wildest and most untameable were now quite tame and docile.

An analysis of the phenomena observed during the continuation of the
_cyclone_, shows that on the 18th it formed its vortex, being then about
opposite the rather lofty and tolerable-sized island of Dkinawasmia of the
Loo-Choo group, which must have occasioned an alteration in the direction
of the wind. Owing in part to the influence of the N.E. trade, which
enters the northern part of the China Sea, and at this season is gradually
veering round till it completely displaces the S.W. monsoon, as also
during the S.W. monsoon itself, which blows from Formosa on the south,
there appears to exist to the northward of the latter-named island,
favoured probably by its natural configuration and physical features, a
well-defined space within which the barometer is always depressed, and in
which the atmosphere in immediate contact with these N.E. and S.W. winds
is compelled to assume a sort of whirling motion, like that of the hands
of a clock, thus forming the germ as it were of a _cyclone_.

So long as the S.W. wind was blowing strongly, the centre of the _cyclone_
moved in an easterly direction, or in other words, in the direction of
least resistance. But arrested in its advance by the various island
groups, as also by the gradually increasing pressure of the S.E. and E.
winds, the _cyclone_ must, in consequence of the obstacles opposed to its
path, have swung round with a sort of whirl, which once more impressed
upon it a N.W. direction to the coasts of China, there to expend itself,
apparently in consequence of the ever-increasing pressure of the
surrounding atmosphere. During forty-eight hours, namely from 6 P.M. of
the 18th to the same hour on the 20th, we were within the range of the
typhoon itself, and on the 19th were at the nearest point to its vortex;
nevertheless, judging by our lowest barometrical reading, we must have
been at least 100 miles distant from the centre. It was the first typhoon
that visited Chinese waters in 1858, and had been predicted weeks before
in the "North China Herald," while the Thousand Years Almanac of the
Chinese calendar assigned its date for the 10th of August.

Our course was now shaped for the Marianne Archipelago. For several days
after the typhoon, the weather remained unsettled, and the swell was both
heavy and broken, when on 26th August we came in sight of the island of
Guam or Guaham, the most southerly of the Marianne group. In twelve days
we had run 1860 miles, with the aid of the typhoon it is true, but there
was the fact, the distance had been accomplished, and as to the How? Jack
gives himself little concern, so long as he reaches his goal swiftly and
in safety.

On the morning of the 27th we stood into the Bay of Umata, although it was
very doubtful whether we should find a secure anchorage here, considering
the S.W. wind that was blowing full into the roadstead, which is quite
un-sheltered in that point of the compass. In fact, as we came nearer the
land, we speedily became aware of the impracticability of anchoring here
even in the best weather; while, on the other hand, it did not seem very
advisable, owing to the difficulty of getting in, to make for the
excellent harbour of San Louis de Apra, it being by no means easy, during
the prevalence of the S.W. monsoons, for a large ship to beat out, so that
they are occasionally detained there for several weeks. The order was
accordingly given to luff up, so as to make tacks against the freshening
west wind, out of this bay, studded as it is with numerous coral reefs.
This proved to be a work of much time and trouble, ere we succeeded,
after many hours of anxious care, in weathering the reef.

The island of Guam, with its lofty green mountain-ridges, numberless
valleys, and thickly-wooded glades, had a cheerful and friendly aspect,
but seems but little cultivated. At Umata, where we perceived a few
houses, the Spanish flag was waving from a small fort adjoining the
settlement, which had been hoisted on the approach of the frigate.

On 30th August, in 149 deg. 53' E., we reached the eastern limit of the S.W.
monsoon, and--although not more than four days' sail from the object of
our next visit, the island of Puynipet, had we met with favourable winds
to waft us a little further--it was 15th September ere we came in sight of
that lovely island, for, stormy and boisterous as the beginning of this
section of our cruise had proved, not less annoying were the fickle calms,
which kept us lying for weeks motionless, our sails idly flapping with the
roll of the ship. It is a wretched depressing state of inactivity and
discomfort, of which only those can form an idea who have been caught in a
calm on the open ocean, on board of a sailing ship,--

     "Wenn Welle ruht und jedes Luftgefluester; Wenn Meer und
        Himmel schweigend sich umschlingen, Und fromm, fast wie zwei
      betende Geschwister."

Which may be freely translated as follows:

              "When ocean smooths his wrinkled face,
              And sea and sky in pray'rful silence bend,
                As when, in mutual fond embrace,
              Two loving sisters' vows on high ascend!"

The original is by Nicolas Lenau.


FOOTNOTES:

[126] Compare Gutzlaff's "History of the Chinese Empire," published by K.
Neumann; Stuttgart and Tuebingen, 1847.

[127] The copper cash is the sole currency in use, and consists of a
mixture of copper, iron, and tin. Its value, reckoned by the string of
100, is variable, and is calculated according to the proportional traffic
in foreign merchandise. On the average, from 1250-1300 cash are about
equal to $1.00 American, or 4_s._ 2_d._ English.

[128] In Shanghai the medium of exchange in common use is not as at
Hong-kong reckoned in dollars, but in taels, an imaginary currency of the
value of about $1.33, so that 100 taels = $133-1/3, or about L27 15_s._
Most accounts are rendered in taels, whence they are reduced into Mexican
dollars, the only foreign silver that is current. When European merchants
first came in contact with the children of the Flowery Land, the latter
used to pay a sort of premium for American dollars, while for those
bearing the effigies of Charles III. (known as the Karolus dollar), quite
a special price was paid. Gradually, however, the value sank till, as
already mentioned, 75 taels=$100. What has so often been reported of a
special Shanghai dollar coinage is quite erroneous. There are neither gold
nor silver coins struck in China, but solely of copper, and in some
provinces of iron. The term Shanghai dollar is equivalent to tael, which,
as already remarked, is, like the guinea in England, unknown to commerce.
1 tael=5_s._ 7_d._ English, but in trade it is taken as 6_s._ It
occasionally rises as high as 6_s._ 6_d._, when the proportion between the
dollar and the tael is as 100 to 72.

[129] An English translation of one of these reports will be found in the
1845 number of Morrison's admirably edited, but now rather rarely met
with, monthly periodical, "The Chinese Repository."

[130] We occasionally saw the Queen of Heaven (Kwan-Yin) represented with
a child in her arms, and have in our possession a piece of carved work
representing such a group, which we purchased in a shop at Shanghai. This
elegant figure seems to be a favourite deity with the Chinese, as it
frequently adorns their little domestic altars, and is especially
reverenced by the women who are desirous of the honours of maternity. The
striking similarity between this exhibition and that of the Holy Virgin,
as we see her represented in Catholic Churches, with the infant Jesus in
her arms, must involuntarily suggest the idea that there has been an
infusion of Catholicism intermingled here with the rites of Buddha. If the
resemblance between the two is not accidental, it may readily be assumed
that the same thing has occurred here as in the case of certain Christian
legends, which the traveller encounters among various races, on whom the
beams of Christian civilization have never been shed.

[131] The price of each meal is as follows:--

  1 bowl of rice,                                   12 cash (1/2 _d._)
  1    "    vegetables,                              "  "   (1/2 _d._)
  1 cup of tea,                                      6  "   (1/4 _d._)
  Breakfast, consisting usually of rice,
      vegetables, and tea,                          30  "   (1-1/4 _d._)
  Bed, fire, and attendance,                        20  "   (7/8 _d._)

[132] This sacrificial paper, coloured and written upon, is usually called
"Joss" or "Sycee"-paper in Canton-English, because the prayers addressed
to the Divinity are usually for riches and silver ingots (_Sycee_), which
the suppliants hope to obtain by entreaty.

[133] Properly spelt _Kong-fu-tseu_, from which the Europeans have
constructed the Latinized name Confucius. _Kong-fu-tseu_ (sometimes also
written _Kong-tse_) was born 550 B.C. in the city of Kio-siu-bien, in the
modern province of Shantung.

[134] Lao-tse (Lao-tseu), born B.C. 504, in the village of Knio-schin, in
the kingdom of Thsu, held the post of keeper of the archives of the palace
under the Tscheu dynasty. In his Book of Philosophy (Tao-te-king) the
following remarkable words occur: "The rule of antiquity has been, not to
shed light on the people, but to keep them in ignorance. A people that
comprehends is difficult to govern. On this subject men say, Whoso governs
a kingdom in knowledge, the same is the destroyer of that kingdom; whoso
governs a kingdom assigning no reason, the same maintains that kingdom. In
the family, in the school, children are brought up among idols. When they
enter school in the morning they are taught to do honour to the image of
Kong-tse. This custom must be forthwith dispensed with." (Compare J. R.
Kaeuffer's History of Eastern Asia, for "Friends of the History of
Mankind," Leipzig, Brockhaus, 1859, vol. ii. p. 64, and K. F. Neumann's
Eastern Asiatic History, Leipzig, W. Engilmann, 1861, p. 129.)

[135] Copper coins, struck by a ruler with whose reign any memorable
occurrences are associated, command a high price as health-giving amulets.
Some of these, those, for instance, of the Ming and Sing dynasties, have
very special healing virtues attributed to them. The currency of
Tsching-ta (1506-1522) are unfailing preservatives against the perils of
pregnancy, and the illnesses consequent thereon. Others are held in great
honour as prophylactics. The mode of application consists in the invalid
dragging them by a cord over various parts of his body in a certain
prescribed order.

[136] The Chinese attribute the most marvellous healing powers to water,
and accordingly apply it in a variety of forms, in numbers of maladies of
the most dissimilar character. Water, cold, tepid, warm, and hot, as also
snow and iced-water, figure among the list of medicaments, as do also
rain-water, well and river-water, brackish water, dew, water from any eddy
or whirlpool, or a stream, boiling water, and steam.

[137] The Chinese women are for this reason anxious to keep their children
at the breast for two or three years and even longer, partly by way of
speculating upon their having a constant breast of milk, and in this
singular manner make up for any deficiency of cow's milk, between the
market demand and the actual supply. A Chinese who possesses five or six
concubines in addition to his legitimate spouse, may thus boast of a
regular dairy farm. As sailors on arriving in port are usually excessively
fond of milk, which they drink in large quantities, we were not a little
amazed on learning from a physician at Hong-kong the source whence in all
probability had been derived the milk that was so plentifully supplied!

[138] In German _Bruch-porzellan_, in French _porcelaine-craquelee_.

[139] _Description generale de la Chine._

[140] Not alone this oil-cake, but ground horns and bones, hair from the
beard, and nail-parings, rust, ashes, and even human excrement are used as
manure. And it is a singular fact that the price of the latter varies
according to the race of men by whom it has been evacuated. The
succulently nourished flesh-eating English and Americans are in this
respect in far greater demand than the more sparely-fed cross-breeds;
while the Chinese, subsisting almost exclusively upon fish and vegetables,
are in respect to the value of their _faeces_ as manure, behind every other
race inhabiting the country. The price of this manure varies with the
quality from one dollar to three dollars the _picul_. This custom of
collecting and disposing of human excrement for manure is much more
extensively observed in the interior of the Empire than in the provinces
along the coast. "If," writes M. Huc, the well-known missionary,--"if we
were not aware to what perfection the denizens of the Celestial Empire
have carried the art of manuring, one would be at a loss how to reconcile
the fondness of John Chinaman for making money with the conveniences free
of all charge which the proprietors of the soil everywhere erect for the
comfort of travellers. There is not a city nor a village in which this is
not universally the case. In the most crowded streets, or the most
out-of-the-way abandoned spot, one frequently marvels to find these
"cabinets" in cane-work, earth, or even masonry. One is almost tempted to
believe he is in a country where the care to provide plenty of public
latrines is pushed to the extreme. Utilization, however, furnishes a
sufficient explanation of all these edifices."

[141] In every part of this extensive empire, travellers encounter these
national tributes to the memory of distinguished women, and Dr. Medhurst,
as also Fortune and other authorities upon China, relate numerous
instances of these remarkable memorials. One of these, an archway of
stone, is spoken of by Medhurst as of singular beauty. It is half a mile
from the city of Kwang-Tib, and was erected by the community of that
region, with the approval of the Emperor, in honour of a lady of that
city, of singular piety and benevolence. Over the portico are inscribed
the words "Kin-sin-tsae-tschung" (a golden and perfect heart precisely in
the middle).

[142] In the hospital, in what is called the western suburb of Canton,
which was under the charge of Dr. Hobson from 1848 to 1858, the annual
number of patients of both sexes under treatment averaged upwards of
20,000. During the most unhealthy season (May and June) the number
imploring assistance frequently amounted to from 3000 to 3400. In the
dispensary there were, moreover, from 200 to 250 patients, who received
medical advice three times a week, and were supplied with medicaments
gratuitously.

[143] We saw this huge work in the private library of the chief of the
medical staff at Hong-kong, Dr. W. A. Harland, who had conceived the idea
of publishing a more important work upon Chinese drugs, when death struck
down this distinguished and most industrious gentleman while in the active
discharge of his duties.

[144] In the Leper village near Canton, which is under the superintendence
of a Chinese physician, there are about 100 lepers of both sexes, each of
whom receives about 20 cash (not quite one penny) daily for his support.
The superintendents stated to Dr. Hobson, who repeatedly visited the
village, as the result of their many years' experience and observations,
that leprosy is not in every case transmitted from parents to children;
that several wives of leprous persons have no trace whatever of the
disease, but that these women in all probability belong to those of the
third and fourth generation, who wholly escape. The Chinese overseers and
attendants, however, can have had as little opportunity for remarking upon
the breaking out of leprosy among the children of those whose parents were
entirely exempt from it as they had of informing themselves with accuracy
as to the various forms and rapid diffusion of the disease in the case of
the one, or its mild type and gradual disappearance in the other.
Perspiration or suppuration in the diseased parts are never remarked in
these patients.

[145] At the Refuge for the Destitute (_Monegu choultry_) at Madras, where
Dr. Mudge was at the same time instituting experiments lasting over two
years, exhibiting these same remedies in every form and shape of
elephantiasis, to which cases a special ward had been set apart, rarely
entertaining fewer than 100 patients, that gentleman found it to be
perfectly inoperative, and he accordingly entirely ceased prescribing it.
In lieu of the Tscharul Mugra, the Hindoos in cases of leprosy make use of
what are known as the "Asiatic pills," consisting of arsenic, pepper, and
the root of the _Asclepia gigantea_.

[146] In an old Chinese medical work occurs the following remarks upon the
plant: "Tae-fung-tzi. Taste, acrid and burning: imported from the South
(this obviously alludes to the Straits of Malacca). Acts as an alterative
on the blood, and is accordingly useful in cases of leprosy, when the
blood is corrupted. The oil pressed from the seeds is also used as a
remedy in ulcers, eruptions, and psoriasis, and for killing worms. This
drug must be exhibited in the form of pills."

[147] Geography, Statistics, and Natural History of the Chinese
Empire--New York, 1847; Tonic Dictionary of the Chinese language--Canton,
1856; Chinese Commercial Guide. Fourth edition--Canton, 1856.

[148] In the figures of the Chinese original, which represents the
Lo-hau-miau or Buddhist aboriginal, Buddha is represented in a cavity of a
rock. Two burning lamps are standing beside him, one on each side, and in
front are two worshippers in devotional attitudes, while at a short
distance one perceives a woman with a little child, who is approaching the
divinity. The men wear fox-tails as ornaments to the head, and their long
locks hang loose and dishevelled, far below the shoulders. Every year on
the third day of the third moon, our Chinese traveller goes on to state,
old and young, man, woman, and child, bring offerings of fruit to Buddha,
and for that and the three next succeeding days, they sing and dance, and
at the same time make offerings of all manner of _cooked_ food. From their
custom of wearing a fox-tail on their heads, which was also common among
the ancestors of the present Mantchoos, and that these wild tribes
reverence the image of Buddha, Dr. Bridgman is disposed to class them
amongst foreign nations.

[149] Among these there were, besides a small quantity of Sorghum, several
species of vegetables, which are suited for cultivation in temperate
climates, such, for example, as Poussen, Pa-tse, Pon-ta-tse, with which
since our return experiments have been instituted in various parts of the
Austrian Empire. M. de Montigny has also since our return sent, quite
lately, a large quantity of Chinese seeds by way of souvenir, and despite
illness, is so much interested in forwarding the objects of the Imperial
Expedition, that he was a short time ago decorated with an Austrian order.

[150] We are however in a position to furnish an extract from the
note-book of an English sailor, left in charge of the yacht of an English
merchant at Shanghai, who accompanied the expedition of Lord Elgin to the
Pei-ho as coxswain. Notwithstanding the occasional _naive_ expressions
made use of, it is a valuable narrative, such as may call up many strange
reflections in the mind of the reader:--

"1858. May 30th.--The river Pei-ho is about 150 yards wide at its mouth,
and at dead low water varies from 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 fathoms in depth. On the
bar, which is two miles wide, the difference between the ebb and the flood
is from 9 to 10 feet. Easterly winds cause the highest tides. In the
interior, near Tien-Tsin, the river is from 3 to 6 fathoms deep, and from
50 to 100 fathoms wide. Countless villages stud the banks. The houses are
built of clay or straw. The boys run about naked to an age of eight years.
It is a very wretched population. The coolies plunge into the water after
the empty bottles which are swimming about. They seem exceedingly willing
to be serviceable to foreigners. At Tien-Tsin, ten and a half hours from
the mouth of the river, the thermometer marks 89 deg. Fahr. in the shade. Lord
Elgin is living in a private house on shore. The interpreters live in a
passenger-junk. Provisions are on the whole cheaper than at Shanghai. An
immense number of natives keep crowding open-mouthed round the
"barbarians" and their ship during the entire day, hundreds following us
at every step. Almost all the shops are shut, through dread of the
barbarians."

"4th June.--Thermometer 95 deg. The people very willing to supply the
strangers with water, tea, &c. The natives are on the average from five to
five feet three and well-proportioned. Some of them are "tremendously"
fat, with huge heads. Among the entire lot I could not see one single
woman. The streets are narrow, filthy, and uneven. Saw several hand-carts,
which were used to convey water from the river to the village. On each
barrow there could be from six to eight buckets of water. There were also
plenty of mules and donkeys, but very few horses."

"June 18.--This day the Russian minister concluded his treaty. A Russian
courier starts to-morrow for St. Petersburg with dispatches."

"June 26th.--At 6 P.M. to-day the treaty with England was signed. Went in
procession to the town. All the shipping dressed with flags, and manned
yards. The festivities went off in the Yamun. Lord Elgin sat at the middle
table, with a Mandarin on each side of him. I hear their names were
Wa-schu-nau and Kwei-liang. The first-named is a strong, corpulent man of
about 45; the latter is much older, and seemed very much dejected; he has
however just recovered from sickness, which may account for it. After the
ceremonies of signing and sealing had been gone through, they all partook
of refreshments provided by the Mandarin. Lord Elgin proposed a toast to
the health of the Emperor of China, and to the future friendship of the
two nations, which was responded to by the Mandarins. Shortly after the
assembly broke up, and we all marched home to the excellent music of the
flag-ship's band and the bugles of the marines. The whole affair lasted
about three hours and a half. It was full moon, and a splendid night.

"June 27th.--This afternoon the treaty with the French was signed.
Returned to their ships by torch-light, port-fires, &c. &c. Ki-ying, the
Mandarin who assisted in bringing about the treaty, was sentenced to be
decapitated, as he was blamed for opening the door to the barbarians, but
he has since been pardoned."

"July 3rd.--News came from Pekin that Ki-ying has committed suicide by
cutting his throat."

"July 4th.--Thermometer 96 deg. on board, despite awnings and sprinkling the
roof of the wheel-house with water!"

"July 6th.--Left Tien-Tsin. After a long, tedious, and tiresome passage of
15 days we reached Shanghai once more on 21st July, all well.

"Price of provisions at Tien-Tsin, as contracted for on 28th May, for the
supply of the English fleet:--

  Oxen (average weight 4 piculs, or 533 lbs.), the carcase      $10
  Sheep,                                         "                2
  Hens,                                        per dozen          1
  Geese and ducks,                               "                2
  Eggs,                                        per thousand       3
  Vegetables,                               picul=133-1/2 lbs.  1.50
  Rice,                                          "                5
  Sugar,                                         "                6
  Yams,                                        per dozen          1
  Pears,                                       per hundred        1
  Apples,                                        "              1.50
  Ice,                                         per lb.           16

"All articles to be delivered of the best quality. The prices are reckoned
in American dollars. Every morning a boat was sent off to the
_Coromandel_, on board which the purchases took place."

[151] The Tau-Tai, whose authority extends over the three prefectures of
Soo-Chow, Sung-Kiang, and Tai-tsing in the north-east of the province of
Kiang-ti, is under the governor of Soo-chow, and has resided at Shanghai
ever since that port was thrown open to trade. His salary by law is only
4000 _taels_ (L1445), but the various perquisites and emolument attached
to it make his actual income about 365,000 _taels_ or L105,000 per annum;
out of which he has, however, to defray all expenses of subordinates, &c.;
so that the net annual income of this post is estimated at from 25,000 to
30,000 _taels_ (L7000 to L8700). Besides the Tau-Tai there is only the
Tschi-hien, a sort of magistrate who lives in Shanghai, and trades with
the foreigners.

[152] As another example of an interview with the highest class of Chinese
officials, we must briefly describe one enjoyed by some of our Expedition
with a Mandarin named Li-hoi-wan. He received them in a chamber of his
house, in which were a few small tables and chairs, while at the other end
was an elevated cushioned seat on which sate Li-hoi-wan, a large stout
man. He wore a Mandarin hat, with a blue button, and a greyish blue coat
reaching to the ground. He saluted the foreigners by folding his palms
across his breast, invited them to be seated on the dais beside him, and
ordered cigars and tea to be brought. Afterwards sweetmeats of every
description, confectionery, and fruit were served, as also Chinese wines,
the latter, to judge by their flavour and their fragrance, seeming as
though they must have hailed from a perfumery store rather than a wine
cellar. Two days after the Chinese, with delicate courtesy, returned the
visit at their quarters in the residence of M. Probst, the Consul for
Oldenburg. Punctually at the appointed hour three far-resounding taps of
the gong were heard, a foot-soldier of police presented a flaming red
"_carte de viste_," bearing the name and titles of Li-hoi-wan, who
forthwith was received by the travellers at the threshold, in compliance
with Chinese customs. He was attired in heavy silk clothes, his fan in an
elegantly worked sheath, a gold lever watch in his girdle, and was in
excellent spirits. The hospitable host had, according to the custom of the
country, prepared a chow-chow, or collation, at which, however, instead of
Samschoo, champagne was the prevailing beverage. A few days later the
Mandarin visited his newly acquired friends on board the frigate, and
begged their acceptance of a variety of presents, such as silks, nuts,
tea, dried fruits, and Chinese maxims and proverbs, written on long rolls
of paper, that, as he naively expressed it, we might think of him "as a
brother."

[153] Mr. Hogg has since left that firm, and with his brother, Mr. Edward
J. Hogg, has established the firm of Hogg Brothers, in Shanghai.

[154] Under the Emperor Yang-ti of the Tsin dynasty, which filled the
throne during the 6th century, more than 1600 miles of canals were partly
constructed, partly rebuilt and repaired, the immense works being
distributed among the soldiery and the inhabitants of the cities and
villages. Each family was bound to furnish one man, between the ages of 15
and 20, whom the Government only found in provisions. The soldiers, on
whom devolved the heaviest portion of the work, received higher pay. Some
of these canals, which were the making of the commerce of the interior,
and thus were of the utmost service to the welfare of the Empire, were
forty feet wide, and were planted on either bank with elms and willows.

[155] These lanterns, often beautifully carved and otherwise adorned, are
among the most characteristic furniture of a Chinese room. Into their
manufacture enter not alone glass, horn, silk, paper, &c., but also the
glutinous matter derived from a species of sea-tangle (_Gigartina
tenax_--called by the Malays _Agar-Agar_), with which the paper employed
in covering the sides of the lantern is fastened on. In the silk and paper
manufactures too this omnipresent Agar-Agar paste plays so important a
part, that above 500 piculs at $2 a picul, are annually imported from the
Indian Archipelago.

[156] Vide Huc's Chinese Empire, Vol. I.

[157] The Chinese find it not less inexplicable that we use such
murderous-looking instruments to divide and convey our food to our mouths,
with which they think we must every moment be in danger of wounding our
lips or putting our eyes out, than that we should remove the bones from
the flesh, or crack the shells of nuts and almonds, both which operations
seem to them excessively absurd. In fact, it is no mere bon-mot which
represents a Chinese gazing in astonishment at Europeans playing
billiards, or nine-pins, waltzing, or "polking," and remarking, with an
ill-concealed assumption of superiority, that wealthy people ought to
leave such fatiguing things to be done by their servants!!

[158] Since the well-known minister and envoy to Japan.

[159] Since sacked by the Tai-ping rebels.

[160] Abandoned after a large part of the course of the Yang-tse had been
explored. Lieutenant-Colonel Sarel published lately a most interesting and
valuable pamphlet on this expedition, of which he was the leader, under
the title, "Notes on the River Yang-tse-kiang from Hankow to Ping-Shan.
Hong-kong, Printed at Noronka's office."

[161] Report of the deputation, appointed by the British Chamber of
Commerce in Shanghai, on the commercial capabilities of ports and places
on the Yang-tse-kiang visited by the expedition under Vice-Admiral Sir
James Hope, K.C.B., in February and March, 1861. Supplement to the China
Overland Trade Report of 28th Feb. and 27th May, 1861, and Supplement to
the Overland China Mail, No. 237 of 12th June, 1861.

[162] According to Dr. W. H. Medhurst's translation of this rare work, for
a copy of which, rescued from the last great conflagration at Canton, we
are indebted to the kindness of Mr. Wylie, the portion especially
referring to this runs as follows: "The mulberry ground having been
supplied with silk-worms, the people descended from the hills and dwelt in
the plains," (p. 91,) and further on, "their tribute baskets were filled
with black silks and checkered sarsenets" (p. 96). See Ancient China,
[Chinese character(s)] The Shookin, or the Historical Classic. Being the
most ancient authentic Records of the Annals of the Chinese Empire.
Illustrated by later commentators. Translated by Dr. W. H. Medhurst, Sen.
Shanghai, 1846.

[163] Thus Yuen-tschin in the third month (April of our calendar), Chay
and Yuen in the fourth month (May), Gae-tschin in the fifth month (June),
Sai in the sixth month (July), Han-tschin in the seventh month (August),
Sze-tschan in the ninth month (October), and Hau in the tenth month
(November).

[164] The value of a tael, as already stated, varies from 6_s._ to 6_s._
6_d._ It is estimated that a bale of silk, until it is shipped at Shanghai
for England, has cost from L80 to L100 sterling.

[165] The word _Cha_ is, however, used by the Chinese to designate not the
tea plant alone, but every description of _Camelia_.

[166] Arabian travellers who visited China in the 9th century, A.D. 850,
speak thus early of tea, as of a beverage in universal use. According to
Kaempfer tea was introduced from China into Japan about A.D. 519, by a
native prince named Daeme, who, during his residence in China, had learned
its invaluable properties. The Japanese, however, do not drink their tea
as an infusion, but grind the leaves into powder, pour hot water upon
them, and stir them with a bamboo-stick till they are thoroughly mingled
together, when they swallow the decoction and the powder together, as is
done with coffee in some parts of Asia.

[167] The term "Bohea" is in fact only a corruption of the Chinese Wu-yi,
which again is derived from Wu-i-kien, a well-known Chinese divinity.

[168] In Java, where the tea plant has been cultivated for a series of
years, the mountain region from 4000 to 5000 feet above the sea, and with
an average temperature of from 58 deg.1 to 73 deg.7, Fahr., has been found best
adapted for the growth of the plant.

[169] The first scientific arrangement of the tea plant according to dried
specimens was made in 1753 by Linnaeus, who in his _Species Plantarum_
included among these one species, which he called _Thea Sinensis_. But by
the time the second edition of his renowned work made its appearance in
1762, Linnaeus found himself compelled to make two species of it, and to
assign them the names by which they are known to the present day. The
first living tea plant was brought to Europe in October, 1763, by a ship
captain named Ekeberg, and planted in the Botanic Garden of Upsala.

[170] According to Fortune ("A Residence among the Chinese." London, 1857.
Murray), the various sorts of tea have added to them from two to four
spoonfuls of a mixture in which the plant _ma-ki-holy_ largely enters, as
also indigo and pulverized _gypsum_, in order to increase the green tinge
of the leaves.

[171] A picul, 133-1/3 lbs., of these leaves costs on the average 15 to 18
dollars, though it occasionally ranges as high as 30 dollars.

[172] In the year 1859, the exports into England were 30,988,598 lbs.
(viz. 22,292,702 lbs. black, and 8,695,896 lbs. green), out of a total
export of 55,328,731 lbs. Within the same period 19,952,147 lbs. went to
the United States, 1,879,584 lbs. to Australia; to Hong-kong, and other
ports along the coast of China, 1,261,347 lbs.; to Montreal, 510,600 lbs.,
and to the entire continent of Europe 736,455 lbs.

[173] Some experiments on a small scale were made with the _Sorgho_ at
Aquileia near Goerz, by M. Karl Ritter, a well-known merchant and sugar
refiner, of Trieste. We were shown samples of refined sugar, extracted
from the _Sorgho_, which promised the best results. A large quantity of
seeds which were sent a year ago to one of the members of the _Novara_
Expedition by M. de Montigny, had been made use of to institute a series
of experiments in cultivation, in those parts of the Empire, the climatic
conditions of which promised to be most favourable for the growth of the
_Sorgho_.

[174] During our stay at Shanghai we also made inquiries as to an alleged
new species of potato, concerning which there have been current for years
such contradictory accounts in the European and American journals, that
the foreign community of Shanghai was beset with inquiries from all parts
of the world, begging for more accurate information as to this newly
discovered tuber, which promised to supply a much-needed substitute for
the apparently effete, worn-out, disease-smitten potato of Peru. No one,
however, could furnish us with the slightest information on the subject,
and ultimately it became apparent that the rumours hitherto current were
founded on an erroneous impression. It would seem, according to the
opinion of Mr. Fortune, that the rumour first arose from mistaking for a
new sort of potato, the _Calladium esculentum_, which is quite commonly
exposed for sale in the streets of Shanghai, and the small tubers of
which, both in flavour and external appearance, resemble those of the
potato, when, without taking the slightest further trouble to inquire into
the matter, the pretended new discovery, fraught with such important
results for the poorer classes, was duly trumpeted to the entire world. In
no part of China hitherto accessible was there at the time of our visit
any other description of potato in use than the common Peruvian. Officers
of the English and American navies, who at the time of the first Peace of
Tien-Tsin were eating potatoes in the Gulf of Petcheli, assured us that
they were precisely identical with those that have so long been
acclimatized in Europe. Of edible tubers there are at Shanghai, besides
potatoes, the yam (_Dioscorea_ sp.) and the Yucca (_Jatropha_ sp.).

[175] The following is the process as we observed it: the bamboo strips
are first soaked for a considerable period in water, after which they are
peeled, and again saturated with lime-water, until they are perfectly
flexible. After this, they are converted, according to the method in use
at that special locality, either by water power or hand labour, into a
fluid of a pap-like viscosity, after which it is boiled till it has
attained the requisite fineness and consistency for conversion into paper.

[176] These consist chiefly of cotton and woollen goods of every
description, steel cutlery, iron-ware, glass, clocks, watches, musical
clocks, tin-ware, &c.

[177] The quantity of home-grown opium, chiefly produced in the province
of Yun-nan, cannot be accurately ascertained, as the returns are not made
at certain points; but the quantity must fall far short of the amount
imported from India.

[178] According to MacCulloch's Commercial Dictionary, opium had been
introduced into China and India by the commencement of the 16th century by
Mahometan merchants, and it sounds like an apology when the learned and
patriotic author, in treating of the part taken by England in the
much-to-be-lamented traffic in this noxious drug, adds by way of
palliation--"A century and a half before the English had _anything_
whatever to do with its _cultivation_."--(Latest edition, p. 939.)

[179] Only a certain number (originally twelve) of wealthy Chinese
merchants, "Hong," were permitted by law to trade with foreigners at
Canton. They had not only to account to Government for all duties and
taxes, but were likewise responsible for the good behaviour of the
strangers!

[180] It is a coincidence worthy of notice, that simultaneously with the
rise of the opium trade with China, the importation of slaves into America
began to increase, and that European commerce in these two infamous
traffics seemed to be ever increasing and gaining ground in Eastern Asia
and in America! At the end of last century the number of slaves in the
Southern States of the Union was little greater than that of opium-smokers
in China: at present the number of the former is about 4,000,000, and the
latter may be put at about the same figure; the latter, slaves of their
own intemperate passions,--the former, of the covetousness and cold
calculating selfishness of their masters. The opium question and the slave
question--these two seem destined to be solved simultaneously!

[181] A very similar result is arrived at by MacCulloch, who calculates
that the Company cleared 7_s._ 6_d._ per lb. on opium, which they bought
by their agents from the Bengal ryots at 3_s._ 6_d._ per pound, and
retailed at 11_s._ per pound.

[182] There are indeed smokers who smoke their two, four, five, and even
eight drachms per diem, but these are solitary instances, while the very
costliness of the article forbids the use of the narcotic to the great
mass of the population, except in the very smallest quantities.

[183] One poem of the Chinese Imperial Pretender, which is not included in
Dr. Medhurst's collection of the writings published by the insurgent press
at Nankin, and for a copy of which we have to thank Mr. Meadows,
Government interpreter at Shanghai, has lately been translated by our
learned countryman, Dr. Pfitzmaier. The splendidly got up binding of this
little book is of a golden yellow on the title page, and red on the
reverse; the river Yang-tse-kiang appears to pay homage to the Tai-ping,
whose residence it surrounds. The title printed on the exterior of the
wrapper runs as follows: "Imperial announcements in theses upon the words
of the Heavenly Father, the Most High Ruler." The title within is: "Ten
poems upon Supreme Felicity," although these so-called poems are simply
strophes, never exceeding four verses of seven feet. The writing bears
date the number _Kuei-hao_ (50), corresponding to A.D. 1853, the third
year of the reign of the Heavenly King, Tai-ping. The whole production is,
if that be possible, yet more bombastic, unintelligible, and stupid than
Chinese poems usually are to Western readers.

[184] Between February and September, 1855, there were executed in Canton
70,000 persons all told. Many of the rebel leaders were, in conformity
with the _penal laws_, hewed in numerous pieces while yet living; a
certain Kausin in 108! See K. F. Neumann's History of Eastern Asia, from
the first Chinese war to the Treaty of Pekin, 1840-1860. Leipzig,
Engelmann, 1861.

[185] We extract from the _London and China Telegraph_ of 31st March,
1862, the following severe but just criticism on this gentleman, whose
letter, which we also quote, shows him to be a person of but limited
education:--"Even the Rev. J. Roberts, who, as our readers are aware, has
lived with the rebels at Nankin, and has to his discredit defended their
conduct in the strongest possible manner, has at length discovered that
they are nothing better than robbers and murderers. This change of opinion
in a man who on all occasions so confidently urged the claims of the
Tai-pings, arose from a very simple cause:--he at length suffered,
personally, from their barbarity. A servant to whom he was attached was
killed before his eyes; and considering his life in danger, he fled to
Shanghai, and wrote the following letter, dated 22nd January, 1862,
reprobating the conduct of his former friends:--'From having been the
religious teacher of Hung Sow-chuen in 1847, and hoping that
good--religious, commercial, and political--would result to the nation
from his elevation, I have hitherto been a friend to his revolutionary
movement, sustaining it by word and deed, as far as a missionary
consistently could, without vitiating his higher character as an
ambassador of Christ. But after living among them fifteen months, and
closely observing their proceedings--political, commercial, and
religious--I have turned over entirely a new leaf, and am now as much
opposed to them, for good reasons, I think, as I was ever in favour of
them. Not that I have aught personally against Hung Sow-chuen, he has been
exceedingly kind to me. But I believe him to be a crazy man, entirely
unfit to rule, without any organized government, nor is he, with his
coolie-kings, capable of organizing a government of equal benefit to the
people of even the old Imperial Government. He is violent in his temper,
and lets his wrath fall heavily upon his people, making a man or woman 'an
offender for a word,' and ordering such instantly to be murdered without
'judge or jury.' He is opposed to commerce, having had more than a dozen
of his own people murdered since I have been here, for no other crime than
trading in the city, and has promptly repelled every foreign effort to
establish lawful commerce here among them, whether inside of the city or
out. His religious toleration and multiplicity of chapels turn out to be a
farce, of no avail in the spread of Christianity, worse than useless. It
only amounts to a machinery for the promotion and spread of his own
political religion, making himself equal with Jesus Christ, who, with God
the Father, himself, and his own son constitute one Lord over all! Nor is
any missionary, who will not believe in his divine appointment to this
high equality, and promulgate his political religion accordingly, safe
among these rebels, in life, servants, or property. He told me soon after
I arrived that if I did not believe in him, I would perish, like the Jews
did for not believing in the Saviour. But little did I then think that I
should ever come so near it, by the sword of one of his own miscreants, in
his own capital, as I did the other day. Kan-Wang, moved by his elder
brother (literally a coolie at Hong-kong) and the devil, without the fear
of God before his eyes, did, on Monday the 13th inst., come into the house
in which I was living, then and there most wilfully, maliciously, and with
malice aforethought, murder one of my servants with a large sword in his
own hand in my presence, without a moment's warning or any just cause. And
after having slain my poor harmless, helpless boy, he jumped on his head
most fiend-like and stamped it with his foot; notwithstanding I besought
him most entreatingly from the commencement of his murderous attack to
spare my poor boy's life. And not only so, but he insulted me myself in
every possible way he could think of, to provoke me to do or say something
which would give him an apology, as I then thought and I think yet, to
kill me, as well as my dear boy, whom I loved like a son. He stormed at
me, seized the bench on which I sat with the violence of a madman, threw
the dregs of a cup of tea in my face, seized hold of me personally, and
shook me violently, struck me on my right cheek with his open hand; then,
according to the instruction of my King for whom I am ambassador, I turned
the other, and he struck me quite a sounder blow on my left cheek with his
right hand, making my ear ring again; and then perceiving that he could
not provoke me to offend him in word or deed, he seemed to get the more
outrageous, and stormed at me like a dog, to be gone out of his presence.
'If they will do these things in a green tree, what will they do in the
dry?'--to a favourite of Teen Wang's, who can trust himself among them,
either as a missionary or a merchant? I then despaired of missionary
success among them, or any good coming out of the movement--religious,
commercial, or political--and determined to leave them, which I did on
Monday, Jan. 20th, 1862.' Mr. Roberts adds that Kan-Wang had refused to
give up his clothes, books, and journals, and that he had been left in a
state of destitution. Most persons will agree that he fully deserves any
amount of suffering that may be inflicted on him. Mr. Roberts has done his
utmost to delude Europeans as to the true character of the Tai-pings; he
has kept back some facts, has falsified others, and has acted throughout
in a manner utterly inconsistent with his assumed character of a Christian
missionary. On such conduct no comment can be too severe."

[186] Nankin accordingly is usually called now-a-days the "City of the
Coolie-Kings."

[187] Very similar are the reports made by the English who, in Dec. 1858,
accompanied Lord Elgin on his voyage of discovery up the Kiang, and
remained a considerable period among the Tai-ping. "The tenets of their
religion," says Mr. Laurence Oliphant (vide Earl of Elgin's Mission to
China and Japan, vol. ii. p. 463), "consist of a singular jumbling of
Jewish ordinances, Christian theology, and Chinese philosophy. Like the
Jews in the Old Testament they wage wars of extermination, they live like
the worst professing Christians, and they believe like--Chinese."

[188] The charges forwarded by the owners of the little _Meteor_ for
towing, and which are calculated according to the draught of water of the
ship towed, was as follows:--

  +--------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
  |Itinerary or  |15 feet   |15 to     |17 to     |18 to     |19 ft. &   |
  |vice versa.   |and under.|17 feet.  |18 feet.  |19 feet.  |all beyond.|
  +--------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
  |              |          |          |          |          |           |
  |From Shanghai |300 taels,|350 taels,|450 taels,|450 taels,|500 taels, |
  |to Gutzlaff's |or        |or        |or        |or        |or         |
  |Island.       |L90.      |L105.     |L135.     |L135.     |L150.      |
  |              |          |          |          |          |           |
  |Shanghai to   |150 taels,|175 taels,|200 taels,|225 taels,|250 taels, |
  |Wusung.       |or        |or        |or        |or        |or         |
  |              |L45.      |L52 10_s._|L60.      |L62 10_s._|L75.       |
  |              |          |          |          |          |           |
  |From Wusung   |225 taels,|250 taels,|275 taels,|300 taels,|350 taels, |
  |to Gutzlaff's |or        |or        |or        |or        |or         |
  |Island.       |L62 10_s._|L75.      |L82 10_s._|L90.      |L105.      |
  +--------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+

[189] Typhoon, or _Tei-fun_, a strong wind. While some authors derive this
word from the Arabic _Tufan_, a violent wind, others see in it the giant
_Typhos_ of Greek mythology, who was begotten by Tartarus of Earth, and
from whom proceeded all that was disastrous and destructive. Whoever has
experienced a typhoon will most readily acquiesce in the latter
derivation.

[190] During this storm, we made the not uninteresting observation in a
physiological point of view, that when the gale was at its worst, even the
least hard-a-weather of us seemed quite free from sea-sickness, apparently
the result of extreme excitement. For similar reasons, men who have been
bitten by a snake, and who have had raw spirits administered as an
antidote, seem able to take four or five times the quantity which they can
on ordinary occasions.


        [Illustration: Distant View of the Island of Puynipet.]




                                 XVI.

                       The Island of Puynipet.

                        18th September, 1858.

    Native boats in sight.--A pilot comes on board.--Communications
    of a white settler.--Another pilot.--Fruitless attempts to tack
    for the island.--Roankiddi Harbour.--Extreme difficulty in
    effecting a landing with the boats.--Settlement of Rei.--Dr.
    Cook.--Stroll through the forest.--Excursions up the Roankiddi
    River.--American missionaries.--Visit from the king of the
    Roankiddi tribe.--Kawa as a beverage.--Interior of the royal
    abode.--The Queen.--Mode of living, habits and customs of the
    natives.--Their religion and mode of worship.--Their festivals
    and dances.--Ancient monumental records and their probable
    origin.--Importance of these in both a historical and geological
    point of view.--Return on board.--Suspicious conduct of the
    white settler.--An asylum for contented delinquents.--Under
    weigh for Australia.--Belt of calms.--Simpson Island.--"It must
    be a ghost!"--Bradley Reef.--A Comet.--The Salmon Islands.--
    Rencontre with the natives of Malayta.--In sight of Sikayana.


While yet, on 16th September, 1858, five or six knots distant from the
island of Puynipet,[191] first discovered in 1828 by the Russian Admiral
Luetke, and just as we found ourselves off what is called "Middle Harbour,"
we remarked a boat of European construction making for the frigate. Two
hours later it came alongside, with four natives and a white man, the
latter of whom came on deck and offered his services to the Commodore as
pilot. He proved to be a Yankee named Alexander Tellet, who had lived 20
years on the island as smith and carpenter, to which he added the
functions of pilot for the harbour in which he lived. Presently we were
surrounded by a considerable number of natives in elegant canoes streaked
with red, and formed of hollowed-out trunks of trees with outriggers,
which have very peculiar scaffold-like supports, so that there is a kind
of platform formed in the centre of the canoe, whereon the master usually
seats himself, but which serves on occasion for festive meetings, and even
for a small dance! The sails, made of mats, are triangular, the most acute
angle being confined between two long bamboos, while a third serves as a
mast, the whole capable of being shifted to either end of the boat by one
of the crew, according to the direction of the wind. While some were doing
what they could in their small boats to keep within the speed of the
frigate, though we were going pretty fast, just as parasites make fast to
the shark, others followed us a little distance, like dolphins, those
faithful companions of ships, as far as the nearest harbour. With the
exception of a short apron of cocoa-palm leaves, the natives were quite
naked, and seemed pretty well made. On their heads they wore a sort of
projecting pent-hat, also of palm-leaves, obviously intended to shield
the eyes from the vertical rays of the sun, and in form most resembling
those lamp shades which old men or youths with weak eyesight are with us
in the habit of using to ward off the full glare of artificial light.
Among the natives who favoured us with their escort, there were two who
from their personal grace, their light colour of skin, and thoroughly
European cast of features, especially attracted our attention. They were
the sons of an Englishman named Hadley, who had been for many years
resident on Mudock island, E. of Puynipet, where he supported himself by
fishing and pilotage, and had married a native woman. Shortly before our
arrival, Hadley had started with several hundred pounds of tortoise-shell
for Hong-kong, whence he intended to sail for England. He had intrusted
his two sons to the care of a European settler, who succeeded him as pilot
on Mudock island. According to all appearance, however, Hadley had little
intention of returning to this island, notwithstanding the family tie that
should have bound him to it.

As we were coasting along the west side of the island about 1 to 17 miles
from the reefs, Tellet was overwhelmed with questions on every hand and on
every possible subject, and among other subjects of information we
presently found that the chief intercourse of foreign ships was carried on
with Roankiddi or Lee Harbour, some 15 or 20 miles distant, and Metetemai
or Foul-weather Harbour, which lies six or seven miles E. of Roankiddi.
During the N.E. trade (November to April), from 50 to 60 American whalers
put in to Puynipet to take in wood and water, and fresh provisions,
chiefly yams, taro, sweet potato, poultry, and pigs. Many ships, moreover,
bound from Sydney for China prefer at that season the voyage through the
Pacific to passing round the south of Australia, and thence through the
Straits of Sunda, or the yet more dangerous passage through Torres
Straits, and usually make a tolerably fast run. Thus the Swedish corvette
_Eugenie_, on her voyage round the globe, performed in November, 1852, the
astonishing feat of making the passage from Sydney to Hong-kong, 5000
miles, in the unprecedentedly short space of 37 days!

The number of aborigines on this island, which is about 60 miles in
circumference, was estimated by Tellet at about 2000. Formerly it was as
many as 5000,[192] but the small-pox had since then committed fearful
ravages among the population. The circumstances under which this frightful
scourge was first introduced into Puynipet, throw considerable light upon
the history of the spread of that disease, as well as much useful
information upon the question of vaccination.

In 1854, the English barque _Delta_ arrived at Roankiddi Harbour, with
one of her crew ill with small-pox. The white settlers then on the island,
who were well acquainted with the virulence of the disease, implored the
native chief to forbid the captain's remaining, and insist on his putting
to sea forthwith. The latter, however, seemed determined to leave the
patient on the island. When he learned the hostile feeling of the
population to himself and the crew, and found that they would neither take
his sick man off his hands, nor supply himself and ship's company with
provisions, he availed himself of the silence and obscurity of night to
deposit the sick man on the shore with all his property, and at daybreak
made off under full sail. Next morning the natives found the unfortunate
wretch stretched suffering and utterly helpless on the strand, while the
barque was no longer in sight. Hostility to the captain was now converted
into sympathy with, and active compassion for, the sick man; a couch was
prepared in an adjacent hut, and as much attention lavished on him as was
possible under the circumstances; but his effects, consisting chiefly of
linen and upper clothing, were speedily appropriated by the thievish
natives. A few weeks later the small-pox broke out with frightful
violence, and raged five months with undiminished severity all over the
island. Almost every one of the natives was attacked, and of 5000
inhabitants 3000 succumbed to the virulence of the epidemic. The sailor,
however, with whom first originated this terrible fatality, completely
recovered. His clothing, scattered through every part of the island, had
no doubt essentially contributed to the speedy diffusion of the malady. Of
the thirty white settlers, who had all been inoculated, only one was
attacked, and he soon got well again. In August, 1854, the destroyer
disappeared almost as suddenly as he came, and has since then spared
Puynipet a second visit, but wherever one goes the traces of the disease
are visible in the faces and on the bodies of the natives.

While picking up this information, we were getting nearer and nearer to
Roankiddi Harbour on the S.W. of the island, and Tellet now stated he
could not undertake to conduct us further, as there resided a pilot in the
harbour whom he was not unwilling to give a job to. Another boat was now
approaching the frigate, which had on board the regular pilot of Roankiddi
Harbour, a Virginia Negro, named Johnson. Our man Tellet now took his
leave, and set out in his boat on his return to Middle Harbour. Many a
longing glance did we cast at the spot, where for the first time we were
to be privileged to examine the wonders of the coral beds of the South
Sea. For Puynipet is one of the finest examples known of a lofty island of
the great ocean regularly hemmed in by wall-like reefs, by far the
majority of the other islands being mere low "atolls." Unfortunately the
breeze was unsteady and very light; the sky looked so gloomy and
threatening that we had to haul off again from the island, and steer to
the S.E., so as not to approach the reef too closely during the night. In
the morning we once more neared the island, under the influence of a
gentle west wind, having run 15 miles out during the night. Gradually the
small wooded or rocky islets hove in sight again, which, stretching
northward from the great central mass, 2860 feet in height, surround the
lofty island like a ring, inside of the wall-reef, which encompasses it at
a distance of from one to two miles. We tacked about during the whole day
with light variable winds from the west, and by evening had got
sufficiently near our anchorage, that every one expected by a last tack to
fetch it ere night set in, when the breeze suddenly shifted, died away,
and once more compelled us to withdraw to a safe distance from the island,
and pass the night under easy sail. At length, on 18th September, a fresh
leading wind from the westward promised to carry us in without further
delay.

Right in front of us, and with not a cloud to interrupt the view, lay this
extinct volcano of an island, densely covered with the most luxuriant
verdure. Only at its N.E. corner there sprang suddenly into the air a
naked, castellated rock, about 1000 feet high or so, cut off horizontally
above, and with perpendicular sides, which we were informed was a small
island (Dochokoits), separated by a narrow channel from the main island.
Gradually, on either side of the isle, several rocky points became
visible, which steadily increased in dimension, and began to stretch
towards each other, till they looked like a row of pearls densely
sprinkled in the air above the horizon; after which a number of thin,
small, white clouds suddenly rose and disappeared above the dark blue
surface of the sea, flickering here and there like flames. This was our
first glimpse of the island-reef and the surf-beaten coral, seen under the
influence of a mirage, when, as is very frequently the case in tropical
climates, the temperature of the surface of the water, and consequently of
the immediately adjacent strata of atmosphere, is higher than those next
above. Having got within about a couple of miles, the dark points resolved
themselves into verdant cocoa-groves, patches of which adorn the outermost
reef, while the small clouds now proved to be the tumultuous lash of a
tremendous blinding surf, on the reef which separated the rise and fall of
the ocean outside from the smooth placid surface of the broad channel,
which inside the ring-shaped coral reef forms those singular natural
canals, on which the natives in their frail canoes can sail right round
the island, sheltered from the violence of the waves, and which, at those
places where there is sufficient depth, and a breach in the line of reef
admits of ingress from without, affords for even large-sized ships a
secure harbour, according to observation in 6 deg. 47' N., 158 deg. 13' 3'' E.

We now endeavoured to enter between Nahlap Island on the west, covered
with cocoa-palms and bread-fruit, and Sandy Island on the east, surrounded
with a belt of raging foam, its coral masses clothed with low scanty
brushwood. But almost immediately "Halt" was once more the order. In order
to get into the harbour proper, which lay between two majestic banks of
coral rising from the level of the sea like an elegantly hewn dock, we
had to pass through a very narrow channel in the reef, barely 50 fathoms
wide, which indeed was pretty plainly indicated by the colour of the
smooth water, besides being well marked out by regular buoys, but winds in
a direction first westerly and then northwards, and accordingly was
inaccessible to us with a west wind blowing. There was no alternative but
to let the anchor go among the naked coral rocks forming the sub-marine
plateau over which we now lay. But anxiety for the safety of the ship did
not admit of her being suffered to remain in circumstances so dangerous.
While therefore the frigate once more made sail, a survey of the island
and harbour was ordered by a boat expedition.

About 9 A.M. the Commodore, accompanied by some of the scientific staff,
set off for land in a slim, flat-floored, Venetian gondola, admirably
adapted for such purposes. When we had passed the twin Nahlap Islands and
Sandy Island, we found ourselves in a channel about 100 fathoms in length
by not quite 80 in width, which led directly into the interior of this
huge basin constructed exclusively by insects, and surrounded by a triple
wall of coral, an unfathomable, mirror-like pool, in which a ship lies
calm and motionless as though in a dock. A buoy at the S.W. angle of the
channel indicates some sunken rocks. On the further side of the coral reef
one perceives the low-lying group of the Ants' Islands, thickly covered
with trees. Although our Venetian boat drew hardly any water, we
nevertheless found great difficulty in advancing in proportion as we
approached the shore. The fact too that it was ebb-tide served to increase
the obstacles that beset our progress. Every moment the gondola touched
upon sand-bank or rock. The utmost caution had therefore to be exercised,
as we steered for some huts which were visible under the cocoa-palms quite
close to the shore. Following the deeper more navigable channels, we
reached the mouth of a river running from N.E., the low swampy soil on
either side being covered with dense mangrove bushes, but all our efforts
to push through the thickets so as to reach the huts proved unavailing,
while the whole soil seemed to be beset with the stumps of the mangrove,
like so many sharp stakes. After pushing a short distance up this mangrove
channel, from which on either side smaller channels diverged, we retraced
our steps, as there was no appearance of the scene changing, nor any
appearance of human habitation, and endeavoured to reach the land near the
huts already mentioned, by some of the deeper channels. Just then a white
settler came to our assistance, who, standing on the shore, indicated to
us by manual signs the clue out of this labyrinth of coral, and enabled us
by a less shallow channel to reach one of the few points at which a
landing is practicable. For at almost every point of the shore the
mangroves, by the tenacity of their roots, prevent, or at any rate impede,
the approach of boats, the natives themselves being confined to the use of
those few spots where rivers or other natural channels afford means of
access. Close to the shore appeared three wooden huts thatched with
bamboo and palm-leaves. This was a small colony of whites, whom a singular
freak of destiny seemed to have cast away upon these islands, where they
earned their subsistence as wood-cutters, smiths, fishermen, &c. They call
their settlement Rei. The first hut we entered was inhabited by a
Scotchman, who called himself "Dr. Cook," and practised as a physician. He
had lived 26 years on the island. His dwelling consisted of three large
apartments, which up to a certain height were shut off from each other by
thin wooden walls, so that the air could circulate freely overhead
throughout the entire length of the hut. Everything was neat and orderly:
in the first room, which apparently was used as a surgery, stood a number
of medicine bottles duly labelled, and crucibles, which at the very first
glance revealed the avocation of the possessor. Cook, who seemed far past
the half century, with pale, faded, expressionless features, and a long
silver-grey beard, clothed in a coarse woollen jacket, and with the huge,
broad-brimmed, worn-out straw-hat pulled low upon his wrinkled forehead,
had quite caught the listless, motionless deportment of the natives.
Nothing roused him, nothing surprised him; it took considerable time to
elicit from him any reply to our questions. The other white settlers in
the adjoining islands were not much more communicative; all showed in
their conduct a certain embarrassment, which left little doubt that theirs
had not been an altogether blameless life in former days. Most of them
were surrounded by a number of native wives, who had covered their bodies
with a powder of an intense yellow, prepared from the _Curcuma longa_,
and wore merely a piece of calico round the loins, while splendid yellow
blossoms set off the raven blackness of their long hair.

We now followed up a narrow footpath, which led to a gently-sloping
eminence behind the huts, and soon found ourselves surrounded by
bread-fruit trees and banana, while from time to time a black basaltic
rock cropped out from among the red, marl-like soil, and beautiful small
lizards with sapphire-blue tails that shone with a metallic lustre, shot
about with the velocity of an arrow among the stones. The prevailing
formation, as in almost all the volcanic islands of the Pacific, is an
amorphous basalt-lava, full of olivin and porphyry. On gaining the summit
of the hill, we found there a solitary, wretched-looking hut. A dog, a few
hens, and a phlegmatic native worn away to a shadow, whom the sudden
appearance of a number of European strangers hardly seemed to rouse from
his apathy, were the only living creatures visible. On our requesting to
be furnished with a light, a wrinkled old hag crept out of the hut, and
handed us a piece of lighted wood. The dusky old woman was presented with
a cigar, which she forthwith lit, and proceeded to smoke with
unmistakeable satisfaction. To our request for fresh cocoa-nuts with which
to quench our thirst, the man, without moving from his place, shouted a
few words in the direction of the forest, which was speedily replied to,
when some young girls came forth giggling and romping, who brought us what
we had asked for, fresh plucked from the slender cocoa-stem, as well as a
sugar-cane, and some ginger (_Zingiber officinalis_); all these
refreshments were handed us amid much hilarity by a lot of daughters of
Eve, young, not the least shy, but by no means attractive, whom a present
of two small mirrors in return sent away in a state of enthusiastic
delight. On our return to Dr. Cook's hut on the shore, several natives had
approached who bartered mussels and fresh fruit for tobacco, which they
preferred to everything, besides a number of young females, who were
retailing, from small bags hung round their persons, the different animals
they had collected the same morning at ebb-tide among the coral reefs.

One of the white settlers offered his services as guide, to pilot us up
the Roankiddi river as far as a village of the natives about two miles
inland, where the chief of the nation dwelt, and several American
missionaries had formed a settlement. Before reaching the main stream,
which is about 100 feet wide and is densely wooded on either side, we had
to pass various small branches and canals, which appeared to be
artificially constructed, and wind about in a succession of extraordinary
meanderings beneath an elastic covering of conical mangrove roots. For
about a mile inwards there was nothing but dreary, swampy, unlovely
mangrove forest, after which the vegetation on either shore began to
assume an unusually variegated but thoroughly tropical appearance. Palms,
bread-fruit trees, pandanus trees, papayas, caladias, Barringtonias, were
the chief representatives of this abounding forest flora. The animals on
this island seem to be less numerous and less varied; there are no large
ones at all. Of doves, as also of sand-pipers and parrots, we saw some
very beautiful species, of which the fowling-pieces of our sportsmen
furnished numerous specimens for our zoological collection. All along the
bank of the river and around the hills lay scattered at will, under the
shade of the most beautiful and abundant vegetation, the dwellings of the
natives. Near where the pretty Roankiddi falls into the sea, rises on the
left bank the handsome mission house built of wood, which serves the
missionaries for school, church, and residence in one. Close by is a stone
building, which serves as a larder. Unfortunately, the sole missionary,
Mr. Sturges of Pennsylvania, was absent on a tour of inspection, and only
his assistant (a native of the Sandwich Islands, who had received his
education in the States) was at home with his family. A third missionary,
also a native of the Sandwich Islands, lives at what is called
Foul-weather Harbour, where he also occupies his time with meteorological
observations.

The mission, which has been in the island since 1851, is supported at
considerable expense. A schooner, the property of the American Missionary
Society, keeps up regular communication with the neighbouring islands and
the Sandwich Islands, and supplies the missionaries with provisions and
other necessaries. These industrious, energetic men have quite recently
made experiments in planting several sorts of vegetables, as also tobacco
and sugar-cane, nearer their houses, in the hope, if successful, of
inciting the natives to similar exertions. The great resources at the
disposal of the Protestant missionaries, and the circumstance that they
attend to the temporal as well as the eternal weal of their dusky
neophytes, exhausting their medical skill in illness, educating their
children, ministering to their wants both by advice and co-operation, must
be regarded as the main causes of the rapid spread of Protestantism
throughout the races of the Pacific Ocean. We have seen missions, of which
the schools, places of worship, and dwelling-houses, constructed of iron,
were imported from the United States ready made, while the expenses of
maintenance were defrayed by an annual grant of 20,000 dollars. What a
gratifying contrast to the wretched appliances with which Catholic oversea
missions are compelled to eke out a precarious existence!

We landed at a spot where the Roankiddi promised to be navigable for
vessels of a better class than the hollowed-out canoes of the natives, and
for the remainder of the distance to the chief's residence we followed a
footpath through the forest. Close to the landing-place is a large,
hall-like building, which is used as an assembly-room by the natives on
the occasion of their festivities. Around the interior of this are ranged
couches stuffed with straw for families of rank, not unlike berths round a
ship's cabin. The centre of the hall is set apart for slaves and servants,
who during these rude reunions are busily employed preparing food and
drink for strangers. As often as a meeting is deemed necessary,
invitations are sent off to the various chiefs requesting their
co-operation. On very important occasions these are intoned through a
conk. As soon as all are assembled the king lays the subject-matter of the
debate before them, when every one present is at liberty to express his
opinion. Frequently these discussions become very animated, especially
when the orators happen to have partaken too freely of Kawa, when only the
interference of the less excited chiefs can prevent the disputants from
coming to blows. When we saw it, there were in the hall of justice, as it
might be termed, a number of huge, lengthy, but elegant canoes, painted
red, which gave it rather the appearance of a shed than a festive hall.

The footpath to the chief's residence led through a most beautiful
tropical landscape. The estate of the Nannekin (as the natives designate a
king in their own language) was laid out quite in the European fashion,
and the entrance was indicated by a wooden gateway. The house itself, a
lengthy oblong of wood and cane-work, with a roof of palm-leaves, and
built upon a sort of platform of two or three courses of stone, and
furnished in every part with numerous large apertures serving as windows,
presented from without a very comfortable, even imposing appearance; but
the interior was bare, ill-equipped, and sadly out of order. A row of
wooden columns, irregularly cut, and partially covered with gay-coloured
stuffs, running parallel with the thin exterior walls, formed a narrow
passage, a closer view of which was, however, shut off by cotton hangings
stretching across. The clothes and other property of the family hung here
at random, suspended from pegs and lines all round the wide hall, and in
the middle a hole had been excavated, which apparently was intended for a
fire-place. Among the articles of furniture we specially noticed a large
iron chest, with iron clampings, and a very singular-looking loom, on
which a fabric was being woven in variegated colours. The chief was not at
home, and had to be summoned, his timely absence affording an excellent
opportunity for examining the environs of the palace a little more
closely. In immediate proximity were a number of bread-fruit trees
(_Dong-dong_), the fruit of which forms the staple diet of the natives,
and has long been prepared by them in quite a unique manner.

The bread-fruit, so soon as it is ripe, is stripped of its husk, and cut
into small pieces. These the natives place in pits dug for the purpose
about three feet deep, in which they are placed in layers carefully
wrapped in banana leaves so as to prevent moisture reaching them. Thus
prepared, the pits are filled up to within a few inches of the surface,
covered with leaves, and weighted with heavy stones so distributed as to
diffuse an equal pressure throughout. Thus each pit is both air and water
tight. After a short time fermentation sets in, till the whole is
converted into a substance resembling cheese. The original idea of thus
storing the bread-fruit is said, according to tradition, to have been
suggested to the natives by a violent hurricane having at a remote period
levelled all the bread-fruit trees on the island, thus causing a great
famine. The fruit thus treated continues fit for consumption for years,
and, despite its sour taste and nauseous odour when exhumed, it is
regarded by the natives as a most palatable and nutritive dish, when well
kneaded, placed between two banana leaves, and baked between two hot
stones. Besides the bread-fruit, the principal articles of food in use
among the natives are cocoa-nuts, sugar-cane, yams, pigeons, turtle, fish,
and trepang, the sort of sea-cucumber of which we have already given a
description, and which the natives eat in the raw state.

They also eat taro (_Caladium esculentum_), a beautiful bulbous-rooted
plant of the _Aroidea_ tribe, with its broad elegant leaves, which,
together with wild ginger and turmeric (which is used sometimes for food,
sometimes for anointing the person, or dyeing their dresses) and the plant
they call Kawa (_Piper Methysticum_), grow in great profusion on the
property of the Nannekin.

As in all the South Sea Islands, the juice of the Kawa is used in Puynipet
for distilling an intoxicating beverage, which indeed plays a conspicuous
part in all their solemnities. But the mode of preparing it is somewhat
better calculated to tempt the palate, since it is not, as elsewhere,
first chewed by the women, but rubbed between two large stones, wetted,
and then drawn off in cocoa-nut shells. The leading chief is entitled to
the first shells of the prepared Kawa, or, if he is not present, the chief
priest, who mutters a few prayers over it ere drinking it.

The liquid, as thus procured from this species of pepper, is of a
brownish-yellow colour, somewhat like that of coffee into which milk has
been poured. The taste is sweet and agreeable, producing a glow in the
stomach, and induces a sort of intoxication, widely different however from
the form that alcoholic inebriations assume with us. Men in the habit of
drinking Kawa neither stagger about, nor speak thick and loud, when under
its influence. A sort of shiver affects the whole frame, and their gait
becomes listless and slow, but they never lose consciousness. In its last
stage, the person affected feels an extraordinary weakness in all his
joints; headache and an irresistible inclination to go to sleep supervene,
and a state of most complete repose becomes an absolute necessity.

The custom of Kawa drinking is diffused over the whole of the islands of
the Pacific. It even appears to have become a necessary of life among the
natives of Polynesia, just as betel-chewing and palm-wine are to the
Malays and Hindoos, opium-smoking and samchoo to the Chinese, chicha to
the Mexican races, and coca to the South American Indians.

In former times, on certain of the islands, the chiefs had regular
watchers, whose duty it was to guard their monarchs from being disturbed
when thus reposing. A dog which dared to bark, a cock that was venturesome
enough to crow, were forthwith put to death. The too liberal or
long-continued indulgence in Kawa seems to generate a peculiar cuticular
disease. Inveterate Kawa drinkers seem haggard or melancholy, their eyes
are sunk, their teeth of a bright yellow, their skin dry and chopped, and
the whole body is covered with boils; but those in whom such sores heal up
again, point with pride to the cicatrices that mark where they occurred.
The more of these scars a Kawa drinker can show, the higher is his
character. Besides producing unconsciousness, Kawa also induces
exceedingly erotic dreams.

According to the information which the white settlers gave us respecting
the method of cultivation of the soil of Puynipet and its climate, it
seems that sugar-cane, coffee, cotton, rice, tobacco, &c., would be
certain to succeed. Sugar-cane is found even now in the wild state; and to
a certain extent it forms an article of food of the natives, who suck the
juice.

The chief of Roankiddi is a handsome young man of lofty stature, strong
frame, of dark brown almost bronze skin, and agreeable, winning
expression. With the exception of the usual apron of palm-leaves, and a
bright red belt, he was naked, and wore a green circlet on his fine,
lustrous black hair, and a piece of sugar-cane in his right hand. His arms
and legs were very neatly tattooed. He seemed quite to understand the use
of a red Turkish fez with blue tassel, which we presented to him, and took
from his head its own exceedingly picturesque covering. Having been
apprized of the friendly nature of our visit, he begged us to enter his
house, which was not so easy a process as it seems, since the only access
was by one of the windows, about three feet from the ground. The Nannekin,
however, set us the example, and we followed. He first invited us to sit
upon European chairs, and ordered his pretty young wife to fetch us
cocoa-nut milk. It was the first time we had ever tasted this drink of the
natural man in the goblet of civilization! How differently did this
invaluable drink taste, when quaffed from the fresh green shell, than in
the artificial vessel of human manufacture! The natives of Puynipet did
not, like those of Nicobar, show their dexterity in opening the young
cocoa-nut by means of a slash. Here the husk is peeled off, and an opening
bored with much trouble till the fluid contents gush out--a process so
tedious, and manifesting so little ingenuity, that one would rather expect
it to be adopted by a European, who for the first time in his life was
opening a cocoa-nut, than from a child of the tropics. After the queen had
presented with her dainty little hands the cocoa-nut drink to the foreign
guests, she squatted herself smiling and laughing on the earth beside the
monarch, occasionally hiding herself with much natural grace behind her
youthful husband, when she could not restrain a burst of mirth at the
interest with which we seemed to regard many of the objects in her simple
household. Nothing surprised her more than that we should attach such
value to some baskets, plaited work, boxes, &c., as to be willing to
exchange articles of European make for them. Like all the other females
we saw, the young queen wore nothing but a piece of yellow linen (_liku_),
about five feet long, round her loins, which reached to her knees, and was
attached by one extremity to the haunch. Her splendid black hair was
adorned with a chaplet of yellow flowers, and her body, smeared with
cocoa-nut oil, was plentifully besprinkled with turmeric (called by the
natives _Kitschi-neang_). Her legs and forearms were beautifully tattooed.

The gown, or rather apron, worn by the men is made of the fresh leaves of
the cocoa-palm, which, bleached and cut into narrow strips, are fastened
at the upper end with a string, and then adorned with numerous flaps of
red cloth. This gown stretches from the hips to about the knees, and is
about two feet long. To be in the fashion at Puynipet, a dandy must wear
at least six of these round his body! The ladies of the island stain white
calico with turmeric, yellow being apparently the favourite colour of the
country. A bright-coloured light handkerchief usually covers the upper
part of the body, and they adorn their long beautiful black tresses with
the delicate flowers of the cocoa-palm. On high days the ladies wear red
clothes hemmed with white calico. Such of the natives, however, as are
converted to Christianity, appear in clothes made after the European
fashion, although many a part of dress would still have to be remedied,
ere a native of Puynipet or his better half would be presentable in a
saloon.

Men and women alike are tattooed from the loins to the ancles, and from
the elbows to the wrist. This curious practice is performed on both sexes
at from ten to twelve years of age by old women, with whom it is a regular
profession. The blue colouring matter used is obtained from the abundant
nut-like fruit of the _Aleurites triloba_, which they heat on the fire,
and then peel off the hard crust which forms upon it. The operation is
performed with the sharp point of a species of pine, or with a pointed
instrument[193] made from fish-bone, which is placed upon the skin, when
it is driven in with a slight blow, till the whole design comes out upon
the body. Besides the turmeric already mentioned, we saw but one colouring
stuff, dyeing red, which seemed to be obtained from _Bixa Orellana_, and
is used by the natives to paint their canoes with.

Many of the natives are subject to a very disgusting scaly eruption of the
skin (_Ichthyosis_), but do not seem to feel any discomfort from it. Some
travellers ascribe this to the immoderate use as an article of diet of raw
uncooked fish. It is singular that this malady is found on all the islands
near the equator, and was also found by Captain Cheyne among the Pellew
Islanders. That shrewd observer once had on board for four months a native
of Puynipet as servant, whose whole body was covered with this eruption,
but who speedily lost every trace of it as soon as his chief diet was salt
meat and vegetables. Beside this cuticular malady, the natives are
greatly afflicted with scurvy and intermittent fever. Most of their
infants too suffer from Yaws[194] (_Framboesia_), a disgusting eruption,
called by the natives "_Keutsch_," which, however, disappears when the
child has attained about its third or fourth year. The marks left by this
malady when cicatrized might easily be mistaken for those of inoculation.

The Nannekin, although the king of his tribe, nevertheless seemed on the
whole to exercise but little influence over his subjects. Thus, for
example, we were eye-witnesses of how he vainly attempted to induce two
native boys to carry our bananas as far as our place of disembarkation. On
the other hand, in all that concerned trading with foreigners he seemed to
be thoroughly alive to his own interest. One native who was driving a
bargain with us for something, was informed forthwith of the value which
the Nannekin assigned to it.

Money is as yet but little used at Puynipet as a medium of exchange, only
the whites resident there and the chiefs take a few English and United
States coins; and many a native would generally not part for a silver
dollar from an object which he will readily give for a piece of chewing
tobacco or a common knife. The most useful articles for barter are pieces
of bright-coloured calico, red shirts, hatchets, knives, axes, straight
swords, muskets, ammunition, biscuit, old clothes, and tobacco.[195]

Of the latter article American Cavendish or negro-head in longish pieces
is the most in repute. The Puynipetanese have no special fondness for
cigars, nor do they use pipes, but only chew passionately tobacco. As they
are unacquainted with the use of the Betel, their teeth are universally
beautiful, and of a brilliant white.

There are on the island five tribes, wholly independent of each
other,--the Roankiddi, the Metelemia, the Not, the Tchokoits, and the
Awnak, none, however, numbering much above 1500 souls, the most numerous
and important being the Roankiddi.

Each king, we are told, has a minister whose power almost rivals his own.
Next in rank to the minister are the nobles, who bear the following
strange-sounding titles: Talk, Washy, Nane-by, Noatch, Shoe-Shabut, and
Groen-wani; after these come such as are not of noble birth, but have
earned them through illustrious deeds, and have been rewarded with
estates. On the death of the king he is succeeded by whichever of his
nobles has the title of Talk, the others rising one grade. The monarch
has the right of freely disposing of his property. As a rule he leaves it
to his sons, but if he have none he usually bequeaths it to the next
sovereign. Between the monarch and his courtiers some quaint patriarchal
customs prevail. Thus the first ripe bread-fruit is brought to the king.
Whenever a chief uses a new turtle or fish net, the prey during a certain
number of days is sent to the king. Another mark of the respect paid to
the king, as also by all ranks to their superiors, is to be found in the
custom for a native who meets another of higher rank in a canoe,--he
cowers down in his own boat till the other has passed by, the two canoes
approaching on the side opposite the outrigger, so that the person of
superior condition may, if he see fit, satisfy himself of the identity of
the other.

The Awnaks and Tchokoits had, at the period of our visit, been at war with
each other for six months, and it is significant of the ferocity and
courage of both parties, that not a single combatant had thus far been
wounded on either side! Their weapons are chiefly spears of hard wood, six
feet long, the barb, instead of iron, being made of fish-bones, thorns, or
ground mussel-shells, which they throw with great dexterity; also
hatchets, long knives, and old muskets, obtained from the whale-fishers in
return for yams and tortoise-shell. At present there are about 1500
muskets in all on the island, and each native possesses at least one, some
of the chiefs having as many as three, besides ample ammunition. Singular
to say, these formidable auxiliaries are rarely called into play in any
of their wars, the fatal effect of fire-arms having contributed not a
little to the promotion of harmony and peace between the various tribes!
Their warriors are selected from among the most powerful men of the tribe,
and as a rule they behave with much consideration to the women and
children, whom they almost always spare. When either party sues for peace,
a neutral party is sent to the monarch of the opposite tribe with a few
Kawa roots. If these are accepted, the struggle is considered over, and a
succession of friendly visits are thereupon exchanged between the chiefs
of the two tribes, which are usually followed up by festivities and much
consumption of Kawa.

As to the narratives of most earlier travellers that the island is
inhabited by two entirely distinct races, the one yellow the other black,
we could neither see nor hear of anything which would confirm such a
statement. It seemed more probable that the diversity of skin and hair
among the various tribes was exclusively caused by a variety of crosses,
which are still frequent, and in former times must have been still more
prevalent. The present population consists of whites, negroes, and
yellow-coloured aborigines, who, as speaking a dialect allied to that of
Polynesia, seem to belong to the Malay-Polynesian _stirps_. The present
white settlers are English and North Americans; formerly they were chiefly
Spanish and Portuguese who traded with the natives. Negro slaves and free
blacks have also occasionally visited the island, or been left there for
good and all. These considerations alone suffice to explain certain
appearances among the natives, such as brown or yellow skins, with crisp
woolly hair, and very full lips, without any more marked characteristics
of the Ethiopian race. We noticed one native with woolly hair of a reddish
hue, but otherwise of strongly-marked Malay features, and on inquiring
into his ancestry, were informed in reply that his father was a Portuguese
(negro understood), and his mother a native.

The daughter of Doctor Cook, the Scotchman already mentioned, of whose
union with a native woman of the island there was issue a handsome
well-shaped _mestiza_ of a light yellow colour, strongly recalling the
stately, elegant quadroons of New Orleans and St. Domingo, had
intermarried with a full-blooded negro of the district of Columbia, U. S.,
from which resulted a new and entirely dissimilar admixture. Their
children had the face of the mother, with the woolly head of the father.

At all events it may be laid down with some degree of certainty, that the
aboriginal races, especially those inhabiting the Caroline Archipelago,
are not of the Pelagian Mongols, nor are they an offshoot of the Mongolian
race of the Asiatic continent, as Lesson maintained; also that Puynipet
has not been peopled by the Papuan negroes; that the woolly crisp hair of
so many of its inhabitants is mainly explained by the intimacy between the
black crews of the whalers (it being well known that a large proportion of
the crews of the American whalers are negroes), some 50 or 60 of which
visit the island every year, and often remain for several weeks taking in
provisions and other stores.

Puynipet has been for some years past the chief rendezvous of the whalers
in the Caroline Archipelago, because it is of all the islands the most
accessible, has the best and safest harbours, and because fuel and water
are procurable thence in unlimited quantities.

The complexion of the natives is of a clear copper hue, and the average
height of the males is 5 feet 8 in.; the women are much smaller than the
men, with delicate features and flexible forms. The sons of the chiefs are
usually well formed, and lighter in colour than the majority of the
population, the consequence of their being less exposed to the weather,
and in any part of the world would pass for elegant men. The nose is
arched, the mouth wide with full lips and dazzling teeth. The flap of the
ear is bored in both sexes, but is rarely much enlarged by artificial
means. Both men and women have beautiful black hair, which they take great
care of.

The men have neither beard nor mustachios. They eradicate the hair so soon
as it makes its appearance on the cheeks by means of mussel-shells, or two
little pieces of tortoise-shell sharpened. The women are usually pretty,
but as the girls marry very young they soon lose the freshness of youth.
Their complexion is much fairer than that of the men. The cause of this is
to be found in their wearing a sort of upper robe of calico; a large
piece of stuff with a hole in the centre through which to put the head,
which thus protects their bodies somewhat from the direct rays of the sun.

The natives are said to be very temperate and methodical in their habits
of life. They rise at daybreak, bathe in the river, take a little
vegetable food, anoint their bodies with cocoa-nut oil, after which they
sprinkle themselves plentifully with powdered turmeric. This done, they
address themselves to some simple avocation, which they prosecute till
noon, when they once more withdraw to their huts, bathe, and partake of
another equally frugal repast. The rest of the day is spent in amusements
and mutual visiting. Towards sunset they take a third meal, and as they
have neither torches nor artificial light of any sort, they usually retire
early to rest, unless fishing or dancing by moonlight.

Much respect and consideration is paid to the weaker sex throughout the
island, they not being put to any work which does not come within their
regular sphere of duty. All outdoor work is done by the men, who build the
huts and canoes, plant yams and Kawa, fish, transport the food from the
plantation to the house, and even cook it.

The women are chiefly occupied within-doors, in fishing, or cleaning the
vegetables, most of their time being taken up with preparing head-dresses,
weaving girdles, sewing together palm or pandanus leaves for clothes,
plaiting elegant baskets, and looking after the house and children.

Never at any time patterns of virtue and chastity, the importation of
European trinkets and luxuries of all sorts has greatly increased the
spread of immorality among the native women, who are actuated by an
insatiate, irresistible craving to possess articles of European
manufacture.

When a native wishes to marry, he makes a present to the father of the
girl he wishes to marry; if not returned, it is understood his addresses
are accepted. Thereupon invitations are issued to a merry-making, with
feast, and dance, and revel, after which the bridegroom conducts his bride
to his dwelling. When she dies the widower marries her sister, the brother
in like manner being required to marry his widowed sister-in-law in the
case of the death of the husband, even though he may happen to be already
married. Under certain circumstances a man is at liberty to divorce his
wife and take another; a woman, on the other hand, enjoys no such
privilege, unless she happen to be of higher rank. The chiefs usually have
several wives, polygamy, as among the Mormons, being only limited by the
means of providing subsistence. The women are of an unusually gossiping,
talkative turn, they are quite incapable of keeping their own secrets, and
many a delinquency is generally known at the very moment of its
commission.

The funeral ceremonies seem to have undergone some modification since the
natives began to have intercourse with Europeans. In former times the dead
were enveloped in straw mats, and kept for a considerable time in the
huts: through the influence of the missionaries, apparently, they have
adopted the European custom of interring their dead in certain special
places. On the death of a chief or any exalted person, the female
relatives of the deceased assemble to mourn for a specific period, and
betray their sorrow by loud sobs and lamentations by day and dances by
night. The connections of the deceased cut off their hair as a mark of
their sorrow. All the goods and clothes of the defunct are carried away by
whoever is nearest or first possesses himself of them, and this custom is
so universal that objects thus obtained are thenceforth considered as
lawful property.

The natives usually pray to the spirits of their departed chiefs, whom
they implore to grant them success in fishing, rich harvests in
bread-fruit and yams, the arrival of numerous foreign ships with beautiful
articles for barter, and a variety of similar matters. The priests of
their idols profess to be able to read the future, and the natives place
the most implicit confidence in these predictions. They believe that the
priest is inspired with the spirit of a deceased chief, and that every
word they utter when in this excited state is dictated by the departed.
When any of these prophecies fail, as is often enough the case, the
cunning priest pretends that another more powerful spirit has interfered,
and forcibly prevented the accomplishment of what they had foretold.

The religion of this primitive people is very simple. They have neither
idols nor temple, and although they believe in a future state after death,
they seem to have no religious customs or festivals of any sort. Their
notion of a future state is under such circumstances exceedingly
extraordinary.

Their abode after death they believe to be surrounded by a colossal wall
amid a fathomless abyss, in fact a sort of fortress. The only portal into
this Elysian abode is guarded by an old woman, whose duty it is to hurl
back into the yawning deep the shadows of the departed, who are compelled
to spring upwards from the abyss. Such of the shadows as succeed in
eluding the evil spirit and effecting an entrance are for ever happy; on
the other hand, those whom the malicious female demon succeeds in
precipitating into the abyss sink into the region of endless woe and
torture.

The native festivals, as a rule, take precedence of every other business,
no matter how pressing. Every year the king visits the various villages
and settlements of those of his tribe, at which period the chief
festivities take place, the chiefs vieing with each other in entertaining
him. Enormous quantities of yam and bread-fruit are on such occasions
cooked two days previous, and Kawa is drunk to excess.

Their dances are far from unbecoming, and are quite free from those
lascivious gestures which are so often seen at the festivals of the other
inhabitants of the South Sea. The dancers are usually unmarried lads and
girls, who stand opposite each other in long rows. While keeping time with
their feet to the music, they accompany the dance with graceful motions of
the arms and upper part of the body. Occasionally they throw their arms
out, snap their fingers, and then clap the hands together. Every movement
is performed with extraordinary precision, and at the same moment by all
the dancers. Their sole musical instrument is a small flute made of
bamboo-cane, the notes of which they draw forth by inserting one end in
the nostril and blowing gently, while their hands are busy fingering the
holes in the usual way.

Their drum is a piece of hollowed-out wood with the skin of a shark
stretched over it, of the shape of a sand-glass. This is struck with the
fingers of the right hand, the instrument being hung on the left side. The
sound somewhat resembles the Tom-tom of the Hindoos. The drummer sits
cross-legged on the ground, and accompanies the beat of the drum with
apposite words.

As to the monumental ruins of the interior of Puynipet which have never
yet been visited and described by scientific travellers, we were informed
that they consisted of nothing more than a large number of colossal
rough-hewn blocks of basalt in the heart of the forest, near Metelenia
harbour. The simplicity of the native, in the absence of all means of
accounting for them naturally, sees in these the grand forms of the
spirits of departed chiefs. Experienced travellers, on the other hand, are
of opinion that in this primeval forest, where now only rocky debris lie
scattered about, there once stood strong fortifications, such as indeed no
savage people could have erected, and that the character of the ruins
evidences a high state of civilization in those who erected them. Some of
the blocks are 8 or 10 feet long, hexagonal, and must evidently have been
brought from some other country, since, with the exception of these, there
are no other stones of a similar description found in any part of the
island. Streets are laid out at various points, and the whole settlement
seems to have consisted of a range of strongly fortified dwellings.[196]

These columns and blocks, however, possess a special interest not merely
in the history of civilization, but of geology, as a part is at present
under water, and can only be reached in canoes, a difficulty which cannot
have been in existence at the period of their erection. What once were
streets are now passages for canoes, and were the walls, built of massive
basalt blocks, to be pulled up, the water would obtain access to the
inclosed space. This has induced later geologists to refer this phenomenon
to a sinking of the entire group, so that Puynipet is perhaps the only
spot on the earth where Darwin's ingenious theory of the construction of
perpendicular reefs and atolls being the result of a sinking of the soil
on which the coral-animal had begun to erect his edifice, receives
confirmation from the existence of the remains of man's handiwork within
the historic period.

As even the "oldest inhabitants" could give us not the slightest
information as to these ruins, and their origin and history are plunged
in the utmost obscurity, it seems not improbable that these stone masses
were once the fortified retreat of pirates, and were built by Spanish
corsairs 200 or 300 years back. This hypothesis receives confirmation in
the fact that in 1838 or 1840, a small brass cannon was found on a hill in
the interior, which was brought home as a curiosity by H.M.S. _Larne_.
Occasionally, too, at various parts of the island clearings are found,
some of which are several acres in extent. In one of these, still in
existence near the harbour of Roankiddi, the traveller is shown an
artificial mound of about 20 feet wide, 8 feet high, and a quarter of a
mile long, which has obviously been thrown up as a defence, or else has
been the place of interment for such as have fallen in a severe contest.

This conjecture adopted, it follows that the present population is of
quite recent introduction, and the rumour of a black race inhabiting the
interior must necessarily be treated as a myth.

While we were asking questions and getting up information, evening was
beginning to draw on, and we could not remain longer on the island, as it
was necessary to return on ship-board before nightfall, the frigate having
meanwhile been kept cruising under easy sail, about three or four miles
off the island. Another reason for our immediate departure was to be found
in our narrow flat-bottomed craft, which in any sort of sea-way would have
some difficulty in escaping swamping. Had the wind during our return
voyage freshened ever so little, we should have found ourselves in a
serious dilemma. Numbers of herons, white, black, and mottled, were
fishing in the shallow water along the edge of the reefs, the sea-raven
flew in vast flights among the lagoons, while high overhead the graceful
frigate-bird swept along, every now and then darting rapidly down to
secure his booty.

One of the whites whom we employed as our guide in the island, accompanied
us on board, and asked as his reward some tobacco and clothes, with which
he departed much satisfied. In him, too, we observed a marked and quite
peculiar shyness, especially when on board the frigate. He seemed as
though he dreaded some avenging hand. His glance was timid, his gait and
motions betrayed a sense of insecurity, and he might have readily been
mistaken for some repentant sinner, who in consequence of some evil deed
had fled from civilized society and sought out this distant asylum, where
he had scarcely to fear any other persecution than that of his own
conscience! Hardly any spot, indeed, can be named more suitable for thus
expiating crime than this remote island, where the white man, face to face
with nature in a new and unwonted aspect, and at the mercy of a savage
people, often deprived for months of the consolations and support of
civilization, finds in his solitude ample opportunity to reflect upon the
enormity of his guilt, and to mourn over his own evil fortune.

As the west wind, which still blew, effectually prevented the frigate
from entering the harbour of Roankiddi, and there was no reason to hope
for any speedy change, our original intention of spending several days
there was abandoned, and the same evening we resumed our course for
Australia.

As our brief stay of barely five hours on the island of Puynipet
necessarily led to our observations and remarks being of the most
superficial nature, whereas the island has of late years begun to acquire
an unusual importance both in a maritime and a commercial sense, we must
content ourselves with referring the reader for a more detailed account to
Captain Cheyne's admirable and comprehensive account of the island.

"The Ant Islands (called also Fraser's Islands) lie in a S.W. direction
from the harbour of Roankiddi, from which they are about 12 nautical miles
distant.

"They consist of a group of low coral islets covered with cocoa-palms and
bread-fruit trees, and surrounded by a coral reef, which makes a lagoon in
the centre. Between the two longer islands at the east end of the group
there is a channel. The entire group from N.W. to S.E. measures seven
miles in width, is only inhabited from May to September, during the period
when the cuttle-fish are caught, and is the property of the chief of the
Roankiddi tribe. However the islands are frequented at all seasons by the
natives of Puynipet, who procure here cocoa-nuts and bread-fruit. The most
north-easterly point lies in 6 deg. 42' N., 158 deg. 3' E.

"Next the Ant Island is Pakeen, the sole adjoining island. It lies about
22 miles W. of Tschokoits, its central point lying in 7 deg. 10' N. and 157 deg.
43' E. It consists of five small coral islets, completely inclosed in a
reef, which forms an inaccessible lagoon in the interior.

"The entire group is about five miles in length from west to east, and
from north to south three miles in width. The islands are very low, but
produce an enormous quantity of cocoa-nuts and bread-fruit, while the
lagoon abounds with excellent fish. The westernmost island is inhabited by
about thirty persons in all, mainly of the family and attendants of the
Chief of Puynipet, who claims proprietorship of the whole group. This
scanty population is chiefly engaged in the construction of mats and
canoe-sails made of the leaves of the _pandanus_. In fine weather the
denizens of Pakeen are fond of running over to Puynipet to exchange their
own products for tobacco and other foreign articles.

"What are marked on the charts as Bottomless Group and St. Augustine's
Islands have no existence. Pakeen and Ant's Islands are the same groups
adjoining each other to the westward of Puynipet."

Our progress now began to be very slow, and the equatorial zones with
their vexatious calms, and variable light breezes alternating with violent
squalls, became a sore trial for our patience. An unusual and most
oppressive heat, from which we vainly sought shelter; tropical rains,
which often fell in unbroken torrents for hours at a time, and obscured
the daylight with clouds almost as suddenly at times as though there were
an eclipse; a long heavy swell, which knocked the good ship about with an
unceasing and most disagreeable motion, without nevertheless our being
able to advance one single mile in the twenty-four hours; the depressing
monotonous flapping and filling of the sails, which, with the rolling and
pitching of the ship, now bellied out and then fell idly back against the
masts and yards, straining the rigging and cordage, and keeping a constant
indescribable but most irritating noise--such is a faint sketch of the
miseries of voyagers caught by an equatorial calm in a sailing vessel! How
one longs for a good hearty storm, if only to drive us out of this truly
dismal plight! How in the monotony of such an existence does a quite
insignificant circumstance at once assume the proportions of an important
event! The most trifling incident on board, the most imperceptible object
which becomes visible in either atmosphere or water, attracts universal
attention, and gives rise to discussions by the hour. One day some one
perceived a dark object floating in the distance; when the frigate got
near this proved to be the trunk of a tree, almost 100 feet long, and
though at best we could only have used it as firewood, a boat was
forthwith manned and dispatched to tow it alongside. A few black
Albatrosses suffered themselves to be hauled contentedly along upon the
floating trunk, somewhat astonishing us by their being found so near the
equator. Only by dint of considerable exertion was the huge unwieldy
piece of wood brought on board, when the zoologists got a famous lesson in
conchology, from the shell-fish that had fastened on it, and the sailors
chuckled with delight at finding some occupation in cutting up the
vegetable colossus into sizeable pieces.

At 6.30 P.M. on the 29th Sept., we crossed the equator for the sixth time
in 161 deg. 57' E., and in the Southern hemisphere found we still had to
contend with calms and contrary winds.

             "To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
              Crept in this petty pace from day to day,"

without our making any perceptible progress. When we had reached 4 deg. 15'
S., and 160 deg. 24' E., a circumstance occurred to break the uniformity of
our existence, as according to the charts we were using of the
Hydrographic Institute of England for the year 1856,[197] we must have
been quite close to some coral reefs, known as Simpson's Island. But
although by our observations, after due allowance made for currents, we
were, about 4 P.M. of the 5th October, off the N.W. extremity of the
islands, there was no land of any sort visible on either side even from
the royals, and we accordingly had to conjecture that Captain Simpson,
after whom these islands were named, must have sighted one of the Le Maire
or Tasman group, which lie 40 miles further to the west and 10 miles
further to the north, and had, owing to false reckoning, imagined to have
discovered a new cluster; for on the following day at 6 P.M., when by our
course, which was south-easterly, the island ought to have lain W.N.W. ten
miles distant, not a vestige of land could be descried from the deck, nor
even from the mast-head, so that we felt positive the Simpson group were
neither at the spot laid in the general chart of the English Admiralty,
nor within ten miles of it in either an easterly or westerly
direction.[198]

A few days after this interlude, an incident of a very peculiar character
took place, which excited universal attention, and more especially greatly
exercised the souls of the superstitious. The occasion was nothing less
than a dread whisper that there was a ghost on board. From time to time,
in fact, dull rumbling sounds were said to be audible, which some
professed to hear above them, others below, some in the fore part of the
ship, others aft. It was a noise like the roll of thunder, or of
cannon-balls that had got loose. The shot-racks were carefully examined,
but everything there appeared to be in its usual order. The sound was
repeated the following days, when there was hanging over us a sky as black
and murky, accompanied by heavy pelts of rain, as though all the clouds
of heaven were lavishing their contents upon us. All on board indulged in
every possible hypothesis that could explain these sounds, and exhausted
themselves in conjectures. Some maintained that one of the volcanoes of
the Solomon group, in the vicinity of which we were at the time, was in a
state of activity, and was the cause of these sub-marine thunders; but the
sailors, sailor-like, insisted it was ghosts playing pranks, and the
attendants refused any longer to remain in the cock-pit, alleging it was
haunted! However, when a second examination was made of the shot-racks, it
was found that no fewer than eighty thirty-pound iron shots had broken
through the wooden bulk-head of the ordnance room, whence they had made
their way into the bread-depot, as it was called, and on its metal floor
had produced the resonance peculiar to the impact of metal against metal.
The mystery was at once solved in the most natural manner, and the
"each-particular-hair-on-end" ghost stories which during the last few days
had been flying from mouth to mouth, forthwith dropped. Thus might many a
"marvel" prove to be the result of some very ordinary cause, if people
would but take the trouble to examine its natural causes, instead of
ascribing everything which they cannot understand or explain to some
supernatural influence.

At noon of the 7th October, in 6 deg. 37' S., 161 deg. 8' E., we were, according
to chart, 12 miles distant from Bradley's Reef. But although both seamen
and midshipmen were stationed at the mast-heads, in order the more
readily to make it out with the advantage of such an elevation, there was
not the slightest trace perceptible of rocks or shoals, and we sailed
without obstruction over the very spot at which, according to the English
charts, Bradley's Reef rises from the waves. This reef was discovered by
Captain Hunter in May, 1791, two days after he had passed Stewart's Island
(Sikayana), and is doubly dangerous in a climate where the sea rarely runs
so high as to make it easily observed by the surf breaking over it.
According to our observations, collated with those of Captain Cheyne,
Bradley's Reef must lie in about 160 deg. 48' E.[199]

The same day about 7 P.M., when we were about 120 miles distant from the
N.W. part of the Solomon group, there suddenly and altogether unexpectedly
blazed forth in the western sky an immense and most brilliant comet, with
a yellow, rather bright nucleus, and an enormous tail, sweeping over some
15 deg. or 20 deg. It was about 8 deg. or 10 deg. above the horizon when we observed it.

This rare phenomenon, during the fourteen days it continued visible,
presented a most excellent opportunity for astronomical observations. Upon
the sailors, usually so superstitious, this splendid celestial visitor
made a much less profound impression than we had anticipated. But few were
apprehensive that the end of the world was at hand, while the majority
seemed quietly to indulge the pleasing anticipation that the wine of the
present year would be good and plentiful.

At last, on the 8th of October, we sighted the Solomon Islands. Some reefs
which were said to lie a little to the north, adjoining Ontong-Java, we
looked for in vain in the positions assigned them on the charts. On the
other hand we could see the lofty, forest-covered Carteret Island directly
before us. Gower Island lay nearly due west, about four miles distant.
This flat low island, which also is not quite accurately laid down on the
English chart, appears to be about eight miles long, the highest point of
its ridge not exceeding 180 feet above the sea. Its S.E. and N.W. points,
upon which beats a furious surf, extend a full half mile into the sea. We
could nowhere perceive any huts of natives. Nevertheless it is highly
probable, if the island is inhabited at all, that the population would
have settled on the W. side, which is more sheltered against wind and
weather.

From the hills on Carteret Island smoke was issuing at different points,
but the natives did not put off in their boats, although on the afternoon
of 8th October the frigate was becalmed off the land. When it was found
that in consequence of the violence of the S.E. winds, which alternated
with calms and N.E. squalls accompanied by rain, it would be impossible
for us to pass through "Indispensable Straits," fringed as they are with
coral reefs, it was resolved to range along the N.E. side of the entire
chain of islands, so as to fetch the open passage between San Christoval
(the most south-easterly of the Solomon Islands) and the Nitendi group. We
thus had to beat with much difficulty against a S.E. wind and a strong
current, so that we barely made 15 miles a day.

On the 13th October, towards evening, we found ourselves about opposite
the large mountainous island of Malayta. This island presents fine
richly-wooded mountain scenery, but without any traces of volcanic
contours. The natives do not appear to dwell near the shore, but among the
hills we could observe cleared spots and huts. Curiously enough the
highest peak of the island, 3900 feet high, is named Kolowrat, a renowned
Austrian name, although it could hardly have been an Austrian navigator
who gave it to this mountain. Many others of these islands, however, have
German names, though the majority indicate their discovery by the French
navigators, Bougainville, Senville, and Dumont d'Urville, to whom the
sea-faring world are indebted for their first acquaintance with this
interesting group. During the afternoon a heavy blow came on from the
S.S.E., upon which we put about and steered E. by S., but had hardly made
the alteration, ere it came on to blow from N.N.E., with such fearful
violence that the cross-jack-yard, which was already sprung, broke in two,
and the sheet of the main try-sail gave way. It was the heaviest squall we
encountered during the voyage. Fortunately the cross-jack-yard had as a
precaution been firmly lashed, so that the two ends continued to hang in
the air. Consequently what might have been a serious calamity was avoided,
and the result of the accident was confined to the difficult task of
disengaging the unwieldy shattered yard. Towards evening a heavy rain
fell, and the wind went down. In the course of the profoundly calm night
which followed, the current swept us so close in shore, that by morning we
were not more than two or three miles distant. A few small boats with
natives were about, which endeavoured to approach us, but only one of
their number succeeded. These boats were not ordinary canoes, but
regularly decked and deep-waisted boats, with high stem and stern, not
unlike the boats in use at the Island of Madeira.

The one which came alongside was manned by five brownish-black men,
perfectly naked, with thick crisp hair resembling a wig, which seemed to
be stained red with ochre. By way of special adornment, some wore in their
side hair a yellowish-red tuft, something like a tassel, and apparently
made of strips of stained bast. One wore a wild boar's tooth in the tip of
the ear, two others had small cylinders neatly carved out of mussel-shells
passed through the nostrils, as well as rings of the same material around
the upper arm and below the knee. When the boat had got within about a
pistol shot from us, one of the natives rose, and in clear strong tones
shouted to us some unintelligible words, while at the same time he pointed
towards the land with very eager, energetic gestures. He seemed desirous
of inviting us to come on shore and visit the islands. At the close of
his address there arose those peculiar reverberating shouts, such as one
would have expected rather to hear among the Styrian Alps than from a
Papuan of the Solomon Islands! Upon this the rest of his companions rose
likewise, and waving in their long arms a piece of tortoise-shell, they
kept shrieking Matte-Matte! for an indefinite period. Not one of them knew
a single word of English, nor could we make ourselves intelligible even
with a vocabulary of the dialects used in the adjoining islands. Although
distant in a direct line N.W. only 60 miles from Stewart's Island and its
inhabitants, they spoke an entirely different idiom, and were likewise
distinguished widely from any of the latter in colour, make, and
physiognomy. Notwithstanding a repeated and pressing invitation to come on
board, they could not be induced to mount the frigate's side, even by the
most tempting promises, nor even by presents of linen-stuffs, tobacco,
articles of clothing, &c. They seemed to have had but little intercourse
with vessels. At length, on our repeated signs, they slowly and shyly came
so near that we could throw a rope on board. The most courageous of their
number planted his foot on the side rope, but made no attempt to proceed
one step further. But we were by this means at all events able to examine
these singular beings more closely. They all had oval faces, and broad,
flat, long noses. Two were full-grown men, of tall powerful frame, while
the rest seemed not above from fourteen to sixteen years old. None of
them were tattooed, but the practice of anointing the body and the want of
cleanliness left many coloured marks upon the skin. One of the lads had a
sort of scaly eruption all over his skin. Beyond the pieces of
tortoise-shell already mentioned, and the ornaments they wore upon their
bodies, they had absolutely nothing in their boats, not even fruit or
other natural products. They rowed a considerable distance after empty
bottles which were pitched into the sea, and one of them seemed to attach
such importance to the possession of these, that he plunged into the water
to swim after them, and thus secure them the more readily.

Unfortunately our intercourse with these islanders of the Solomon group
was confined to the little episode above related, and as a favourable
breeze once more sprang up, we soon lost sight of these simple savages and
their island. On this occasion the members of the Expedition were
unanimously of opinion (which is not always the case in matters of
personal impressions), that the inhabitants of Malayta were the wildest,
most uncivilized race of men we had as yet encountered in our voyaging to
and fro round the globe.

During the night numerous watch-fires were visible on the peaks of the
island. Were they lit for the protection of the slumbering inhabitants
against the cold and damp of the night, or were they alarm signals for the
entire population of the island, warning them against dangers that menaced
them? If any apprehensions were entertained by the natives of Malayta
that we had visited their shores with hostile intent, they must have been
of short duration, for the same wind which prevented our making Port Adam,
wafted us the following morning--it was the 16th October, 1858--in sight
of Sikayana.


FOOTNOTES:

[191] Occasionally called Bonabe, Bonibet, Funopet (by the French,
Ascension). It lies in 6 deg. 58' N., and 158 deg. 20' E., and, with the two low
atolls adjacent of Andema and Paphenemo (called by the English Ant's
Island and Pakeen respectively) were named by their discoverer, Admiral
Luetke, the Senjawin group, after the name of his ship.

[192] Captain Andrew Cheyne, of the English mercantile service, to whom
the sea-faring world is indebted for a very complete and excellent account
of the islands of the West Pacific, and who last visited Puynipet in 1846,
reckoned the population of the island at that period at from 7000 to 8000.
See a description of islands in the Western Pacific Ocean, North and South
of the Equator, with sailing Directions, &c. p. 94. London, J. D. Potter.
1852.--Sailing Directions from New South Wales to China and Japan.
Compiled from the most Authentic Sources. By Andrew Cheyne, first Class
Master, Mercantile Navy. p. 136. London, J. D. Potter. 1855.

[193] The natives of the Engano Islands, to the west of Sumatra, use
precisely similar instruments for the same purpose.

[194] Yaws is a very common disease among the lower class of the western
and eastern _coast_-population of England. It is unknown almost in
Ireland, where the poorer classes rarely eat fish.

[195] Captain Cheyne adds to the foregoing lists the following articles;
fish-hooks, butcher's-knives, chisels, hand-saws, bill-hooks, planes,
augers, piles, iron-pots, razors, needles, twine, drills, gay
parti-coloured cotton cloths, cotton hose, woollen cloths, trinkets, glass
beads, straw-hats, chests with lock, key, and handles, spirits. The
equivalents as laid down by Captain Cheyne are as follows:--

  12 hens               =  24 sticks of negro-head tobacco, or 4 ells
  100 yams              =  10    "           "         "       of calico.
  100 bread-fruit       =  10    "           "         "
  100 cocoa-nuts        =  10    "           "         "
  1 cluster of bananas  =   2    "           "         "

[196] Similar ruins are described by Captain Cheyne as having been also
found in the forests of Nalan (Strong Island) in the Caroline Archipelago,
5 deg. 21' 30'' N., 163 deg. 0' 42'' E.

[197] From 1st October, 1856, upon which were marked all the improvements
known up to 1857.

[198] Compare Captain Cheyne's sailing directions, p. 68: "Captain Simpson
of Sydney reported to me in 1845, that a group of low coral islands,
covered with cocoa-nut trees and inhabited, had been seen in 4 deg. 52' S.,
and 160 deg. 12' E. This may probably be the same group seen by Captain
Wellings in 1824, which is laid down in Mr. Arrowsmith's chart in latitude
4 deg. 29' S., 159 deg. 28' E." It is matter of surprise in any case that
considering the uncertainty which prevails as to the precise locality of
the reef, its position on the English Admiralty Charts should not at least
be marked _doubtful_.

[199] A. Cheyne--Sailing Directions from New South Wales to China and
Japan. London, 1855, page 68.


         [Illustration: Barrier Reef and Atoll of Sikayana.]




                                 XVII.

                    The Coral Island of Sikayana.

                         17th October, 1858.

    Natives on board.--Good prospects of fresh provisions.--An
    interment on board.--A night scene.--Visit to the Island Group.--
    Faole.--Voyage trip to Sikayana.--Narrative of an English
    sailor.--Cruelty of merchantmen in the South Sea Islands.--
    Tradition as to the origin of the inhabitants of Sikayana.--A
    king.--Barter.--Religion of the natives.--Trepang.--Method of
    preparing this sea-slug for the Chinese market.--Dictionary of
    the native language.--Under sail.--Ile de Contrariete.--Stormy
    weather.--Spring a leak.--Bampton Reef.--Smoky Cape.--Arrival in
    Port Jackson, the harbour of Sydney.


The short distance at which we found ourselves from Sikayana, called
Stewart's Island by the English, as also the prospect of procuring there
fresh provisions for the crew, among whom after 66 days' confinement on
board ship, some symptoms of scurvy began to appear, determined our
Commodore on spending a day there, and effecting a landing. Towards
afternoon, when we were about four or five miles distant from the western
island, two splendid large canoes approached the ship, in which were
fifteen men stark naked, except for a piece of linen round their loins.
They were all tall, robust, powerful men, five and a half to six feet
high, some with long, others broad faces, all having long noses, of a
light brown colour, and the greater number with glossy black hair. With
the exception of one who had whiskers, they were beardless; almost all
being tattooed from the elbow to the shoulder. They spoke broken English,
and even had English names. We never saw among the savage races such
finely built, well-proportioned, healthy-looking men, as these inhabitants
of the coral reef of Sikayana. Their free, unaccustomed, familiar
deportment was something surprising. But our astonishment reached its
height when one of these apparently savage children of nature, happening
to find on a table on the gun-deck a draught-board lying open, immediately
challenged one of the by-standers to a game, which it seems he understood
so well that he beat his antagonist two games out of three. We afterwards
heard that the natives at Sikayana have learned draughts, as also an
English game at cards known as "odd fourth," of which they seemed
passionately fond, from some English sailors, who several years before had
spent five months on these islands, preparing Trepang, or _biche-de-mar_,
for the Chinese market, those sea-slugs having formerly been found here in
large quantities.

To our question whether they had fresh provisions for sale, and of what
description, they replied that they possess on the island plenty of Taro,
cocoa-nuts, bananas, pigs, and poultry, which they would willingly
exchange for fish-hooks, tobacco, calico, gunpowder, ammunition, biscuit,
playing-cards, and ornaments for their wives. For money they did not show
the slightest desire, and of the value of gold they seemed to be utterly
ignorant. They showed the utmost eagerness for playing-cards and trinkets.

We now also learned that there was on the island one white settler, an
English sailor. This man attempted to come off to the frigate in a small
canoe, but owing to night setting in, he could not reach her. As these
hearty people were taking their leave, we promised to pay them a visit
early next morning, with which they seemed highly delighted.

There still remained the same evening one mournful duty for those on board
the _Novara_. During the afternoon one of our sailors had died after
protracted sufferings consequent on dysentery, and we had now, for
sanitary reasons, to commit his remains to the deep the very evening of
his death. It was already dark when the officers and crew were mustered on
deck, to pay the last honours to the departed. The captain gave the
customary orders, the ship's bell tolled, the narrow plank, on which lay
the body of the deceased sewn up in his hammock, was brought to the
gangway, where an iron weight was attached to the body by the feet, and
last of all the plank being tilted up, the heavy body plunged into the
waves with a hollow splash, and the watery tomb closed over him.

We looked down into the abyss and beheld myriads of stars reflected in
all their lustre in the smooth mirror of the ocean; the deep, blue,
unfathomable ocean appearing like a second firmament beneath our feet!
Nothing in the gay scene around seemed out of harmony with the mournful
act which the community of Christians on board the _Novara_ had been
celebrating. Everything about us--the brightly glistening stars, the
whispering ripple of the waves, the balmy atmosphere, all left an
impression of a higher state of felicity and tranquil happiness, and
seemed to remind us that everything in the universe, even the poor remains
we had just committed to the waves, obeyed but one eternal, immutable law!

On the morning of 17th October, three boats put off from the _Novara_ with
some of the officers and all the naturalists of the Expedition, bound for
Sikayana, between three and four miles distant, while the frigate cruised
about in the vicinity.

Stewart's Atoll (8 deg. 22' S., 162 deg. 58' E.) is a semi-lunar coral reef of
about sixteen miles in circumference, with a deep lagoon in its centre,
and five small wooded islands on the reef itself, which are visible from
the deck of a ship about twelve miles away, and were first discovered by
Captain Hunter, in May, 1791. These islands are named Sikayana, Faole,
Manduiloto, Barena, and Maduawe, and are so overgrown with cocoa-nut
palms, that they appear capable of supporting a population of about 1000
souls (with the wants and requirements of men in the tropics).

The two largest islands, Sikayana and Faole, lie exactly at the sharp
horns of the lune-shaped atoll. Here we again had an opportunity of
observing the configuration of which all known atolls furnish examples,
viz. that the islands found adjoining these reefs are almost invariably at
the projecting extremities, where the surf rages on either side, and where
consequently the conditions are most favourable for the heaping up of
detached fragments of coral. The area of habitable dry land is to the
extent of the reef in the proportion of 1 : 21. As may readily be assumed
from the physical conditions of the islands, there is no drinkable water
to be found upon them; the liquid contents of the cocoa-nut when fresh is
almost the only beverage of the inhabitants, and hence the first thing the
natives asked for when they came on board was for some "drinking-water,"
since, except of course during the wet season, when they catch the
rain-water, this is a rarity with them--we might almost say an article of
luxury.

Sikayana, the Big Island of the English, the most easterly and largest of
the islands, is about 1 1/6th statute mile in length, and lies in 8 deg. 22'
24'' S., and 163 deg. 1' E. The reef which surrounds the island sinks at
certain points sheer downwards, so that a ship may in perfect safety
approach within a cable's length. We had to sail for a considerable time
along this line of reef, on which the sea beat with a thundering surf, ere
we came to one of those spots on the N.W. side where it is practicable in
a boat to pass the atoll reef into the tranquil lagoon, which it encloses.
At all times, even in the calmest weather, a tremendous surf roars against
the reef, and even this point is inaccessible when there is a fresh breeze
blowing. Here we found some of the canoes of the natives awaiting our
approach, who now, as though they had been on the look-out for our
arrival, came off to us, some in their boats, others swimming, to inform
us that, it being ebb-tide, the entry into the lagoon was not very easy,
but that at high-water one could pass right over the reef, in even larger
boats than ours. It was accordingly arranged that two of the boats should
anchor outside the reef, and only one should be hauled inside the lagoon
with a rope for our further use. But even this could not be managed until
by removing all baggage and transhipping almost her entire crew, she had
been made sufficiently light.

The passage between the coral reefs and the lagoon is at high-water about
three feet deep, but at lowest ebb it is barely a foot in depth, and three
to four feet wide, and then the reef juts up at most points to such
extent, that a skilled equilibrist may (although not to the advantage of
his soles) easily reach the interior of the lagoon without wetting his
shoes. As soon, however, as this narrow entrance, which is about 300 feet
long, has been passed, the navigation becomes easier. The appearance of
the reef was very peculiar. Corals of every description, _Astraeae_,
_Maeandrinae_, _Madriporae_, form a sort of series of clusters of
stone-bushes, among which beautifully mottled fish swim about, while
starfish of an exquisite indigo blue, and mussels of the most
extraordinary forms, people the ground.

The atoll presents some very remarkable geological features. At its N.W.
side, close to the reef and as it were growing to it, stand two singular
vase-shaped rocks, from 8 to 10 feet in height. While their base is
bathed by the sea, their upper portions, which are about 20 feet in
diameter, present the spectacle of luxuriant grass, brushwood, and one or
two fruit-bearing cocoa-nut palms, so that the two crags looked like two
gigantic flower-pots attached to the reef. They seem to be all that
remains of an island which Ocean had first thrown up, and was now busy
wearing away.

Another geological peculiarity is the occurrence of heaps of pumice-stone.
These are found about the size of walnuts over the entire interior of the
island of Faole at those places which the swell of the waves cannot reach
even in the stormiest weather, where they occur in such immense quantities
(though there are no traces of them on the sand or shingle of the actual
beach) that we may take for granted that the convulsion which brought them
here must have occurred in times long gone by, the more so as this
superposed pumice-stone exercises a marked and obvious influence upon the
vegetation of the island. So far as its soil consists of heaps of
fragments of coral and mussel-shells, the cocoa-nut palm reigns almost
alone, whereas as soon as the pumice-stone region is reached, there begins
an exceedingly luxuriant growth of lofty forest trees with huge trunks and
umbrageous foliage, and an astonishingly abundant _flora_ of species
apparently peculiar to these Atoll islands. The English naturalist Jukes,
who accompanied Captain Blackwood on his survey of Torres Straits, found
beds of pumice along the entire east and north coasts of Australia, over
an extent of 2000 miles, and under numerous special conditions, but most
frequently on flat grounds elevated about ten feet above high-water mark
and more or less distant from the beach--never upon the beach itself. The
occurrence of pumice in such vast quantities is of no slight interest in a
geological point of view. It must have been some tremendous natural
convulsions, an earthquake wave of enormous lateral dimensions, which
threw up this pumice-stone, and deposited it throughout this entire region
at the same height above high-water mark. Since this phenomenon occurred,
the general level of the coasts and islands on which this deposit of
pumice is found, can scarcely have undergone any considerable alteration,
if one is not inclined to assume for the entire region a perfectly equal
elevation or depression.

The whole party of Excursionists had wandered along the reef to a spot at
which we could embark once more, so as to row over to the next island,
Faole, which, however, the natives do not much frequent, except
occasionally to collect cocoa-nuts and pandanus fruits. But as one main
object had to be accomplished, namely, the supply of the ship with fresh
provisions, which were not found here, some of the party went off to the
principal settlement on the island of Sikayana, to barter some goods they
had brought, against as much private supplies for themselves as could be
conveniently conveyed to the boats and so taken on board.

While the natives were paddling along in their elegant canoes, escorting
us as far as Sikayana, we offered a seat in our boat to the only white man
on the island, the English sailor already mentioned. This man was named
John Davis, about forty years of age, a native of Greenwich, and was,
according to his own story, left behind against his will by Captain Ross,
a "sandal-wooder," who had visited this group in 1858. He stated he had
just before been with Captain Ross at the Tonga Islands, where the captain
sent two sailors on shore to fell sandal-wood. These men, however, got
into a quarrel with the natives, who would not permit them to rob them of
their property, in the course of which they lost their lives. The captain
immediately proceeded to the islands himself with some of his crew well
armed, attacked the unfortunate natives, shot five, and then sailed off.
Davis had become obnoxious to the captain, because in consequence of
over-work he had fallen ill with intermittent fever, and could not work,
upon which his remorseless superior cast about how to get rid of the now
useless seaman, and resolved to put him ashore by force on the next island
which came in sight. What a fearful doom! To be abandoned, sick and
helpless, on a lone island far from the highways of the world, where ships
but seldom touched, and amid savages with whose tongue he was
unacquainted! If even one were disposed to doubt the possibility of such
inhuman cruelty, it would find mournful confirmation in many similar
instances. To this charge the "sandal-wooders" are especially amenable,
who visit the islands of the South Sea to collect the costly sandal-wood,
and in the prosecution of their enterprise seem to go upon the exclusive
principle that the coloured man has no property over the natural wealth
of these islands, and has no right to resist the wishes of the white man!

Commander Erskine of H.M.S. _Savannah_, mentions a case in which an
English merchantman, engaged in the sandal-wood traffic, entered into an
engagement to employ his whole crew in assisting one native tribe to
overpower its neighbour, in return for which timely assistance certain
places were pointed out where the coveted sandal-wood was found in great
abundance. A battle took place, and a number of prisoners were carried on
board the ship, of whom, during the passage to the sandal-wood-producing
islands, several were in the presence of the European crew coolly
slaughtered and eaten by their cannibal foes of the Fee-jee Islands!!

Davis, whom the natives for distinction's sake called simply "the white
man," could not expatiate enough on the cordiality and kind treatment he
received from the poor inhabitants of Sikayana during his stay. Since
April no ship had called at the island, or even been visible from it. He
begged the favour of a passage to Sydney, which was readily accorded him
on condition he would first repay all his obligations to the natives, and
that on their side there should be no objections made to his leaving. On
our arrival in Sydney we learned that Captain Ross, who had put Davis
ashore at Sikayana, had been tried for another still greater atrocity; he
had inflicted Lynch-law, by hanging some of the natives of New Caledonia
at his yard-arm. Ross was somewhat later acquitted by the judges at
Sydney, but public opinion reversed the verdict.

After a row of an hour and a half we at last reached the island of
Sikayana, having previously met three canoes, one of which was manned by
twelve rowers, who now entered on a sort of regatta contest with us. These
canoes, not more than a foot and a half wide, glide with uncommon velocity
through the water, but despite their outriggers, they are not adapted for
carrying much provisions. We found it quite easy to land at the place, and
drew up our boat upon the sandy beach.

The world of these islanders, the entire area of dry habitable land upon
this coral reef, is about one-eighth of an English square mile; no stream,
no mountain, no eminence adorns the island, the highest part of which is
just sufficiently elevated to enable the winds and waves to heap up sand
and debris; around it on every side is the boundless ocean, and its
mineral wealth is reduced to one single mineral, carbonated chalk,
deposited in the brine by thousands of millions of coral-animals. Hither
too the ocean in some extraordinary cases wafts pumice and other stones
lighter than water, which somewhat improve the soil, or occasionally
stones are transported, entangled in the roots of floating trees, with
which the denizens of this little place can grind the mussel-shells, of
which they make all their tools, as well as knives and hatchets.

The immense vegetable kingdom has but 20 or 30 representatives here, whose
seeds have been transported hither by the sea from richer and more
congenial soils, and thrown up by it upon the strand. Animals are still
more scarce. A few sea-swallows and insects form the whole Fauna of the
group. The sea furnishes the only supply of animal food, in the shape of
fish, crabs, and shell-fish. One may well ask, what degree of moral or
spiritual development can be attained by a race of men whose sphere of
action is confined to a solitary coral reef! Yet the mode of existence of
the inhabitants of Stewart's Islands is by no means of the most primitive
or simple nature; through the occasional visits of ships they have
obtained much, by which they have sensibly improved their condition. They
now possess swine, poultry, and various tubers, which seem greatly to
thrive on the island, and which they can now exchange for other articles
of prime necessity.

Sikayana is the only member of the group which is permanently inhabited,
and that by a sincerely hospitable, most friendly race. Their origin is
variously accounted for.

Among the natives themselves there is a dim tradition that Captain Cook
transported hither the first settlers. Another version is, that the first
inhabitants came from South Island, 130 miles W. of Stewart's Islands, and
that they were brought hither by whalers, which latter, when they no
longer needed the services of these poor people, sought how most easily to
get rid of them. At the same time several English and American sailors,
who at various times have been left in these islands in consequence of
sickness, want of further employment, love of adventure, or quarrels with
their captains, must have largely contributed to the present quite
peculiar mixture. The practice of leaving upon any suitable island such
natives of the South Sea groups as may take service with English or
American whalers, is very common, and sufficiently explains the mode of
first settling many of these islands of Oceania.

When Captain Cheyne, who has greatly contributed to our more intimate
knowledge of the islands of the West Pacific, visited Sikayana in
September, 1847, the population amounted to 48 men, 73 women, and 50
children, who inhabited a small village lying on the lagoon at the eastern
end of the island. Although eleven years had elapsed ere we visited this
simple community, their numbers did not appear materially to have
increased.

Considering the powerful, healthy appearance of the natives, it should
seem that we must ascribe this stagnation in amount of population less to
the influence of climate, than to the ravages of the various diseases
which are from time to time introduced by foreign ships. Thus we saw one
woman whose whole body was deeply marked with small-pox, and presented a
living example that the fell scourge of all uncivilized races is no longer
unknown in Sikayana.

At the landing-place we were received by the king of the island, a very
aged man with grey hair and silver beard. He sat on the grass close to the
shore under the shade of cocoa-nut palms, driving away with his hand the
flies which were stinging his naked body. After a brief welcome he
invited us to be seated beside him on Nature's own soft green carpet.

The natives whom we met here were all tall handsome men, with good
features, decidedly of a European cast. The hair was black, very crisp,
but not the slightest appearance of being woolly. Many had shaved it till
there only remained a long tail; most of them had their arms and legs
tattooed, but wore no ear or nose ornaments like the Solomon Islanders.
Round the loins they wore a sort of girdle, four or five inches wide, of
strips of plants plaited by the women. In addition to this, most of them
wore some piece of European clothing; drawers, old caps, but most commonly
a sort of jacket without sleeves made of calico, which only covered the
back and chest. Like the natives of the Nicobars, they showed great
curiosity to learn our names, and kept repeating them over and over,
apparently to impress them upon their memory. They had beyond a doubt
taken their own names from sailors and ship captains, with whom they had
once been in communication.

Close to the shore, among some scattered palm-trees, stood a few wretched
huts, compared with which the bee-hive huts of the Nicobar Islanders
appear like palaces. They consisted of a roofing woven of cocoa-nut
palm-leaves, planted upon the naked soil which serves as a floor, and
closed in front and rear with mats of similar texture. The interior was no
less poverty-stricken than the exterior. We could see no articles of
furniture beyond a few baskets and battered boxes, in which the islanders
stow away their small property.

A crowd of eager expectants had gathered round the crates of merchandise
which our sailors had brought on shore, and the barter began.

The natives had swine, poultry, a few eggs, papayas, Taro, cocoa-nuts, and
bananas to offer, while we had an assortment of knives, hatchets, saws,
flints, fish-hooks, calico, linen, blue cloth, ribbons, linen-thread,
needles, coarse tobacco, biscuit, red coral, glass beads, empty bottles,
&c. &c.

This commerce was something higher than a mere barter--it had also a
psychological interest of its own. Useful goods and tools found a much
less demand than baubles and objects of personal adornment; and for a
string of glass beads only fit to hang round the neck of a wife, or to put
as a bracelet upon the arm of some little dusky daughter, provisions
enough were given away to have supported an entire family for days.

Red and green seemed the colours most in demand, and the small beads were
in far more request than the larger and heavier descriptions, even if
these latter were more costly and neat. It seemed the women were not
permitted to show themselves at market, which must have been a sore enough
disappointment for many; but the men earnestly requested before closing
with an offer to be permitted to carry off the coveted prizes, leaving
their own articles of barter in pledge, apparently with the gallant
attention of first of all obtaining the advice and consent of their
better halves. Hence it frequently happened that the article first
selected was exchanged for some other widely different, or the whole
bargain given up.

The women whom we afterwards saw in their huts were all tall and
powerfully built, but very unattractive, the majority appearing
prematurely old. The sole covering was a piece of gay-coloured calico
tolerably wide, which they wore around their loins. Their lower limbs and
faces were tattooed, the latter however with only a few cross-bars.

The two hampers of assorted articles, which was our stock in trade, were
ere long nearly emptied, and as the sailors would have found it hard work
to bring off the provisions we had purchased in our small boat, it was
agreed to break up our improvised exchange, and return to Faole with our
valuable cargo of fresh provisions.[200]

While the barter was going on, the author of this narrative occupied
himself with making some anthropometrical measurements, and at the same
time noting down a few cursory remarks respecting these interesting
people.

The chief food of these islanders consists of fish, cocoa-nuts, taro, and
the fruit of the pandanus (_dawa_); only at rare intervals do they taste
pork or poultry. The rearing of pigs and poultry is chiefly carried on for
the purpose of trading with foreign vessels, so as to obtain in return the
products of a higher civilization. Their fish-nets are prepared from the
rind of their trees. A few looms which they also possess have been given
them by whale-fishers. The cincture round the loins, which is their sole
article of apparel, is also prepared from the inner bark of the tree.

When the king dies, the oldest member of the community is elected his
successor. At their festivals they sing in a sort of monotonous drone, and
blow at the same time through mussel-shells.

When mourning for the dead, they stain their faces red with the seeds of
the _Bixa orellana_, and wear a piece of white calico, shaped something
like a capuchin's hood, which reaches down till it covers the shoulder.
One native, who was wearing one of these head coverings, could not be
induced to traffic, nor even to approach the place where our improvised
market was being held, because, as he made us understand, one of his near
relatives had lately died. Altogether the inhabitants of Sikayana struck
us as a primitive, very moral, and honourable race, and it made us almost
melancholy to think that these excellent people should be without the
blessings of Christianity. To our great amazement, however, we learned
that the natives themselves strenuously opposed the settlement in their
midst of any missionaries of any Christian denomination,--"Because," said
they, "all their Kai-kai (i. e. their food) would belong to the
missionaries." This naive reply reminds us of a similar remark on the part
of the Quiche Indians, which we once overheard in the highlands of
Guatemala, in whose language a missionary or priest is known as
Ki-sol-re-le-ak-uch, which being interpreted means "devourer of all hens!"
And just as among the Mormons every care is taken to keep certain
professions out of their community, as, for instance, the physician, in
order to prevent illness, or the lawyer, with the intent to keep away
law-suits, thus in their simplicity the natives of Sikayana have fallen
into the error of viewing the missionary, that moral physician, as only of
importance or of necessity in those places where there are really
spiritual and moral evils to cure!

The liquors of Europe are as yet but little known to the inhabitants of
Sikayana. In none of the huts could we discern any sort of spirituous
fluids, nor was any offered to us. Even during the trading, amid the
demands for every sort of article, no desire was expressed for them, not a
question even was asked respecting them, whereas hitherto all the wild or
semi-savage races with which we came in contact at once clamoured for
"Brandy," and not seldom presented themselves in a riotous condition.
That there is as yet no demand for spirits at Sikayana shows how little
intercourse they can as yet have had with civilization. In former years
this group was occasionally visited by American and English merchantmen,
owing to the abundance of Trepang. Since the year 1845, however, when one
American captain collected 250 Chinese piculs[201] (about 15 tons), and
ten years later when Captain Cheyne in the course of nine months gathered
265 piculs (about 16-3/4 tons), the business is no longer profitable and
at present years sometimes slip by without a ship lying to off Sikayana.

As these worm-like animals,[202] which in the dried state command, like
the Salangan swallows' nests, a high price as a costly delicacy in China
and Japan, form an important article of commerce and employ a considerable
number of ships annually, we shall indulge in a few remarks on the very
laborious operations of preparing the Trepang.

Of the large number of varieties of Trepang which are found among the
coral reefs of the Pacific, there are only ten suited to the Chinese
market, which are accurately distinguished by their special names. As they
fetch a price according to quality of from 6 to 35 dollars per picul, it
is a matter of great importance to obtain the very highest qualities.

The four species most in demand are known in China by the following
names,--_Bangkolungan_, _Kiskisan_, _Talipan_, and _Munang_, each of which
has a distinctive appearance, and is found at various depths on the coral
reefs.

_Bangkolungan_, when captured, is from 11 to 15 inches in length, of an
oval form, brown on the back, white on the belly, incrusted with chalk,
and with a row of papillae or warts along the side. This species is hard,
stiff, and possesses hardly any means of progression beyond expanding and
contracting at will. They are found on the inner edge of the coral reef in
coral-sandy ground, under water of from 2 to 10 fathoms, and are difficult
to get at without diving. Kiskisan is from 6 to 12 inches long, oval, very
black, smooth on the back, dark grey belly, and with a row of papillae
along its side. This description is found in shallow water near the
highest portion of the reef, and on a bottom of coral and sand. _Talipan_
varies in length from 9 inches to 2 feet, and is the most peculiar-looking
of all the Trepang species. This sort is found in all parts of the reef,
but chiefly in water of from 2 to 3 fathoms. It is of a dark red colour,
and less bulky than either of the sorts already described. The back is
covered with large red spots, which readily distinguish it from all other
species. It is more flexible than the black sort, and more difficult to
prepare. _Munang_ is oval, small, quite black, and rarely measures above
eight inches in length. It has neither warts nor other excrescences, and
is found in shallow water on the coral flats, and frequently also among
the sea-tangle along the shore. It is this sort which the Americans
usually catch at the Fee-jee Islands. In the Chinese markets, a picul of
_Munang_ is worth 15 to 25 dollars. Besides these four principal species,
there are a variety of less valuable descriptions, such as Zapatos-China,
Lowlowan, Balati-blanco, Matan, Hangenan, and Zapatos-Grande.

In order to prepare these four sorts of Trepang for commerce, they are
first soaked in a large iron kettle for from 5 to 10 minutes in boiling
water, and when thoroughly heated through, are taken out. The portion of
the animal which is cut off, when well boiled, should be of an amber
colour tinged with blue, and feel somewhat like Indian rubber.

A certain degree of dexterity and practice are requisite for boiling
Trepang to the proper point and afterwards drying it. While it becomes
puffed out through too sudden an application of heat, and porous like
sponge, too low a temperature or too short a time destroys it on the other
hand, and in 24 hours it becomes quite tainted. Trepang dried in the sun
is more valuable than that dried on the island, nor does the native ever
care for those he dries over his wood fire. Probably the former mode of
preparing it would not pay for a ship, since at least twenty days are
necessary to dry Trepang in the sun, whereas over a wood fire the same
end is attained in four days.

On the whole, the precautions requisite properly to prepare Trepang are so
manifold and require such an expenditure of time, that only those who for
years have been exclusively devoted to the business can secure a
successful result. Consequently the trade is exceedingly remunerative, and
numbers of captains have within a very few years realized a competency and
even affluence by preparing Trepang for the Chinese market.

We employed our time, when sailing back to the island of Faole, in
finishing a small vocabulary of the language in use by the inhabitants of
the Stewart Island group, which we accomplished with the last stroke of
the oar that brought our heavily-laden boat back to Faole, where the rest
of our companions already anxiously awaited our return. We had occasion to
remark with surprise the perseverance and readiness of comprehension of
one native named Karosi, to whose assistance we are entirely indebted for
the preparation of this vocabulary.

After a stay of about four hours on the island, we returned to the ship
about 4.30 P.M., and by sundown were again under weigh for Sydney.[203] If
the inhabitants of the Solomon group were the most savage race of men we
encountered throughout our cruise, these amiable Sikayanese left on us the
impression of being the most moral and peacefully disposed race of
aborigines that we became acquainted with, and even to this day the few
fleeting but highly suggestive hours we spent with these primitive people
are among the most singular, yet delightful, on which memory rests, when
recalling the incidents of our circumnavigation.[204]

A fresh breeze hurried us rapidly to the southward during the 18th, but we
soon entered once more upon the region of squalls[205] and calms, and on
19th and 20th October we were lying listlessly about 15 miles E., by
chart, from Sesarga,[206] called also _Ile de Contrariete_ (9 deg. 49' S.,
162 deg. 13' E.), condemned to inactivity to the northward of San Christoval.
We could now satisfy ourselves that it is quite erroneous to identify this
island with that seen by Pedro de Ortega in 1567, round in shape, and with
a lofty volcano in its midst continually throwing up smoke and steam. _Ile
de Contrariete_, as seen from the deck of our frigate, presented the
appearance of a long wooded ridge, averaging about 800 feet in height,
whereas some of the peaks of San Christoval, 3000 or 4000 feet in height,
presented all the configuration peculiar to a volcanic island; this was
especially the case with one remarkably regular cone of about 2000 feet in
height, which rises quite close to Cape Surville. So that Burney's theory
seems the most probable, that Ortega's Sesarga is no other than Mount
Lammot, 8000 feet high, on Guadalcanar (9 deg. 50' S., 160 deg. 20' E.).

At last, on 21st October, we succeeded in weathering Cape Surville. Thus
the Solomon's group too were what seamen call "hull-down," and we might
look forward to a speedy termination to this most tedious and unpropitious
voyage. For a long month we had, while to the northward of the Solomon's
Islands, vainly sighed for a fresh breeze, and now all at once the S.E.
trade was blowing so strong that the ship could only lay her course to the
southward under reduced sail, close-hauled, and had now to plunge
laboriously through the heavy seas, which the stiff breeze was knocking
up. On the 25th and 26th October it blew a regular storm from the S.E., we
forging along under double-reefed square-sails, till it almost seemed that
the end of our voyage was destined to be as stormy as its commencement
"away in the China seas." The ship's timbers creaked and groaned, as
though they would break into a thousand pieces, while the whistling and
moaning of the wind, the raging and roaring of the sea, the tremendous
crash of the waves against our bulwarks, left no peace night or day for
the "non-effectives," as all passengers not regularly borne upon the
ship's books are called on board a man-of-war. As though to increase the
discomfort of their position, it happened that the frigate began to make
water to such an extent, that in what was fortunately but a very small
portion of the hold, the water rose to fifty inches within four hours! It
was supposed that during the typhoon on the China sea, some of the copper
plates had been wrenched off, and that the water was finding entrance
through some leak in her outer timbers, but the most rigid examination
failed to discover its whereabouts. At all events it must have been at or
above the water line, as when the sea rose higher than usual, or the ship
lurched much, the water was sure to gain. We were compelled consequently
to vary from our original course by the open sea-way along the west coast
of New Caledonia, and steer for the coral sea, thickly studded with
reefs, which lies between New Caledonia and "Sandy Cape" on the shores of
Australia, as by adopting this dangerous route we should at least have
smoother water and more favourable winds. Meanwhile, every possible
precaution was taken in handling the ship, so as not to increase the leak,
and a sail was kept ready to be fothered from without over the leaky part
in case of necessity.

On 28th October we had expected to be in sight of the great
horse-shoe-shaped Bampton Reef. But there was no surf discernible from the
mast-head, only the change to smooth water, which we at once felt, proving
that the reef really existed, and that we were to leeward of it. Its
position is so variously laid down on the charts, that while by one chart
we must have been upon the very reef itself, we were, according to a
second, four miles, and, according to a third, fourteen miles to the
eastward of it! The last-mentioned seemed to be the most correct, since at
four miles the surf must have been visible, whereas it would be impossible
to see it at fourteen miles.

By 30th October we had passed the latitude of Sandy Cape, and could now
steer direct for Sydney, the capital of the colony of New South Wales. The
same day we also crossed the tropic of Capricorn. The temperature, which
had been falling regularly ever since we left the Solomon Islands, in 28 deg.
S., was as low as 64 deg.4 Fahr., so that we found it advisable to resume our
woollen clothing.

Ten months we had now spent in the tropics, in the hottest seas of the
globe, and we now felt, on a beautiful November morning in the southern
tropics, as on a clear spring morning at home. On 4th November we had our
first peep of the coast of Australia at Smoky Cape, a fresh easterly
breeze filling our sails, as we bowled along at 10 knots an hour,
constantly nearing the next station of our voyage. On the 5th, at 2 P.M.,
the not very high land round Port Jackson came in sight, and we had not to
alter her course by one spoke, so that our chronometer had given
unmistakeable proof of its accuracy. The coast is for the most part rather
flat and monotonous, but we soon recognized the entrance by North Cape,
which rises sheer out of the water at the harbour mouth, where we also
took a pilot on board. The light-house here, 420 feet above sea-level, had
been visible from the deck of the frigate 15 miles away! During the whole
voyage we had only seen one vessel, an American clipper off the Marianne
Archipelago, and were greatly amazed to find not a single sail in the
vicinity of the port. At last, just as we got abreast of the entrance, we
saw a steamer and some small boats making for the land. At 6 P.M., after a
voyage of 82 days, during which we had sailed 5930 miles, the anchor was
let go in the magnificent harbour of Port Jackson, off Garden Island, to
the N.E. of the city of Sydney. We had reached in safety the fifth quarter
of the globe!


FOOTNOTES:

[200] As it is not uninteresting to know the course of exchange at
Sikayana existing between the products of European industry and its native
products, we subjoin a few of the most important equivalents:

  For 5 lbs. tobacco                               one pig.
   "  20 Steel fish-hooks                             "
   "  5 Strings of red corals                         "
   "  5 Strings of green and red glass beads          "
   "  5 Packets of needles and thread                 "
   "  10 Ells of calico                               "
   "  5 Fish-hooks                                 ten eggs.
   "  5 Fish-hooks                                 two hens.
   "  10 Fish-hooks                                30 pieces of Taro.
   "  2 Packets needles and threads                30 pieces of Taro.
   "  1 Packet old playing-cards                   4 hens.

[201] One Chinese picul = 133-1/2 lbs. English, whereas one Dutch picul =
135-3/5 lbs. English.

[202] Called Trepang by the Malays, _hai-schni_ by the Chinese, and
_Biche-de-mar_ by both English and French. Of this _holothuria_ or
sea-cucumber (_Holothuria edulis_), there are about 400 tons annually
imported into China from the various islands of the Southern Ocean.

[203] During our excursion, there were taken on board the frigate, which
cruised to and fro in short tacks off the island, about 200 readings of
the temperature, at depths of every 50 fathoms. It was also intended to
experiment as to soundings, but the state of the weather prevented this,
as there were continual squalls, and the threatening state of the weather
did not admit of a boat being launched. However at a distance of half a
mile from the reef, no bottom was found with 200 fathoms of line.

[204] It is perhaps a duty to our gallant companions of every grade to
vindicate the Expedition once more, and finally, from certain malignant
calumnies which, upwards of a year after we had left Australian waters,
were circulated in the columns of even respectable newspapers, accusing
the crew of the _Novara_ of having been guilty of most scandalous excesses
and wanton robbery while at Sikayana. It seems however needless to insist
that not the slightest pretext for such infamous aspersions was furnished
by any of the party who spent these few hours in Sikayana, of which we
have sketched the details in the present chapter. But the fact that they
could be circulated without its being possible to contradict them on
official authority points to a serious defect in our diplomatic position
abroad. True, that no respectable member of the community accredited the
idle mischievous report; true that the leading inhabitants, English,
American, and German, strenuously combated it on every possible occasion,
and in every possible manner. Yet had Austria been a recognized power,
instead of a friendly guest, it needs but little acquaintance with the
etiquette of public and official life to know that the calumny must have
been stifled in its birth, by the prompt action of those specially
appointed to protect the fair fame of their country in these distant
waters. Not till her flag floats regularly to the breeze in the most
distant countries, instead of being that of a casual visitor, will
Austria, and through her the entire German nation, receive that respect,
and occupy that position among the family of nations, to which her
intelligence, her energy, and her important influence upon the progress of
civilization alike entitle her.

[205] The quantity of rain that falls in these latitudes is something
almost incredible. One single squall from the N.W. was accompanied by a
rainfall of _three_ inches, in the course of _five hours_, whereas the
_entire rainfall_ for the _year_ in London, for instance, is only 18.07
inches.

[206] The native name is Ulatua.


                            END OF VOL. II.


                    JOHN CHILDS AND SON, PRINTERS.




                          List of Modifications