Transition has given economists a rare chance to study capitalism and
economic policies from scratch. What's more important - free markets,
institutions, education, democracy, or capital? Central and east Europe
became a giant lab in which to peruse policies pertaining to
criminality, private property ownership, entrepreneurship,
privatization, income distribution, employment, inflation and social
welfare.

Superficially, the debate revolved around the scientific rigor and
usefulness - or lack thereof - of the "Washington Consensus". Opposing
monetary and fiscal policies, free trade versus protectionism, capital
controls and convertibility - these occupied the minds and writings of
all manner of economic and development "experts" in the first decade
after the fall of the Berlin Wall.

Yet, deep underneath, transition - perhaps because it was so thoroughly
botched - taught us unforgettable lessons about markets and the way
they work, namely that "objective", "mechanical" capitalism is a mirage.

Perhaps the most important moral is that, like all other economic
processes - transition is, mostly, in the mind. Successful capitalism
requires education and experience. The blind in east Europe were led by
the one-eyed. Capitalism was presented - especially by Western
protagonists of "shock therapy" - as a deus ex machina, a panacea,
guaranteed to transport the region's derelict economies and destitute
people to the kitschy glamour of the tacky soap operas that flooded
their television screens.

Bedazzled by the alleged omnipotence and omniscience of the "invisible
hand", no one predicted the utter meltdown that ensued: the mass
unemployment, the ubiquitous poverty, the glaring abyss between new
rich and always poor, or the skyrocketing prices even as income
plummeted. Nor were the good parts of the new economic regime
understood or explained: private property, personal profit, incentives.

The dangers of transition were flippantly ignored and the peoples of
central and eastern Europe were treated as mere guinea pigs by eager
Western economists on fat retainers. Crime was allowed to hijack
important parts of the post-communist economic agenda, such as the
privatization of state assets. Kleptocracies subsumed the newborn
states. Social safety nets crumbled.

In their vainglorious attempt to pose as accurate and, thus,
"respectable", scientists, economists refused to admit that capitalism
is not merely a compendium of algorithms and formulas - but mainly a
state of mind. It is an all-encompassing, holistic, worldview, a set of
values, a code of conduct, a list of goals, aspirations, fantasies and
preferences and a catalog of moral do's and don'ts. This is where
transition, micromanaged by these "experts" failed.

The mere exposure to free markets was supposed to unleash innovation
and entrepreneurship in the long-oppressed populations of east Europe.
When this recipe bombed, the West tried to engender a stable,
share-holding, business-owning, middle class by financing small size
enterprises.

It then proceeded to strengthen and transform indigenous institutions.
None of it worked. Transition had no grassroots support and its
prescriptive - and painful - nature caused wide resentment and
obstruction.

The process of transition informed us that markets, left to their own
devices, unregulated and unharnessed, yield market failures, anomies,
crime and the misallocation of economic resources. The invisible hand
must be firmly clasped and guided by functioning and impartial
institutions, an ingrained culture of entrepreneurship and fair play,
classes of stakeholders, checks and balances and good governance on all
levels.

Wealth, behavioral standards, initiative, risk seeking - do not always
"trickle down". To get rid of central planning - more central planning
is required. The state must counteract numerous market failures ,
provide some public goods, establish and run institutions, tutor
everyone, baby-sit venture capitalists, enhance innovation, enforce
laws and standards, maintain safety, attract foreign investment, cope
with unemployment and, at times, establish and operate markets for
goods and services. This omnipresence runs against the grain of
Anglo-Saxon liberalism.

Moreover, such an expanded role of the state sits uncomfortably with
complete political liberty. That capitalism is inextricably linked to
democracy is a well-meaning fallacy - or a convenient pretext for
geopolitical power grabs. East Europe's transition stalled partly due
to political anarchy. China's transition, by comparison, is spectacular
- inflated figures notwithstanding - because it chose a gradual
approach to liberalization: first economic, then political.

Last but not least, pure, "American", capitalism and pure Marxism have
more in common than either would care to admit. Both are utopian. Both
are materialistic. Both are doctrinaire. Both believe that "it's a
jungle out there". Both seek social mobility through control of the
means of production. Both claim to be egalitarian forms of social
engineering and are civilizing, millennial, universal, missionary
pseudo-religions.

The denizens of the nether regions of central and eastern Europe have
been the victims of successive economic utopias. They fear and suspect
ideological purity. They have been conditioned by the authoritarian
breed of socialism they endured, really little more than an overblown
conspiracy theory, a persecutory delusion which invariably led to
Stalinesque paranoid backlashes. Indeed, Stalin was more representative
of communism than any other leader before or after him.

The Economist summed this semipternal mass hysteria neatly thus:

"The core idea that economic structure determines everything has been
especially pernicious ... The idea that ... rights have a deeper moral
underpinning is an illusion. Morality itself is an illusion., just
another weapon of the ruling class. As Gyorgy Lukasc put it, 'Communist
ethics makes it the highest duty to act wickedly ... This is the
greatest sacrifice revolution asks from us.' Human agency is null: we
are mere dupes of 'the system', until we repudiate it outright. What
goes for ethics also goes for history, literature, the rest of the
humanities and the social sciences. The 'late Marxist' sees them all
... not as subjects for disinterested intellectual inquiry but as forms
of social control."

Many in Europe feel that the above paragraph might as well have been
written about Anglo-Saxon capitalism. Reduced to bare-bones
materialism, it is amoral, if not immoral. It upholds natural selection
instead of ethics, prefers money to values, wealth formation to social
solidarity.

Predators everywhere - Russian oligarchs, central European cronies,
Balkan kleptocrats, east European managers - find this gratifying. All
others regard capitalism as yet another rigid and unforgiving creed,
this time imposed from Washington by the IMF and multinationals rather
as communism was enjoined from Moscow by the Kremlin.

With eight of the former communist countries about to become members of
the European Union - albeit second rate ones -  transition is entering
is most fascinating phase. Exposed hitherto to American teachings and
practices, the new members are forced to adhere to a whole different
rule book - all 82,000 pages of it.

European "capitalism" is really a hybrid of the socialist and liberal
teachings of the 19th century. It emphasizes consensus, community,
solidarity, equality, stability and continuity. It places these values
above profitability, entrepreneurship, competition, individualism,
mobility, size, litigation and the use of force. Europeans firmly
believe that the workings of the market should be tampered with and
that it is the responsibility of the state to see to it that no one
gets left behind or trampled upon.

European stakeholder capitalism is paternalistic and inclusive.
Employees, employers, the government, communities and suppliers are
partners in the decision making process or privies to it. Relics of
past models of the market economy still abound in this continent:
industrial policy, Keynesian government spending, development aid,
export and production subsidies, trade protectionism, the
state-sanctioned support of nascent and infant industries. Mild
corporatism is rife and manifest in central wage bargaining.

For some countries - notably Estonia - joining the EU would translate
into a de-liberalized and re-regulated future. Others would find the
EU's brand of the market a comfortable and dimly familiar middle ground
between America's harsh prescriptions and communism's delusional model.
The EU's faceless and Kafkaesque bureaucracy in Brussels - Moscow
revisited - should prove to be a relief compared to the IMF's ruffians.

The EU is evolving into a land empire, albeit glacially. The polities
of central and eastern Europe were always constituents of empires -
reluctantly or by choice. In some ways they are better suited to form
an "ever closer union" than the more veteran members.

Eastern Advantages

By: Dr. Sam Vaknin

Also published by United Press International (UPI)

Also Read

Transition in Context

Lessons in Transition

Is Transition Possible?

Leapfrogging Transition - Technology and Post Communism

Many of the nations of central and east Europe have spent most of their
history as components of one empire or another. People in this region
are used to be at the receiving end of directives and planning from the
center. Though ostensibly fervid nationalists, they are ill at ease
with their re-founded and re-found nation-states.

The identity of the denizens of these parts is more regional than
national and evolving towards the supra-national. People are from this
or that city, or district, or village. And they aspire to become
citizens of Europe and the great experiment of the European Union. They
are only hesitantly and tentatively Macedonians, or Moldovans, or
Belarusians, or Kazakhs, or Yugoslavs.

The likes of the Czechs, the Estonians and the Slovenes are well-suited
to become constituents of a larger whole. They make better Europeans
than the British, or the Norwegians. They have survived far mightier
and more bloated bureaucracies than Brussels'. They are unsurpassed
manipulators of officialdom. In the long run, the new members stand to
benefit the most from the EU's enlargement and to form its unwaveringly
loyal core.

Not yet the full-fledged individualists of the Anglo-Saxon model of
capitalism - these nations are consensus-seeking team-players. Tutored
by centuries of occupation and hardship, they are instinctual
multilateralists. They are avid Westerners by persuasion, if not yet in
practice, or geography.

Moreover, their belated conversion to the ways of the market is an
undisguised blessing.

Though still a promise largely unfulfilled, the countries in transition
could now leapfrog whole stages of development by adopting novel
technologies and through them the expensive Western research they
embody. The East can learn from the West's mistakes and, by avoiding
them, achieve a competitive edge.

Technology is a social phenomenon with social implications. It fosters
entrepreneurship and social mobility. By allowing the countries in
transition to skip massive investments in outdated technologies - the
cellular phone, the Internet, cable TV, and the satellite become
shortcuts to prosperity.

Poverty is another invaluable advantage.

With the exception of Slovenia, Estonia, Croatia and the Czech Republic
- the population of the countries in transition is poor, sometimes
inordinately so. Looming and actual penury is a major driver of
entrepreneurship, initiative and innovation. Wealth formation and
profit seeking are motivated by indigence, both absolute and relative.
The poor seek to better their position in the world by becoming
middle-class. They invest in education, in small businesses, in
consumer products, in future generations.

The Germans - sated and affluent - are unlikely to experience a second
economic miracle. The Serbs, Albanians, Ukrainians, Poles, or Romanians
won't survive without one. The West is just discovering this truth and
is opening its gates - albeit xenophobically and intermittently - to
poorer foreigners. For what is immigration if not the importation of
ambitious indigents, certain to revitalize the EU's rich and somnolent
economies?

The countries of central and eastern Europe, thus, stand to benefit
twice.

Their own economic Renaissance is spurred on by a striving home-grown
proletariat. And they are uniquely positioned - geographically and
culturally - to export destitute go-getters to the wealthy West and to
reap the rewards of the inevitable spurt in entrepreneurship and
innovation that follows. Remittances, returning expatriates, thriving
and networked Diasporas would do more to uplift the countries of origin
than any amount of oft-misallocated multilateral aid.

This cornucopian vision is threatened from numerous sides.

Geopolitical instability, resurgent trade protectionism, dysfunctional
global capital markets and banks - can all reverse the course of a
successful transition to market economies. Still, the more pernicious
threats are from the inside: venal, delegitimized politicians, brain
drain, crumbling infrastructure, cheap foreign competition, or
inter-ethnic tensions.

Perhaps the most serious hindrance to progress would be a fanatic
emulation by the countries in transition of the European Union. An
overly generous social safety net, a sprawling bureaucracy, inane laws
and regulations about everything from the environment to the welfare of
pigs, paralyzed decision-making processes and deleterious subventions -
can all scupper progress and depress entrepreneurship and innovation.

The cautionary tale of east Germany - smothered by western red tape and
lethargy - should forewarn every new member and aspiring candidate.
They need to join the European Union in the hope of helping to reform
it from the inside. They should not succumb to the allure of German
largesse, nor acquire the French, Spanish, Greek and Portuguese
addiction to it. They cannot afford to.

Europe's Four Speeds

By: Dr. Sam Vaknin

Also published by United Press International (UPI)

Pomp and circumstance often disguise a sore lack of substance. The
three days summit of the Central European Initiative is no exception.
Held in Macedonia's drab capital, Skopje, the delegates including the
odd chief of state, discussed their economies in what was
presumptuously dubbed by them the "small Davos", after the larger and
far more important annual get together in Switzerland.

Yet the whole exercise rests on a series of politically correct
confabulations. To start with, Macedonia, the host, as well as Albania,
Bulgaria, Romania, Ukraine and other east European backwaters hardly
qualify for the title "central European". Mitteleuropa is not merely a
geographical designation which excludes all but two or three of the
participants. It is also a historical, cultural, and social entity
which comprises the territories of the erstwhile German and,
especially, Austro-Hungarian (Habsburg) empires.

Moreover, the disparity between the countries assembled in the august
conference precludes a common label. Slovenia's GDP per capita is 7
times Macedonia's. The economies of the Czech Republic, Poland, and
Hungary are light years removed from those of Yugoslavia or even
Bulgaria.

Nor do these countries attempt real integration. While regional talk
shops, such as ASEAN and the African Union, embarked on serious efforts
to establish customs and currency zones - the countries of central and
eastern Europe have drifted apart and intentionally so. Intra-regional
trade has declined every single year since 1989. Intra-regional foreign
direct investment is almost non-existent.

Macedonia's exports to Yugoslavia, its next door neighbor, amount to
merely half its exports to the unwelcoming European Union - and are
declining. Countries from Bulgaria to Russia have shifted 50-75 percent
of their trade from their traditional COMECON partners to the European
Union and, to a lesser degree, the Middle East, the Far East and the
United States.

Nor do the advanced members of the club fancy a common label. Slovenia
abhors its Balkan pedigree. Croatia megalomaniacally considers itself
German. The Czechs and the Slovaks regard their communist elopement a
sad aberration as do the Hungarians. The Macedonians are not sure
whether they are Serbs, Bulgarians, or Macedonians. The Moldovans wish
they were Romanians. The Romanians secretly wish they were Hungarians.
The Austrians are sometimes Germans and sometimes Balkanians. Many
Ukrainians and all Belarusians would like to resurrect the evil empire,
the USSR.

This identity crisis affects the European Union. Never has Europe been
more fractured. It is now a continent of four speeds. The rich core of
the European Union, notably Germany and France, constitutes its engine.

The mendicant members - from Greece to Portugal - enjoy inane dollops
of cash from Brussels but have next to no say in Union matters.

The shoo-in candidates - Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and,
maybe, Slovakia, if it keeps ignoring the outcomes of its elections -
are frantically distancing themselves from the queue of beggars,
migrants and criminals that awaits at the pearly gates of Brussels. The
Belgian Curtain -between central European candidates and east European
aspirants - is falling fast and may prove to be far more divisive and
effective than anything dreamt up by Stalin.

The fourth group comprises real candidates - such as Bulgaria - and
would be applicants, such as Romania, Macedonia, Albania, Yugoslavia,
Bosnia-Herzegovina and even Croatia. Some of them are tainted by war
crimes. Others are addicted to donor conferences. Yet others are
travesties of the modern nation state having been hijacked and
subverted by tribal crime gangs. Most of them combine all these
unpalatable features.

Many of these countries possess the dubious distinction of having once
been misruled by the sick man of Europe, the Ottoman Empire. In a
moment of faux-pas honesty, Valerie Giscard D'Estaing, the chairman of
the European Union's much-touted constitutional convention, admitted
last week that a European Union with Turkey will no longer be either
European or United. Imagine how they perceive the likes of Macedonia,
or Albania.

As the Union enlarges to the east and south, its character will be
transformed. It will become poorer and darker, more prone to crime and
corruption, to sudden or seasonal surges of immigration, to
fractiousness and conflict. It is a process of conversion to a truly
multi-ethnic and multi-cultural grouping with a weighty Slav and
Christian Orthodox presence. Not necessarily an appetizing prospect,
say many.

The former communist countries in transition are supposed to be
miraculously transformed by the accession process. Alas, the indelible
pathologies of communism mesh well with Brussels's unmanageable,
self-perpetuating and opaque bureaucracy. These mutually-enhancing
propensities are likely to yield a giant and venal welfare state with a
class of aged citizens in the core countries of the European Union
living off the toil of young, mostly Slav, laborers in its eastern
territories. This is the irony: the European Union is doomed without
enlargement. It needs these countries far more than they need it.

The strategic importance of western Europe has waned together with the
threat posed by a dilapidated Russia. Both south Europe and its
northern regions are emerging as pivotal. Enlargement would serve to
enhance the dwindling geopolitical relevance of the EU and heal some of
the multiple rifts with the USA.

But the main benefits are economic.

Faced with an inexorably ageing populace and an unsustainable system of
social welfare and retirement benefits, the EU is in dire need of young
immigrants. According to the United Nations Population Division, the EU
would need to import 1.6 million migrant workers annually to maintain
its current level of working age population. But it would need to
absorb almost 14 million new, working age, immigrants per year just to
preserve a stable ratio of workers to pensioners.

Eastern Europe - and especially central Europe - is the EU's natural
reservoir of migrant labor. It is ironic that xenophobic and
anti-immigration parties hold the balance of power in a continent so
dependent on immigration for the survival of its way of life and
institutions.

The internal, common, market of the EU has matured. Its growth rate has
leveled off and it has developed a mild case of deflation. In previous
centuries, Europe exported its excess labor and surplus capacity to its
colonies - an economic system known as "mercantilism".

The markets of central, southern, and eastern Europe - West Europe's
hinterland - are replete with abundant raw materials and dirt-cheap,
though well-educated, labor. As indigenous purchasing power increases,
the demand for consumer goods and services will expand. Thus, the
enlargement candidates can act both as a sink for Europe's production
and the root of its competitive advantage.

Moreover, the sheer weight of their agricultural sectors and the
backwardness of their infrastructure can force a reluctant EU to reform
its inanely bloated farm and regional aid subsidies, notably the Common
Agricultural Policy. That the EU cannot afford to treat the candidates
to dollops of subventioary largesse as it does the likes of France,
Spain, Portugal, and Greece is indisputable.

But even a much-debated phase-in period of 10 years would burden the
EU's budget - and the patience of its member states and denizens - to
an acrimonious breaking point.

The countries of central and eastern Europe are new consumption and
investment markets. With a total of 300 million people (Russia
counted), they equal the EU's population - though not its much larger
purchasing clout. They are likely to while the next few decades on a
steep growth curve, catching up with the West. Their proximity to the
EU makes them ideal customers for its goods and services. They could
provide the impetus for a renewed golden age of European economic
expansion.

Central and eastern Europe also provide a natural land nexus between
west Europe and Asia and the Middle East. As China and India grow in
economic and geopolitical importance, an enlarged Europe will find
itself in the profitable role of an intermediary between east and west.

The wide-ranging benefits to the EU of enlargement are clear,
therefore. What do the candidate states stand to gain from their
accession? The answer is: surprisingly little. All of them already
enjoy, to varying degrees, unfettered, largely duty-free, access to the
EU. To belong, a few - like Estonia - would have to dismantle a much
admired edifice of economic liberalism.

Most of them would have to erect barriers to trade and the free
movement of labor and capital where none existed.

All of them would be forced to encumber their fragile economies with
tens of thousands of pages of prohibitively costly labor, intellectual
property rights, financial, and environmental regulation. None stands
to enjoy the same benefits as do the more veteran members - notably in
agricultural and regional development funds.

Joining the EU would deliver rude economic and political shocks to the
candidate countries. A brutal and rather sudden introduction of
competition in hitherto much-sheltered sectors of the economy, giving
up recently hard-won sovereignty, shouldering the debilitating cost of
the implementation of  reams of guideline, statutes, laws, decrees, and
directives, and being largely powerless to influence policy outcomes.
Faced with such a predicament, some countries may even reconsider.

Switching Empires

By: Dr. Sam Vaknin

Also published by United Press International (UPI)

European Union (EU) leaders, meeting in Copenhagen, are poised to sign
an agreement to admit ten new members to their hitherto exclusive club.
Eight of the fortunate acceders are former communist countries: Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia and
Slovenia. Bulgaria and Romania are tentatively slated to join in 2007.
The exercise will cost in excess of $40 billion over the next three
years. The EU's population will grow by 75 million souls.

In the wake of the implosion of the USSR in 1989-91, the newly
independent countries of the Baltic and central Europe, traumatized by
decades of brutal Soviet imperialism, sought to fend off future Russian
encroachment. Entering NATO and the EU was perceived by them as the
equivalent of obtaining geopolitical insurance policies against a
repeat performance of their tortured histories.

This existential emphasis shifted gradually to economic aspects as an
enfeebled, pro-Western and contained Russia ceased to represent a
threat. But the ambivalence towards the West is still there. Mild
strands of paranoid xenophobia permeate public discourse in central
Europe and, even more so, in east Europe.

The Czechs bitterly remember how, in 1938, they were sacrificed to the
Nazis by a complacent and contemptuous West. The Poles and Slovenes
fear massive land purchases by well heeled foreigners (read: Germans).
Everyone decries the "new Moscow" - the faceless, central planning,
remote controlling bureaucracy in Brussels. It is tough to give up hard
gained sovereignty and to immerse oneself in what suspiciously
resembles a loose superstate.

But surely comparing the EU or NATO to the erstwhile "Evil Empire"
(i.e., the Soviet Union) is stretching it too far? The USSR, after all,
did not hesitate to exercise overwhelming military might against
ostensible allies such as Hungary (1956) and the Czechoslovaks (1968)?
Try telling this to the Serbs who were demonized by west European media
and then bombarded to smithereens by NATO aircraft in 1999.

Though keen on rejoining the mainstream of European history,
civilization and economy, the peoples of the acceding swathe are highly
suspicious of Western motives and wary of becoming second-class
citizens in an enlarged entity. They know next to nothing about how the
EU functions.

They are chary of another period of "shock therapy" and of creeping
cultural imperialism. Rendered cynical by decades of repression, they
resent what they regard as discriminatory accession deals imposed on
them in a "take it or leave it" fashion by the EU.

Anti-EU sentiment and Euroscepticism are vocal - though abating - even
in countries like Poland, an erstwhile bastion of Europhilia. Almost
two thirds of respondents in surveys conducted by the EU in Estonia,
Latvia, Slovenia and Lithuania are undecided about EU membership or
opposed to it altogether. The situation in the Czech Republic is not
much different. Even in countries with a devout following of EU
accession, such as Romania, backing for integration has declined this
year.

These lurking uncertainties are reciprocated in the west. The mostly
Slav candidates are stereotyped and disparaged by resurgent rightwing,
anti-immigration parties, by neo-nationalists, trade protectionists and
vested interests. Countries like Spain, France, Ireland, Greece and
Portugal stand to receive less regional aid and agricultural subsidies
from the common EU till as the money flows east.

Core constituencies in the west - such as farmers and low-skilled
industrial workers - resent the enlargement project. Anti-Slav
prejudices run rampant in Italy, Austria and Germany. The
incompatibilities are deepest. For instance, according to research
recently published by the Pew Center, the new members are staunchly
pro-American, though less so than ten years ago. In stark contrast, the
veteran core of the EU is anti-American.

Many of the denizens of the candidate countries regard the EU as merely
an extended Germany. It is the focus of numerous conspiracy theories,
especially in the Balkan. The losers of the second world war - Japan
and Germany - are out to conquer the world, this time substituting
money for bullets.

Germany, insist the Serbs and the Macedonians - instigated the
breakdown of the Yugoslav Federation to establish a subservient
Croatia. Wasn't Slobodan Milosevic, the Serb dictator, ousted in favor
of the German-educated Zoran Djindjic? - they exclaim triumphantly.

Germany is reasserting itself. United, it is the largest country in
Europe and one of the richest. Its forces are keeping the fragile peace
in Balkan hot spots, like Macedonia. It will contribute to the EU's
long-heralded rapid reaction force. It owns the bulk of the, frequently
overdue, sovereign debts of Russia, Ukraine and other east European
countries.

One tenth of Germany's trade is with the candidate countries, a
turnover comparable to its exchange with the United States. German
goods constitute two fifths of all EU trade with the new members.
Germans are the largest foreign direct investors throughout the region
- from Hungary to Croatia. German banks compete with German-owned
Austrian banks over control of the region's fledgling financial sector.
The study of German as a second or third language has surged.

Last year alone, German corporations plunged $3.6 billion into the
economies of the acceding countries. German multinationals like
Volkswagen and Siemens employ almost 400,000 people in central Europe -
for one tenth to one eighth their cost in the fatherland.

Quoted by the World Socialist, the German Chamber of Industry and
Commerce (IHK) estimates that the production costs in mechanical
engineering and plant construction are 20 percent lower in Poland than
in Germany, while quality is more or less the same.

Germany runs the EU rather single-handedly, though with concessions to
a megalomaniacally delusional France. In September, the German and
French leaders, meeting tˆte-…-tˆte in a hotel, dictated to other
members the fate, for the next 11 years, of half the EU's budget - the
portion wasted on the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP).

Germany's hegemonic role is likely to be enhanced by enlargement. Many
of the new members - e.g., the Czech Republic - depend on it
economically. Others - like Hungary - share with it a common history.
German is spoken in the majority of the candidates. They trade with
Germany and German businessmen and multinational are heavily invested
in their economies. A "German Bloc" within the EU is conceivable -
unless Poland defects to the increasingly marginalized French or to the
British.

Germany's federalist instincts - its express plan to create a "United
States of Europe", central government and all - are, therefore,
understandable, though spurned by the candidate countries. Germany is
likely to press for even further enlargement to the east. The EU's
commissioner for enlargement is a German, Gunter Verheugen.

The dilapidated expanses of the former Soviet satellites are Germany's
natural economic hinterland - on the way to the way more lucrative
Asian markets. Hence Germany's reluctance to admit Turkey, a massive,
pro-American, potential competitor for Asian favors. Integrating Russia
would be next on Germany's re-emerging Ostpolitik.

This firmly places Germany on an economic and military collision course
with the United States. As Stratfor, the strategic forecasting
consultancy, put it recently: "In Washington's opinion, America's
obsessions should be NATO's obsessions." Germany, the regional
superpower, has other, more pressing priorities: "maintaining stability
in its region, making sure that Russian evolution is  benign and
avoiding costly conflicts in which it has only  marginal interest."

Moreover, there is an entirely different - and much less benign -
interpretation of EU enlargement. It is based on the incontrovertible
evidence that the German ends in Europe have remained the same - only
the means have changed. The German "September Plan" to impose an
economic union on the vanquished nations of Europe following a military
victory, called, in 1914, for "(the establishment of) an economic
organization ... through mutual customs agreements ... including
France, Belgium, Holland, Denmark, Austria, Poland, and perhaps Italy,
Sweden, and Norway".

Europe spent the first half of the 19th century (following the 1815
Congress of Vienna) containing a post-Napoleonic France. The Concert of
Europe was specifically designed to reflect the interests of the Big
Powers, establish the limits to their expansion in Europe, and create a
continental "balance of deterrence". For a few decades it proved to be
a success.

The rise of a unified, industrially mighty and narcissistic Germany led
to two ineffably ruinous world wars. In an effort to prevent a repeat
of Hitler, the Big Powers of the West, led by the USA, the United
Kingdom and France, attempted to contain Germany from both east and
west. The western plank consisted of an "ever closer" European Union
and a divided Germany.

The collapse of the eastern flank of anti-German containment - the USSR
- led to the re-emergence of a united Germany. As the traumatic
memories of the two world conflagrations receded, Germany resorted to
applying its political weight - now commensurate with its economic and
demographic might - to securing EU hegemony. Germany is also a natural
and historical leader of central Europe - the future lebensraum of both
the EU and NATO and the target of their expansionary predilections,
euphemistically termed "enlargement".

Thus, virtually overnight, Germany came to dominate the Western
component of anti-German containment - even as the Eastern component
has chaotically disintegrated.

The EU - notably France - is reacting by trying to assume the role
formerly played by the USSR. EU integration is an attempt to assimilate
former Soviet satellites and dilute Germany's power by re-jigging rules
of voting and representation. If successful, this strategy will prevent
Germany from bidding yet again for a position of dominance in Europe by
establishing a "German Union" separate from the EU.

If this gambit fails, however, Germany will emerge triumphant, at the
head of the world's second largest common market and most prominent
trading bloc. Its second-among-equal neighbors will be reduced to mere
markets for its products and recruitment stages for its factories.

In this exegesis, EU enlargement has already degenerated into the same
tiresome and antiquated mercantilist game among 19th century
continental Big Powers. Even Britain has hitherto maintained its
Victorian position of "splendid isolation". There is nothing wrong with
that. The Concert of Europe ushered in a century of globalization,
economic growth and peace. Yet, alas, this time around, it has thus far
been quite a cacophony.



Europe's Agricultural Revolution

By: Dr. Sam Vaknin

Also published by United Press International (UPI)

One of the undeniable benefits of the forthcoming enlargement of the
European Union (EU) accrues to its veteran members rather than to the
acceding countries. The EU is forced to revamp its costly agricultural
policies and attendant bloated bureaucracy. This, undoubtedly, will
lead, albeit glacially, to the demise of Europe's farming sector as we
know it.

Contrary to public misperceptions, Europe is far more open to trade
than the United States. According to the United Nations (UN), the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Organization of Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD), its exports amount to 14 percent of
gross domestic product (GDP) compared to America's 11.5 percent. It is
also the world's second largest importer. In constant dollar terms, it
is the world's largest trader.

A recent Trade Policy Review released by the World Trade Organization
(WTO) mentions two notable exceptions: farm products and textiles.
Europe's average tariff on agricultural produce is four times those
levied on non-agricultural goods. Yet, a number of trends conspire to
break the eerie stranglehold of 3 percent of Europe's population - its
farmers - on its budget and political process.

The introduction of the euro rendered prices transparent across borders
and revealed to the European consumer how expensive his food is. Scares
like the mishandled mad cow disease dented consumer confidence in both
politicians and bureaucrats. But, most crucially, the integration of
the countries of east and central Europe with their massive
agricultural sectors makes the EU's Common Agricultural Policy (CAP)
untenable.

The CAP guzzles close to half of the EU's $98 billion budget. Recent,
controversial reforms, introduced by the European Commission, call for
a gradual reduction and diversion of CAP outlays from directly
subsidizing production to WTO-compatible investments in agricultural
employment, regional development, environment and training and
research. Unnoticed, support to farmers by both the EU and member
governments has already declined from $120 billion in 1999 to $110
billion in 2000. This decrease has since continued unabated.

Still, the EU is unable to provide the candidate countries with the
same level of farm subsidies it doles out to the current 15 members.
Close to one quarter of Poland's population is directly or indirectly
involved in agriculture - ten times the European average. The agreement
struck between Germany and France in September and adopted in a summit
Brussels in October freezes CAP spending in its 2006 level until 2013.

This may further postpone the identical treatment much coveted by the
applicants. Theoretically, subsidies for the farm sectors of the new
members will increase and subsidies flowing to veteran members will
decrease until they are equalized at around 80 percent of present
levels throughout the EU by the end of the next budget period in 2013.

But, in reality, the entire CAP stands to be renegotiated in 2005-6. No
one can guarantee the outcome of this process, especially when coupled
with the Doha round of trade liberalization. The offers made now to the
candidate countries are not only mean but also meaningless.

A recent tweak by Denmark, the current president of the EU, to peg
support for farmers in the accession countries at two fifths the going
rate, won a cautious welcome by the applicants. Some of this novel
subventionary largesse will be deducted from a fund for rural
development in the new members. Additionally, national governments will
be allowed to top up inadequate EU dollops with governmental budget
funds.

Even this parsimonious offer - still disputed by the majority of
contemporary EU members - will cost the Union an extra $500 million a
year. It also fails to tackle equally weighty wrangles about production
quotas, EU protectionist "safeguard" measures, import tariffs imposed
by the applicant countries against heavily subsidized European farm
products, reduced value added taxes on agricultural produce and
referential periods and yields - the bases for calculating EU
transfers.

It also ignores the distinct - and thorny - possibility that the new
members will end up as net contributors to the budget. Quoted by Radio
Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Sandor Richter, a senior researcher with the
Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies, concluded that the
first intake of applicants will end up underwriting at least $410
million of the EU's budget in the first year of membership alone. With
the GDP per capita of most candidates at one fifth the EU's, this would
be a perverse, socially unsettling and politically explosive outcome.

Aware of this, the European Commission denies any intention to actually
accept cash from the candidates. Their net contributions would remain
theoretical, it pledges implausibly. Yet, as long as a country such as
Poland is incapable of absorbing - disseminating and utilizing - more
than 28 percent of the aid it is currently entitled to - veteran EU
members rightly question its administrative ability to tackle much
larger provisions - c. $20 billion in the first three years after
accession.

The prolonged and irascible debate has taken its toll. In some
candidate countries, pro-EU sentiment is on the wane. Leszek Miller,
Poland's prime minister, told the PAP news agency that Poland should
contribute to the EU less than it receives in agricultural subsidies.
And what if not? "Nobody would be overly concerned if Poland did not
enter the EU together with the first group of new members."

Hungary echoes this argument. Almost two thirds of respondents in
surveys conducted by the EU in Estonia, Latvia, Slovenia and Lithuania
are undecided about EU membership or opposed to it altogether.

The situation in the Czech Republic is not much improved. Only Hungary
stalwartly supports the EU's eastern tilt.

Opinion polls periodically conducted by GfK Hungaria, a market research
group owned by GfK Germany, paint a more mixed picture. On the one
hand, even in countries with a devout following of EU accession, such
as Romania, support for integration has declined this year. Support in
Hungary and Poland, on the other hand, picked up.

Yet, the EU can't seem to get its act together. According to the Danish
paper, Berlingske Tidende, Danish prime minister, Anders Fogh
Rasmussen, rules out a "take it or leave it" ultimatum to the
candidates. There will be "real negotiations", he insisted. Not so,
says Anders Fogh Rasmussen, the Danish president of the EU until Dec
31: "The room for maneuver in negotiations will be very limited ... We
have a certain framework, and we stick to it."

Yet, disenchantment should not be exaggerated. Naturally,
flood-affected farmers throughout the region - from the Czech Republic
to Poland - are vigorously protesting their unequal treatment and the
compromises their governments are arm-twisted into making. Still,
according to a survey released last December by the European
Commission, 60 percent of the denizens of the accession countries
support it.

As the endgame nears, the parties to the negotiations are posturing,
though. EU enlargement commissioner, Gunter Verheugen, argued a
fortnight ago against equalizing support for Poland's 6 million farmers
with the subsidies given to the EU's 8 million smallholders. In a
typical feat of incongruity he said it will prevent them from
modernizing and alienate other professions.

Franz Fischler, the Austrian EU's agriculture commissioner, hinted that
miserly production quotas for cereals, meat and dairy products, offered
by the EU to the seething applicants, can be augmented. The EU
presently provides the candidate countries with funding, within the
Special Accession Programme for Agriculture and Rural Development
(SAPARD) to support farm investments, to boost processing and marketing
of farm and fishery products and to bankroll infrastructure
improvements. Hungarian farmers, for instance, are entitled to up to
$38 million of SAPARD money annually.

In a thinly veiled threat, Fischler included this in a speech he made
in a recent official visit to Estonia:

"The EU enlargement countries should be pleased with the 25 per cent
agriculture subsidies, as the member states have not agreed even on
that yet, therefore this should be the first goal and only after that
can further subsidies be discussed ... It would not be very wise to
tell the EU member states that accession countries are not pleased,
that would not be positive for the whole process."

Small wonder he was whistled down by irate Polish parliamentarians in
an address to a joint session of the parliamentary committees for
agriculture and European integration in the Sejm. Poland's fractured
farm sector is notoriously inefficient. With one quarter of the labor
force it produces less than 4 percent of GDP. But the peasants are well
represented in the legislature and soaring unemployment - almost one
fifth of all adults - makes every workplace count.

In the meantime, the ten would-be new members of the EU have teamed up
to present their case in Brussels. Their ministers of finance, foreign
affairs and of agriculture, parliamentary deputies in their finance and
farm committees - all issued and issue common statements, position
papers, briefings and memoranda of understanding. But no one is
inclined to take such ad-hoc alliances among the candidate countries
seriously. The disparity between their farm sectors is such that it
rules out a single voice.

Moreover, the EU is strained to the limit of its habitual
consensus-driven decision making. The breakdown of the European
mechanism of deliberation was brought into sharp relief by the way in
which the future of the CAP was decided in a series of chats between
the leaders of France and Germany in a hotel in Brussels. Their deal
was later rubber stamped, unaltered, in a summit of all EU members last
month.

The Union is in constitutional and institutional flux. Small and even
medium sized members - such as the United Kingdom - are marginalized.
As the EU grows to 25 countries, a core of leadership will emerge. It
will involve Germany, France and, potentially the UK and Italy.

These will hand down blueprints to be fleshed out by the less
significant states and by an increasingly sidelined European Commission
and a make-believe European Parliament.

The countries of central and eastern Europe are and will, for a long
time, be second class citizens, tolerated merely because they provide
cheap, youthful, labor, raw materials and close-by markets for finished
goods. The candidates are strategically located between the old
continent and booming Asia.

EU enlargement is a thinly disguised exercise in mercantilism tinged
with the maudlin ideology of embracing revenant brothers long lost to
communism. But beneath the veneer of civility and kultur lurk the cold
calculations of realpolitik. The applicant countries - the EU's
hinterland - would do well to remember this.

Winning the European CAP

By: Dr. Sam Vaknin

Also published by United Press International (UPI)

According to Herve Gaymard, the French resistance is alive and kicking
- at least with regards to the European Commission's proposed reforms
of the European Union's Common Agricultural Policy (CAP). The French
Minister for Agriculture, Food, Fisheries and Rural Affairs, in a
speech to the misnamed "Real Solutions for the Future" Oxford Farming
Conference last week, drew the battle lines.

France - and six other EU countries - intend to stick religiously to a
deal struck, tˆte-…-tˆte, between the French president and the German
chancellor last year. The CAP - which now consumes close to half of the
EU's budget - will not be revamped until 2013 at the earliest, though
outlays will be frozen in real terms and, starting in 2006, gradually
diverted from subsidizing production to environmental and other good
causes ("decoupling" and "modulation" in EU jargon).

This upset the EU's ten new members, slated to join as early as May
2004. With spending capped, they are unlikely to enjoy the same
pecuniary support bestowed on the veterans, even after 2013. As it is,
their agricultural benefits are phased over ten years and face an
uncertain future when the CAP is, inevitably and finally, scrapped.

Moreover, France's recalcitrance imperils the crucial Doha round of
trade talks. Both the EU and the USA are supposed to reveal their hands
by March. The developing countries are already up in arms over promises
made by the richer polities in the protracted Uruguay round and then
promptly ignored by them.

Agriculture is arguably the poorer members' highest priority. They
demand the opening of the rich world's markets, whittling down export
and production subsidies and the abrogation of non-tariff trade
barriers and practices, such as the profuse application of anti-dumping
quotas and duties.

Gaymard proffered the usual woolly mantras of "farm products are more
than marketable goods", "France, and Europe in general, need security
of food supply", "food cannot be left to the mercy of market forces".
Farmers, unlike industrialists - insisted the Minister counterfactually
- cannot simply relocate and agrarian pursuits are a pillar of the
nation's culture and its attachment to the land.

Yet, it cannot be denied that Gaymard advanced in his speech a few
thought-provoking and oft-overlooked points.

He convincingly argued that farm products covered by EU subsidies are
rarely in direct competition with the crops of the poor in Africa and
Asia. The cotton, rice and groundnut oil subventions generously doled
out to growers in the United States - the EU's most vocal critic - harm
the third world smallholders and sharecroppers it purports to defend.

The IMF - perceived in Europe as the long and heartless arm of the
Americans - has dismantled the coffee regime and marketing structures
causing irreparable damage to its indigent growers, Gaymard said.

The CAP, insists Gaymard, does not encourage environmental ills. The
policy does not subsidize the husbandry of disease-prone poultry and
pigs, nor does it support genetically modified crops. The CAP is also
way cheaper than portrayed by its detractors. Food constitutes only 16
percent of the family budget - one third of its share when the CAP was
instituted, four decades ago. The CAP amounts to a mere 1 percent of
the combined public spending of all EU members. The comparable figure
in America is 1.5 percent.

This last argument is, of course, spurious. It ignores the distorting
effects of the CAP: exorbitant food prices in the EU, double payments
by EU denizens, once as taxpayers and then as consumers, mountains of
butter and rivers of milk produced solely for the sake of finagling
subsidies out of an inert and bloated bureaucracy and deteriorating
relationships with irate trade partners.

Gaymard is no less parsimonious with the full truth elsewhere in his
counterattack.

He claims that the EU provides tariff-free and quota-free access to
farm products from the world's 49 Highly Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPCs). This is partly untrue and partly misleading. Important
commodities - such as sugar, rice and bananas - are virtually excluded
by long phase-in periods.

Non-tariff and non-quota barriers abound. Macedonian lamb is regularly
barred on sanitary grounds, for instance. Health, sanitary,
standards-related and quality regulations render a lot of the supposed
access theoretical.

Still, it is true that the EU's larger economies are more open to
international trade than the United States. Gaymard flaunted a telling
statistic: the EU absorbs well over two fifths of Brazil's farm
exports. The USA - in geographical proximity to Brazil and a
self-described ardent champion of free trade - takes in less than 15
percent.

The problem with farming in the developing world is its concentration
on cash crops, whose prices are volatile. This subverts traditional
agriculture. Gaymard implied that the destitute would do well to
introduce a CAP all their own and thus underwrite a thriving indigenous
sector for internal consumption and more stable export revenues.

They can expect no help from the industrialized nations, he made
crystal clear:

"(The rich countries) are not ready to eliminate their support for
agriculture. They have not committed themselves to doing so in
international forums and do not believe that, as far as they Are
concerned, it would be to the developing countries' advantage.
Therefore," - he concluded soberly - "let us stop dreaming." This was
received with a standing ovation of the 500 conference delegates.

The conspiracy minded stipulate that France was actually merely seeking
to strengthen its bargaining chips. Finally, they go, it will accept
decoupling and modulation. But recent policy initiatives do not point
this way. France all but renationalized its beef markets, proposed to
continue dairy quotas till 2013, sought to index milk prices and
defended the much-reviled current sugar regime

These are bad news, indeed. Agriculture is a thorny issue within the EU
no less than outside it. A recessionary Germany has been bankrolling
sated and affluent French farmers for decades now. This has got to stop
and will - whether amicably, or acrimoniously.

The new members - most of them from heavily agrarian central and east
Europe - will demand equality sooner, or later. Poor nations will give
up on the entire trade architecture so laboriously erected in the last
20 years - if they become convinced, as they should, that it is all
prestidigitation and a rich boys' club. It is a precipice and France
has just taken us all one step forward.



Deja V-Euro

The History of Previous Currency Unions

By: Dr. Sam Vaknin

Also published by United Press International (UPI)

I. The History of Monetary Unions

"Before long, all Europe, save England, will have one money". This was
written by William Bagehot, the Editor of "The Economist", the renowned
British magazine, 120 years ago when Britain, even then, was heatedly
debating whether to adopt a single European Currency or not.

A century later, the euro is finally here (though without British
participation). Having braved numerous doomsayers and Cassandras, the
currency - though much depreciated against the dollar and reviled in
certain quarters (especially in Britain) - is now in use in both the
eurozone and in eastern and southeastern Europe (the Balkan). In most
countries in transition, it has already replaced its much sought-after
predecessor, the Deutschmark. The euro still feels like a novelty - but
it is not.  It was preceded by quite a few monetary unions in both
Europe and outside it.

What lessons does history teach us? What pitfalls should we avoid and
what features should we embrace?

People felt the need to create a uniform medium of exchange as early as
in Ancient Greece and Medieval Europe. Those proto-unions did not have
a central monetary authority or monetary policy, yet they functioned
surprisingly well in the uncomplicated economies of the time.

The first truly modern example would be the monetary union of Colonial
New England.

The four kinds of paper money printed by the New England colonies
(Connecticut, Massachusetts Bay, New Hampshire and Rhode Island) were
legal tender in all four until 1750. The governments of the colonies
even accepted them for tax payments. Massachusetts - by far the
dominant economy of the quartet - sustained this arrangement for almost
a century. The other colonies became so envious that they began to
print additional notes outside the union. Massachusetts - facing a
threat of devaluation and inflation - redeemed for silver its share of
the paper money in 1751. It then retired from the union, instituted its
own, silver-standard (mono-metallic), currency and never looked back.

A far more important attempt was the Latin Monetary Union (LMU). It was
dreamt up by the French, obsessed, as usual, by their declining
geopolitical fortunes and monetary prowess. Belgium already adopted the
French franc when it became independent in 1830. The LMU was a natural
extension of this franc zone and, as the two teamed up with Switzerland
in 1848, they encouraged others to join them. Italy followed suit in
1861. When Greece and Bulgaria acceded in 1867, the members established
a currency union based on a bimetallic (silver and gold) standard.

The LMU was considered sufficiently serious to be able to flirt with
Austria and Spain when its Foundation Treaty was officially signed  in
1865 in Paris. This despite the fact that its French-inspired rules
seemed often to sacrifice the economic to the politically expedient, or
to the grandiose.

The LMU was an official subset of an unofficial "franc area" (monetary
union based on the French franc). This is similar to the use of the US
dollar or the euro in many countries today. At its peak, eighteen
countries adopted the Gold franc as their legal tender (or peg). Four
of them (the founding members of the LMU: France, Belgium, Italy and
Switzerland) agreed on a gold to silver conversion rate and minted gold
and silver coins which were legal tender in all of them. They
voluntarily limited their money supply by adopting a rule which forbade
them to print more than 6 franc coins per capita .

Europe (especially Germany and the United Kingdom) was gradually
switching at the time to the gold standard. But the members of the
Latin Monetary Union paid no attention to its emergence. They printed
ever increasing quantities of gold and silver coins, which constituted
legal tender across the Union. Smaller denomination (token) silver
coins, minted in limited quantity, were legal tender only in the
issuing country (because they had a lower silver content than the Union
coins).

The LMU had no single currency (akin to the euro). The national
currencies of its member countries were at parity with each other. The
cost of conversion was limited to an exchange commission of 1.25%.

Government offices and municipalities were obliged to accept up to 100
Francs of non-convertible and low intrinsic value tokens per
transaction. People lined to convert low metal content silver coins
(100 Francs per transaction each time) to buy higher metal content ones.

With the exception of the above-mentioned per capita coinage
restriction, the LMU had no uniform money supply policies or
management. The amount of money in circulation was determined by the
markets. The central banks of the member countries pledged to freely
convert gold and silver to coins and, thus, were forced to maintain a
fixed exchange rate between the two metals (15 to 1) ignoring
fluctuating market prices.

Even at its apex, the LMU was unable to move the world prices of these
metals. When silver became overvalued, it was exported (at times
smuggled) within the Union, in violation of its rules. The Union had to
suspend silver convertibility and thus accept a humiliating de facto
gold standard. Silver coins and tokens remained legal tender, though.
The unprecedented financing needs of the Union members - a result of
the First World War - delivered the coup de grace. The LMU was
officially dismantled in 1926 - but expired long before that.

The LMU had a common currency but this did not guarantee its survival.
It lacked a common monetary policy monitored and enforced by a common
Central Bank - and these deficiencies proved fatal.

In 1867, twenty countries debated the introduction of a global currency
in the International Monetary Conference. They decided to adopt the
gold standard (already used by Britain and the USA) following a period
of transition. They came up with an ingenious scheme. They selected
three "hard" currencies, with equal gold content so as to render them
interchangeable, as their legal tender. Regrettably for students of the
dismal science, the plan came to naught.

Another failed experiment was the Scandinavian Monetary Union (SMU),
formed by Sweden (1873), Denmark (1873) and Norway (1875). It was a
by-now familiar scheme. All three recognized each others' gold coinage
as well as token coins as legal tender. The daring innovation was to
accept the members' banknotes (1900) as well.

As Scandinavian schemes go, this one worked too perfectly. No one
wanted to convert one currency to another. Between 1905 and 1924, no
exchange rates among the three currencies were available. When Norway
became independent, the irate Swedes dismantled the moribund Union in
an act of monetary tit-for-tat.

The SMU had an unofficial central bank with pooled reserves. It
extended credit lines to each of the three member countries. As long as
gold supply was limited, the Scandinavian Kronor held its ground. Then
governments started to finance their deficits by dumping gold during
World War I (and thus erode their debts by fostering inflation through
a string of inane devaluations). In an unparalleled act of arbitrage,
central banks then turned around and used the depreciated currencies to
scoop up gold at official (cheap) rates.

When Sweden refused to continue to sell its gold at the officially
fixed price - the other members declared effective economic war. They
forced Sweden to purchase enormous quantities of their token coins. The
proceeds were used to buy the much stronger Swedish currency at an ever
cheaper price (as the price of gold collapsed). Sweden found itself
subsidizing an arbitrage against its own economy. It inevitably reacted
by ending the import of other members' tokens. The Union thus ended.
The price of gold was no longer fixed and token coins were no more
convertible.

The East African Currency Area is a fairly recent debacle. An
equivalent experiment, involving the CFA franc, is still going on in
the Francophile part of Africa.

The parts of East Africa ruled by the British (Kenya, Uganda and
Tanganyika and, in 1936, Zanzibar) adopted in 1922 a single common
currency, the East African shilling.  The newly independent countries
of East Africa remained part of the Sterling Area (i.e., the local
currencies were fully and freely convertible into British Pounds).
Misplaced imperial pride coupled with outmoded strategic thinking led
the British to infuse these emerging economies with inordinate amounts
of money. Despite all this, the resulting monetary union was
surprisingly resilient. It easily absorbed the new currencies of Kenya,
Uganda and Tanzania in 1966, making them legal tender in all three and
convertible to Pounds.

Ironically, it was the Pound which gave way. Its relentless
depreciation in the late 60s and early 70s, led to the disintegration
of the Sterling Area in 1972.

The strict monetary discipline which characterized the union -
evaporated. The currencies diverged - a result of a divergence of
inflation targets and interest rates. The East African Currency Area
was formally ended in 1977.

Not all monetary unions ended so tragically. Arguably, the most famous
of the successful ones is the Zollverein (German Customs Union).

The nascent German Federation was composed, at the beginning of the
19th century, of 39 independent political units. They all busily minted
coins (gold, silver) and had their own - distinct - standard weights
and measures. The decisions of the much lauded Congress of Vienna
(1815) did wonders for labour mobility in Europe but not so for trade.
The baffling number of (mostly non-convertible) different currencies
did not help.

The German principalities formed a customs union as early as 1818. The
three regional groupings (the Northern, Central and Southern) were
united in 1833. In 1828, Prussia harmonized its customs tariffs with
the other members of the Federation, making it possible to pay duties
in gold or silver. Some members hesitantly experimented with new fixed
exchange rate convertible currencies. But, in practice, the union
already had a single currency: the Vereinsmunze.

The Zollverein (Customs Union) was established in 1834 to facilitate
trade by reducing its costs. This was done by compelling most of the
members to choose between two monetary standards (the Thaler and the
Gulden) in 1838.

Much as the Bundesbank was to Europe in the second half of the
twentieth century, the Prussian central bank became the effective
Central Bank of the Federation from 1847 on. Prussia was by far the
dominant member of the union, as it comprised 70% of the population and
land mass of the future Germany.

The North German Thaler was fixed at 1.75 to the South German Gulden
and, in 1856 (when Austria became informally associated with the
Union), at 1.5 Austrian Florins. This last collaboration was to be a
short lived affair, Prussia and Austria having declared war on each
other in 1866.

Bismarck (Prussia) united Germany (Bavarian objections notwithstanding)
in 1871. He founded the Reichsbank in 1875 and charged it with issuing
the crisp new Reichsmark. Bismarck forced the Germans to accept the new
currency as the only legal tender throughout the first German Reich.
Germany's new single currency was in effect a monetary union. It
survived two World Wars, a devastating bout of inflation in 1923, and a
monetary meltdown after the Second World War. The stolid and
trustworthy Bundesbank succeeded the Reichsmark and the Union was
finally vanquished only by the bureaucracy in Brussels and its euro.

This is the only case in history of a successful monetary union not
preceded by a political one. But it is hardly representative. Prussia
was the regional bully and never shied away from enforcing strict
compliance on the other members of the Federation.

It understood the paramount importance of a stable currency and sought
to preserve it by introducing various consistent metallic standards.
Politically motivated inflation and devaluation were ruled out, for the
first time. Modern monetary management was born.

Another, perhaps equally successful, and still on-going union  - is the
CFA franc Zone.

The CFA (stands for French African Community in French) franc has been
in use in the French colonies of West and Central Africa (and,
curiously, in one formerly Spanish colony) since 1945. It is pegged to
the French franc. The French Treasury explicitly guarantees its
conversion to the French franc (65% of the reserves of the member
states are kept in the safes of the French Central Bank). France often
openly imposes monetary discipline (that it sometimes lacks at home!)
directly and through its generous financial assistance. Foreign
reserves must always equal 20% of short term deposits in commercial
banks. All this made the CFA an attractive option in the colonies even
after they attained independence.

The CFA franc zone is remarkably diverse ethnically, lingually,
culturally, politically, and economically. The currency survived
devaluations (as large as 100% vis a vis the French Franc), changes of
regimes (from colonial to independent), the existence of two groups of
members, each with its own central bank (the West African Economic and
Monetary Union and the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community), controls of trade and capital flows - not to mention a host
of natural and man made catastrophes.

The euro has indirectly affected the CFA as well. "The Economist"
reported recently a shortage of small denomination CFA franc notes.
"Recently the printer (of CFA francs) has been too busy producing euros
for the market back home" - complained the West African central bank in
Dakar. But this is the minor problem. The CFA franc is at risk due to
internal imbalances among the economies of the zone. Their growth rates
differ markedly. There are mounting pressures by some members to
devalue the common currency. Others sternly resist it.

"The Economist" reports that the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) - eight CFA countries plus Nigeria, Ghana, Guinea, the
Gambia, Cape Verde, Sierra Leone, and Liberia - is considering its own
monetary union. Many of the prospective members of this union fancy the
CFA franc even less than the EU fancies their capricious and
graft-ridden economies. But an ECOWAS monetary union could constitute a
serious - and more economically coherent - alternative to the CFA franc
zone.

A neglected monetary union is the one between Belgium and Luxembourg.
Both maintain their idiosyncratic currencies - but these are at parity
and serve as legal tender in both countries since 1921. The monetary
policy of both countries is dictated by the Belgian Central Bank and
exchange regulations are overseen by a joint agency. The two were close
to dismantling the union at least twice (in 1982 and 1993) - but
relented.

II. The Lessons

Europe has had more than its share of botched and of successful
currency unions. The Snake, the EMS, the ERM, on the one hand - and the
British Pound, the Deutschmark, and the ECU, on the other.

The currency unions which made it have all survived because they relied
on a single monetary authority for managing the currency.

Counter-intuitively, single currencies are often associated with
complex political entities which occupy vast swathes of land and
incorporate previously distinct -and often politically, socially, and
economically disparate - units. The USA is a monetary union, as was the
late USSR.

All single currencies encountered opposition on both ideological and
pragmatic grounds when they were first introduced.

The American constitution, for instance, did not provide for a central
bank. Many of the Founding Fathers (e.g., Madison and Jefferson)
refused to countenance one. It took the nascent USA two decades to come
up with a semblance of a central monetary institution in 1791. It was
modeled after the successful Bank of England. When Madison became
President, he purposefully let its concession expire in 1811. In the
forthcoming half century, it revived (for instance, in 1816) and
expired a few times.

The United States became a monetary union only following its traumatic
Civil War. Similarly, Europe's monetary union is a belated outcome of
two European civil wars (the two World Wars). America instituted bank
regulation and supervision only in 1863 and, for the first time, banks
were classified as either national or state-level.

This classification was necessary because by the end of the Civil War,
notes - legal and illegal tender - were being issued by no less than
1562 private banks - up from only 25 in 1800. A similar process
occurred in the principalities which were later to constitute Germany.
In the decade between 1847 and 1857, twenty five private banks were
established there for the express purpose of printing banknotes to
circulate as legal tender. Seventy (!) different types of currency
(mostly foreign) were being used in the Rhineland alone in 1816.

The Federal Reserve System was founded only following a tidal wave of
banking crises in 1908. Not until 1960 did it gain a full monopoly of
nation-wide money printing. The monetary union in the USA - the US
dollar as a single legal tender printed exclusively by a central
monetary authority - is, therefore, a fairly recent thing, not much
older than the euro.

It is common to confuse the logistics of a monetary union with its
underpinnings. European bigwigs gloated over the smooth introduction of
the physical notes and coins of their new currency. But having a single
currency with free and guaranteed convertibility is only the
manifestation of a monetary union - not one of its economic pillars.

History teaches us that for a monetary union to succeed, the exchange
rate of the single currency must be realistic (for instance, reflect
the purchasing power parity) and, thus, not susceptible to speculative
attacks. Additionally, the members of the union must adhere to one
monetary policy.

Surprisingly, history demonstrates that a monetary union is not
necessarily predicated on the existence of a single currency. A
monetary union could incorporate "several currencies, fully and
permanently convertible into one another at irrevocably fixed exchange
rates". This would be like having a single currency with various
denominations, each printed by another member of the Union.

What really matters are the economic inter-relationships and power
plays among union members and between the union and other currency
zones and currencies (as expressed through the exchange rate).

Usually the single currency of the Union is convertible at given
(though floating) exchange rates subject to a uniform exchange rate
policy. This applies to all the territory of the single currency. It is
intended to prevent arbitrage (buying the single currency in one place
and selling it in another). Rampant arbitrage - ask anyone in Asia -
often leads to the need to impose exchange controls, thus eliminating
convertibility and inducing panic.

Monetary unions in the past failed because they allowed variable
exchange rates, (often depending on where - in which part of the
monetary union - the conversion took place).

A uniform exchange rate policy is only one of the concessions members
of a monetary union must make. Joining always means giving up
independent monetary policy and, with it, a sizeable slice of national
sovereignty. Members relegate the regulation of their money supply,
inflation, interest rates, and foreign exchange rates to a central
monetary authority (e.g., the European Central Bank in the eurozone).

The need for central monetary management arises because, in economic
theory, a currency is never just a currency. It is thought of as a
transmission mechanism of economic signals (information) and
expectations (often through monetary policy and its outcomes).

It is often argued that a single fiscal policy is not only unnecessary,
but potentially harmful. A monetary union means the surrender of
sovereign monetary policy instruments. It may be advisable to let the
members of the union apply fiscal policy instruments autonomously in
order to counter the business cycle, or cope with asymmetric shocks,
goes the argument. As long as there is no implicit or explicit
guarantee of the whole union for the indebtedness of its members -
profligate individual states are likely to be punished by the market,
discriminately.

But, in a monetary union with mutual guarantees among the members (even
if it is only implicit as is the case in the eurozone), fiscal
profligacy, even of one or two large players, may force the central
monetary authority to raise interest rates in order to pre-empt
inflationary pressures.

Interest rates have to be raised because the effects of one member's
fiscal decisions are communicated to other members through the common
currency. The currency is the medium of exchange of information
regarding the present and future health of the economies involved.
Hence the notorious "EU Stability Pact", recently so flagrantly
abandoned in the face of German budget deficits.

Monetary unions which did not follow the path of fiscal rectitude are
no longer with us.

In an article I published in 1997 ("The History of Previous European
Currency Unions"), I identified five paramount lessons from the short
and brutish life of previous - now invariably defunct - monetary unions:

(A) To prevail, a monetary union must be founded by one or two
economically dominant countries ("economic locomotives"). Such driving
forces must be geopolitically important, maintain political solidarity
with other members, be willing to exercise their clout, and be
economically involved in (or even dependent on) the economies of the
other members.

(B) Central institutions must be set up to monitor and enforce
monetary, fiscal, and other economic policies, to coordinate activities
of the member states, to implement political and technical decisions,
to control the money aggregates and seigniorage (i.e., rents accruing
due to money printing), to determine the legal tender and the rules
governing the issuance of money.

(C) It is better if a monetary union is preceded by a political one
(consider the examples of the USA, the USSR, the UK, and  Germany).

(D) Wage and price flexibility are sine qua non. Their absence is a
threat to the continued existence of any union. Unilateral transfers
from rich areas to poor are a partial and short-lived remedy. Transfers
also call for a clear and consistent fiscal policy regarding taxation
and expenditures. Problems like unemployment and collapses in demand
often plague rigid monetary  unions. The works of Mundell and McKinnon
(optimal currency areas) prove it decisively (and separately).

(E) Clear convergence criteria and monetary convergence targets.

The current European Monetary Union is far from heeding the lessons of
its ill fated predecessors. Europe's labour and capital markets, though
recently marginally liberalized, are still more rigid than 150 years
ago. The euro was not preceded by an "ever closer (political or
constitutional) union". It relies too heavily on fiscal redistribution
without the benefit of either a coherent monetary or a consistent
fiscal area-wide policy. The euro is not built to cope either with
asymmetrical economic shocks (affecting only some members, but not
others), or with the vicissitudes of the business cycle.

This does not bode well. This union might well become yet another
footnote in the annals of economic history.

The Concert of Europe, Interrupted

By: Dr. Sam Vaknin

"(Plan for establishing) an economic organization ... through mutual
customs agreements ... including France, Belgium, Holland, Denmark,
Austria, Poland, and perhaps Italy, Sweden, and Norway".

The German "September Plan" to impose an economic union on the
vanquished nations of Europe following a military victory, 1914

Europe spent the first half of the 19th century (following the 1815
Congress of Vienna) containing France. The trauma of the Napoleonic
wars was the last in a medley of conflicts with an increasingly
menacing France stretching back to the times of Louis XIV. The Concert
of Europe was specifically designed to reflect the interests of the Big
Powers, establish their borders of expansion in Europe, and create a
continental "balance of deterrence". For a few decades it proved to be
a success.

The rise of a unified, industrially mighty and narcissistic Germany
erased most of these achievements. By closely monitoring France, the
Big Powers were fighting the last war - instead of the three next ones.
Following two ineffably ruinous world wars, Europe now shifted its
geopolitical sights from France to Germany. In an effort to prevent a
repeat of Hitler, the Big Powers of the West, led by France,
established an "ever closer" European Union. Germany was
(inadvertently) split and sandwiched and, thus, restrained.

To its East, it faced a military-economic union (the Warsaw Pact) cum
eastern empire (the late USSR). To its West, it was surrounded by a
military union (NATO) cum emerging Western economic supranational
structure (the EU). The Cold War was fought all over the world - but in
Europe it was about Germany.

The collapse of the eastern flank (the Soviet - "evil" - Empire) of
this implicit anti-German containment geo-strategy led to the
re-emergence of a united Germany. Furthermore, Germany is in the
process of obtaining hegemony over the EU by applying the political
weight commensurate with its economic and demographic might. It is a
natural and historical leader of central Europe - the EU's and NATO's
future lebensraum and the target of their expansionary predilections
("integration"). Thus, virtually overnight, Germany came to dominate
the Western component of the anti-German containment master plan -
while the Eastern component has chaotically disintegrated.

The EU - notably France - is reacting by trying to assume the role
formerly played by the USSR. EU integration is an attempt to assimilate
former Soviet satellites and dilute Germany's power by re-jigging rules
of voting and representation. If successful, this strategy will prevent
Germany from bidding yet again for a position of hegemony in Europe by
establishing a "German Union" separate from the EU. It is all still the
same tiresome and antiquated game of continental Big Powers. Even
Britain maintains its Victorian position of "splendid isolation".

The exclusion of both Turkey and Russia from these re-alignments is
also a direct descendant of the politics of the last two centuries.
Both are likely to gradually drift away from European (and Western)
structures and seek their fortunes in the geopolitical twilight zones
of the world. The USA is unlikely to be of much help to Europe as it
reasserts the Monroe doctrine and attends to its growing Pacific
preoccupations. It will assist the EU to cope with Russian (and to a
lesser extent, Turkish) designs in the tremulously tectonic regions of
the Caucasus, oil-rich and China-bordering Central Asia, and the Middle
East. But it will not do so in Central Europe, in the Baltic, and in
the Balkan.

Of these three spots, the Balkan is by far the most ominous. Russia -
as it has proved in 1877-8 - has historical claims there which it is
willing to back militarily. Many of the nations of the Balkan are far
closer to Russia than to the West and tend to regard the latter with
suspicion and hostility. Turkey, if it so chooses, can easily assume
the role of the protector of Balkan Moslems - sure to provoke Greek
ire. A military conflict among two NATO members will constitute a body
blow to the credibility and prestige of this alliance in search of an
enemy. Moreover, Turkey is the prefect staging ground for operations in
the Middle East, Central Asia and China. It constitutes a vital
American interest and the pivot of NATO's southern flank. But it is
derided by the EU, its NATO membership notwithstanding.

It is here, in the Balkan, that the New World Order and the End of
History hypothesis are being tested. A new European balance of the Big
Powers will emerge here. But hitherto, alas, this particular concert of
Europe has been quite a cacophony.

 The Eastern Question Revisited

A lecture organized by the daily "Politiken"

in Copenhagen, Denmark

June 25, 2001

By: Dr. Sam Vaknin

When the USSR disintegrated virtually overnight, in 1989, its demise
was often compared to that of the Ottoman Empire's. This was a very
lacking comparison. Turkey's death throes lasted centuries and its
decomposition was taken to be so certain that its division and
partition (the "Eastern Question") animated European geopolitics for
the better part of two centuries. Yet, both left a power vacuum in the
Balkan in their sorry wake.

The Big Powers of the time - Russia, Great Britain, France,
Austria-Hungary, and the emerging Germany and Italy - possessed
conflicting interests and sentiments. But, at this stage or another,
most of them (with the exception of Austria-Hungary) supported the
nationalist solution. It was Russia's favourite discussion topic,
France espoused it under Napoleon III, everyone supported the Greeks
and, to a lesser extent, the Serbs against the weakening Ottomans.

The nationalist solution encouraged the denizens of the Balkan to adopt
national identities, to develop national myths, to invent a national
history, and to aspire to establish modern nation-states.

The examples of Germany and, especially, Greece and Italy were often
evoked. For a detailed treatment of this theme - see "Herzl's Butlers".

The competing solution was reform. The two Balkan empires - the
Ottomans and Austria-Hungary - endlessly, tediously, and
inefficaciously tinkered with their systems or overhauled them. But, to
no avail. The half-hearted reforms often failed to address core issues
and always failed to assuage the growing nationalist sentiment. It was
a doomed approach.

Nationalist solutions were inherently self-destructive. They were
mutually exclusive and strived to achieve ethnically homogeneous
lebensraums by all means, fair and foul. The nation's genuine and
natural ("historic") territory always overlapped with another nation's
no less historic claims. This led to recurrent conflicts and to a
growing sense of deprivation and loss as actual territories never
tallied with national myths disguised as national histories. It also
prevented the emergence of what du Bois calls "Double Consciousness" -
the mental capacity to contentedly belong to more than one social or
national grouping ("Afro-American", "Latino-American", "American Jew").

Thus, the Big Powers proffered a nationalist solution when a regional
one was called for. Following two devastating Balkan Wars (1912 and
1913) and a World War (1914-1918), regional groupings began to emerge
(example: Yugoslavia). The regional solution stabilized the Balkan for
almost 7 decades (excluding external shocks, such as the combined
invasions of Nazi Germany and fascist Italy).

Yet, the regional solution was dependent on both the existence of real
or perceived outside threats (the USSR, the USA, Great Britain) - and
on the leadership of charismatic figures such as Tito and Hoxha. When
the latter died and the USSR evaporated, the region imploded.

The last two decades of the 20th century witnessed a resurgence of
narrow geographical-political identities (a "Europe of Regions").
Countries - from the USSR to Italy to Belgium to Canada to Yugoslavia -
were gradually reduced to geopolitical atoms: provinces, districts,
regions, resurrected political units. Faced with the Yugoslav wars of
succession, the Big Powers again chose wrongly.

Instead of acknowledging the legitimate needs, concerns, and demands of
nations in the Balkan - they proclaimed two untenable principles:
borders must not change and populations must stay put. They dangled the
carrot of European Union membership as an inducement to peace. In other
words, even as virulent nationalism was erupting throughout the Balkan,
they promoted a REGIONAL set of principles and a REGIONAL inducement
(EU) instead of a nationalist orientated one. Yet, as opposed to the
past, the remaining Big Powers were unwilling to actively intervene to
enforce these principles. When they did intervene feebly, it was either
too late (Bosnia-Herzegovina, 1995), too one-sidedly (Kosovo, 1999), or
too hesitantly (Macedonia, 2001). They clearly lacked commitment and
conviction, or even the military ability to become the guardians of
this new order.

The Big Powers (really, the West) would have done well to leave the
Balkan to its own devices. Clearly its inhabitants were intent on
re-drawing borders and securing ethnic homogeneity. Serbs, Croats,
Bosniaks, Kosovars - were all busy altering maps and ethnically
cleansing minorities. The clumsy and uninformed intervention of the
West (led by the USA) served only to prolong these inevitable
conflicts. By choosing sides, labelling, providing military and
diplomatic succour, arming, intervening, cajoling, and imposing
ill-concocted "solutions", the West internationalized local crises and
prevented attrition and equilibrium - the prerequisites to peace. The
West's artificial arrangements, served on the bayonets of SFOR and KFOR
are unlikely to outlast SFOR and KFOR. Moreover, humanitarian military
interventions have proven to be the most pernicious kind of
humanitarian disasters. More people - Kosovars included - died in
Operation Allied Force than in all the years of Serb repression
combined. The Balkan is simply frozen in geopolitical time. It will
re-erupt and revert to old form when Western presence is reduced and
perhaps even before that.

The West should have ignored the Yugoslav wars of succession. But it
would have done well to offer the combatants - Serbs, Croats, Albanians
- a disinterested diplomatic venue (a benign, voluntary Berlin Congress
or Dayton) to iron out their differences, even as they are fighting.
The agenda of such a Congress should have included minorities and
borders. There is no doubt that sporadic fighting would have punctuated
the deliberations of such a congregation. It is certain that walk-outs,
crises, threats, and break-ups would have occurred regularly.

But the participants could have aired grievances, settle disputes,
discuss differences, judge reasonableness, form coalitions, help each
other to multilateral give and take, and establish confidence building
measures. With the West keeping all cards close to its chest, such a
venue was and is sorely lacking.

With the exception of Imperial Russia, "stability in the Balkan" has
always been the mantra. But stability is never achieved diplomatically.
If there are lessons to be learned from history they are that diplomacy
is futile, peacekeeping meaningless, imposed agreements ephemeral. War
is the ultimate and only arbiter of national interest. Parties resort
to peace only when they are convinced that all military or coercive
options have been exhausted. When nothing further is to be gained by
means of force and its application - peace prevails. But peace (as
opposed to a protracted ceasefire) is impossible even a second before
the combatants are struck by this realization. Equilibrium is never the
result of honed negotiating skills - and always the outcome of forces
matched in battle. Attrition, fatigue, a yearning for stability, a
willingness to compromise - are all provoked and enhanced to the
acutest level by bloodshed and atrocities. It is an inevitable phase.
The road to peace is bloodied.

The Balkan has never been as politically fragmented as it is today. It
has never been under the auspices of only one superpower. These are
destabilizing facts. But one thing has not changed. The Balkan has
always been the battlefield of numerous clashing and equally potent
interests coupled with military might.

In the last decade, the West has been busy establishing protectorates
(Bosnia-Herzegovina, Kosovo, and now, most probably, Macedonia) and
effectively altering borders without admitting to it. NATO, that cold
war anachronism, is still busy maintaining its southern flank, composed
of the eternal adversaries, Turkey and Greece. Turkey is the natural
road to Central Asia and its oil riches and, further on, to an
ominously emerging China. The Balkan is, once again, the playground of
the grand designers.

Europe's New Jews

By: Dr. Sam Vaknin

Also published by United Press International (UPI)

Also Read

Iran between Reform and Mayhem

Turkey's Troubled Water

Syria's Sunshine Policy

Saddam's Thousand Nights

The Iraqi and the Madman

God's Diplomacy and Human Conflicts

The Economies of the Middle East

Turkey's Jewish Friend

They inhabit self-imposed ghettoes, subject to derision and worse, the
perennial targets of far-right thugs and populist politicians of all
persuasions. They are mostly confined to menial jobs. They are accused
of spreading crime, terrorism and disease, of being backward and
violent, of refusing to fit in.

Their religion, atavistic and rigid, insists on ritual slaughter and
male circumcision. They rarely mingle socially or inter-marry. Most of
them - though born in European countries - are not allowed to vote.
Brown-skinned and with a marked foreign accent, they are subject to
police profiling and harassment and all manner of racial
discrimination.

They are the new Jews of Europe - its Muslim minorities.

Muslims - especially Arab youths from North Africa - are, indeed,
disproportionately represented in crime, including hate crime, mainly
against the Jews. Exclusively Muslim al-Qaida cells have been
discovered in many West European countries. But this can be safely
attributed to ubiquitous and trenchant long-term unemployment and to
stunted upward mobility, both social and economic due largely to latent
or expressed racism.

Moreover, the stereotype is wrong. The incidence of higher education
and skills is greater among Muslim immigrants than in the general
population - a phenomenon known as "brain drain". Europe attracts the
best and the brightest - students, scholars, scientists, engineers and
intellectuals - away from their destitute, politically dysfunctional
and backward homelands.

The Economist surveys the landscape of friction and withdrawal:

"Indifference to Islam has turned first to disdain, then to suspicion
and more recently to hostility ... (due to images of) petro-powered
sheikhs, Palestinian terrorists, Iranian ayatollahs, mass immigration
and then the attacks of September 11th, executed if not planned by
western-based Muslims and succored by an odious regime in Afghanistan
... Muslims tend to come from poor, rural areas; most are ill-educated,
many are brown. They often encounter xenophobia and discrimination,
sometimes made worse by racist politicians. They speak the language of
the wider society either poorly or not at all, so they find it hard to
get jobs. Their children struggle at school. They huddle in poor
districts, often in state-supplied housing ... They tend to withdraw
into their own world, (forming a) self-sufficient, self-contained
community."

This self-imposed segregation has multiple dimensions. Clannish
behavior persists for decades. Marriages are still arranged - reluctant
brides and grooms are imported from the motherland to wed immigrants
from the same region or village. The "parallel society", in the words
of a British government report following the Oldham riots two years
ago, extends to cultural habits, religious practices and social norms.

Assimilation and integration has many enemies.

Remittances from abroad are an important part of the gross national
product and budgetary revenues of countries such as Bangladesh and
Pakistan. Hence their frantic efforts to maintain the cohesive national
and cultural identity of the expats.

DITIB is an arm of the Turkish government's office for religious
affairs. It discourages the assimilation or social integration of Turks
in Germany. Turkish businesses - newspapers, satellite TV, foods,
clothing, travel agents, publishers - thrive on ghettoization.

There is a tacit confluence of interests between national governments,
exporters and Islamic organizations. All three want Turks in Germany to
remain as Turkish as possible. The more nostalgic and homebound the
expatriate - the larger and more frequent his remittances, the higher
his consumption of Turkish goods and services and the more prone he is
to resort to religion as a determinant of his besieged and fracturing
identity.

Muslim numbers are not negligible. Two European countries have Muslim
majorities - Bosnia-Herzegovina and Albania. Others - in both Old
Europe and its post-communist east - harbor sizable and growing Islamic
minorities. Waves of immigration and birth rates three times as high as
the indigenous population increase their share of the population in
virtually every European polity - from Russia to Macedonia and from
Bulgaria to Britain. One in seven Russians is Muslim - over 20 million
people.

According to the March-April issue of Foreign Policy, the non-Muslim
part of Europe will shrink by 3.5 percent by 2015 while the Muslim
populace will likely double. There are 3 million Turks in Germany and
another 12 million Muslims - Algerians, Moroccans, Pakistanis,
Bangladeshis, Egyptians, Senegalese, Malis, or Tunisians - in the rest
of the European Union.

This is two and one half times the number of Muslims in the United
States. Even assuming - wrongly - that all of them occupy the lowest
decile of income, their combined annual purchasing power would amount
to a whopping $150 billion. Furthermore, recent retroactive changes to
German law have naturalized over a million immigrants and automatically
granted its much-coveted citizenship to the 160,000 Muslims born in
Germany every year .

Between 2-3 million Muslims in France - half their number - are
eligible to vote. Another million - one out of two - cast ballots in
Britain. These numbers count at the polls and are not offset by the
concerted efforts of a potent Jewish lobby - there are barely a million
Jews in Western Europe.

Muslims are becoming a well-courted swing vote. They may have decided
the last election in Germany, for instance. Recognizing their growing
centrality, France established - though not without vote-rigging - a
French Council of the Islamic Faith, the equivalent of Napoleon's
Jewish Consistory. Two French cabinet members are Muslims. Britain has
a Muslim Council.

Both Vladimir Putin, Russia's president and Yuri Luzhkov, Moscow's
mayor, now take the trouble to greet the capital's one million Muslims
on the occasion of their Feast of Sacrifice. They also actively solicit
the votes of the nationalist and elitist Muslims of the industrialized
Volga - mainly the Tatars, Bashkirs and Chuvash. Even the impoverished,
much-detested and powerless Muslims of the northern Caucasus -
Chechens, Circassians and Dagestanis - have benefited from this
newfound awareness of their electoral power.

Though divided by their common creed - Shiites vs. Sunnites vs.
Wahabbites and so on - the Muslims of Europe are united in supporting
the Palestinian cause and in opposing the Iraq war. This - and
post-colonial guilt feelings, especially manifest in France and Britain
- go a long way toward explaining Germany's re-discovered pacifistic
spine and France's anti-Israeli (not to say anti-Semitic) tilt.

Moreover, the Muslims have been playing an important economic role in
the continent since the early 1960s. Europe's postwar miracle was
founded on these cheap, plentiful and oft-replenished Gastarbiter -
"guest workers". Objective studies have consistently shown that
immigrants contribute more to their host economies - as consumers,
investors and workers - than they ever claw back in social services and
public goods. This is especially true in Europe, where an ageing
population of early retirees has been relying on the uninterrupted flow
of pension contributions by younger laborers, many of them immigrants.

Business has been paying attention to this emerging market. British
financial intermediaries - such as the West Bromwich Building Society -
have recently introduced "Islamic" (interest-free) mortgages. According
to market research firm, Datamonitor, gross advances in the UK alone
could reach $7 billion in 2006 - up from $60 million today. The Bank of
England is in the throes of preparing regulations to accommodate the
pent-up demand.

Yet, their very integration, however hesitant and gradual, renders the
Muslims in Europe vulnerable to the kind of treatment the old continent
meted out to its Jews before the holocaust. Growing Muslim presence in
stagnating job markets within recessionary economies inevitably
generated a backlash, often cloaked in terms of Samuel Huntington's
1993 essay in Foreign Affairs, "Clash of Civilizations".

Even tolerant Italy was affected. Last year, the Bologna archbishop,
Cardinal Giacomo Biffi, cast Islam as incompatible with Italian
culture. The country's prime minister suggested, in a visit to Berlin
two years ago, that Islam is an inherently inferior civilization.

Oriana Fallaci, a prominent journalist, published last year an inane
and foul-mouthed diatribe titled "The Rage and the Pride" in which she
accused Muslims of "breeding like rats", "shitting and pissing" (sic!)
everywhere and supporting Osama bin-Laden indiscriminately.

Young Muslims reacted - by further radicalizing and by refusing to
assimilate - to both escalating anti-Islamic rhetoric in Europe and the
"triumphs" of Islam elsewhere, such as the revolution in Iran in 1979.
Tutored by preachers trained in the most militant Islamist climates in
Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Somalia, Pakistan and Iran, praying in mosques
financed by shady Islamic charities - these youngsters are amenable to
recruiters from every fanatical grouping.

The United Kingdom suffered some of the worst race riots in half a
century in the past two years. France is terrorized by an unprecedented
crime wave emanating from the banlieux - the decrepit, predominantly
Muslim, housing estates in suburbia. September 11 only accelerated the
inevitable conflict between an alienated minority and hostile
authorities throughout the continent. Recent changes in European -
notably British - legislation openly profile and target Muslims.

This is a remarkable turnaround. Europe supported the Muslim Bosnian
cause against the Serbs, Islamic Chechnya against Russia, the
Palestinians against the Israelis and Muslim Albanian insurgents
against both Serbs and Macedonians. Nor was this consistent pro-Islamic
orientation a novelty.

Britain's Commission for Racial Equality which caters mainly to the
needs of Muslims, was formed 37 years ago. Its Foreign Office has never
wavered from its pro-Arab bias. Germany established a Central Council
for Muslims. Both anti-Americanism and the more veteran anti-Israeli
streak helped sustain Europe's empathy with Muslim refugees and
"freedom fighters" throughout the 1960s, 70s and 80s.

September 11 put paid to this amity. The danger is that the brand of
"Euro-Islam" that has begun to emerge lately may be decimated by this
pervasive and sudden mistrust. Time Magazine described this blend as
"the traditional Koran-based religion with its prohibitions against
alcohol and interest-bearing loans now indelibly marked by the
'Western' values of tolerance, democracy and civil liberties."

Such "enlightened" Muslims can serve as an invaluable bridge between
Europe and Russia, the Middle East, Asia, including China and other
places with massive Muslim majorities or minorities. As most world
conflicts today involve Islamist militants, global peace and a
functioning "new order" critically depend on the goodwill and
communication skills of Muslims.

Such a benign amalgam is the only realistic hope for reconciliation.
Europe is ageing and stagnating and can be reinvigorated only by
embracing youthful, dynamic, driven immigrants, most of whom are bound
to be Muslim. Co-existence is possible and the clash of civilization
not an inevitability unless Huntington's dystopic vision becomes the
basic policy document of the West.

T H E   A U T H O R

SHMUEL (SAM) VAKNIN

Curriculum Vitae

Click on blue text to access relevant web sites - thank you.

Born in 1961 in Qiryat-Yam, Israel.

Served in the Israeli Defence Force (1979-1982) in training and
education units.

Education

Graduated a few semesters in the Technion - Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa.

Ph.D. in Philosophy (major : Philosophy of Physics) - Pacific Western
University, California.

Graduate of numerous courses in Finance Theory and International
Trading.

Certified E-Commerce Concepts Analyst.

Certified in Psychological Counselling Techniques.

Full proficiency in Hebrew and in English.

Business Experience

1980 to 1983

Founder and co-owner of a chain of computerized information kiosks in
Tel-Aviv, Israel.

1982 to 1985

Senior positions with the Nessim D. Gaon Group of Companies in Geneva,
Paris and New-York (NOGA and APROFIM SA):

- Chief Analyst of Edible Commodities in the Group's Headquarters in
Switzerland.

- Manager of the Research and Analysis Division

- Manager of the Data Processing Division

- Project Manager of The Nigerian Computerized Census

- Vice President in charge of RND and Advanced Technologies

- Vice President in charge of Sovereign Debt Financing

1985 to 1986

Represented Canadian Venture Capital Funds in Israel.

1986 to 1987

General Manager of IPE Ltd. in London. The firm financed international
multi-lateral countertrade and leasing transactions.

1988 to 1990

Co-founder and Director of "Mikbats - Tesuah", a portfolio management
firm based in Tel-Aviv.

Activities included large-scale portfolio management, underwriting,
forex trading and general financial advisory services.

1990 to Present

Free-lance consultant to many of Israel's Blue-Chip firms, mainly on
issues related to the capital markets in Israel, Canada, the UK and the
USA.

Consultant to foreign RND ventures and to Governments on macro-economic
matters.

President of the Israel chapter of the Professors World Peace Academy
(PWPA) and (briefly) Israel representative of the "Washington Times".

1993 to 1994

Co-owner and Director of many business enterprises:

- The Omega and Energy Air-Conditioning Concern

- AVP Financial Consultants

- Handiman Legal Services

   Total annual turnover of the group: 10 million USD.

Co-owner, Director and Finance Manager of COSTI Ltd. -  Israel's
largest computerized information vendor and developer. Raised funds
through a series of private placements locally, in the USA, Canada and
London.

1993 to 1996

Publisher and Editor of a Capital Markets Newsletter distributed by
subscription only to dozens of subscribers countrywide.

In a legal precedent in 1995 - studied in business schools and law
faculties across Israel - was tried for his role in an attempted
takeover of Israel's Agriculture Bank.

Was interned in the State School of Prison Wardens.

Managed the Central School Library, wrote, published and lectured on
various occasions.

Managed the Internet and International News Department of an Israeli
mass media group, "Ha-Tikshoret and Namer".

Assistant in the Law Faculty in Tel-Aviv University (to Prof. S.G.
Shoham).

1996 to 1999

Financial consultant to leading businesses in Macedonia, Russia and the
Czech Republic.

Collaborated with the Agency of  Transformation of Business with Social
Capital.

Economic commentator in "Nova Makedonija", "Dnevnik", "Izvestia",
"Argumenti i Fakti", "The Middle East Times", "Makedonija Denes", "The
New Presence", "Central Europe Review" , and other periodicals and in
the economic programs on various channels of Macedonian Television.

Chief Lecturer in courses organized by the Agency of Transformation, by
the Macedonian Stock Exchange and by the Ministry of Trade.

1999 to 2002

Economic Advisor to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and to
the Ministry of Finance.

2001 to present

Senior Business Correspondent for United Press International (UPI)

Web and Journalistic Activities

Author of extensive Websites in Psychology ("Malignant Self Love") - An
Open Directory Cool Site

Philosophy ("Philosophical Musings")

Economics and Geopolitics ("World in Conflict and Transition")

Owner of the Narcissistic Abuse Announcement and Study List and the
Narcissism Revisited mailing list (more than 3900 members)

Owner of the Economies in Conflict and Transition Study list.

Editor of mental health disorders and Central and Eastern Europe
categories in web directories (Open Directory, Suite 101, Search
Europe).

Columnist and commentator in "The New Presence", United Press