The catalog records relate to books (9,543,910 as of December 10, 1998), maps
(171,756), serials (825,664), prints and photographs (68,135), manuscripts
(10,698), music (209,142), visual materials (278,771) and software (6,318). As
explained on the website:

"The Experimental Search System (ESS) is one of the Library of Congress' first
efforts to make selected cataloging and digital library resources available over
the World Wide Web by means of a single, point-and-click interface. The
interface consists of several search query pages (Basic, Advanced, Number, and a
Browse screen) and several search results pages (an item list of brief displays
and an item full display), together with brief help files which link directly
from significant words on those pages. By exploiting the powerful synergies of
hyperlinking and a relevancy-ranked search engine (InQuery from Sovereign Hill
Software), we hope the ESS will provide a new and more intuitive way of
searching the traditional OPAC (on-line public access catalog). [...]

Besides the cataloging records for over 4 million books (including JACKPHY
records not currently available through SCORPIO); 263,000 motion pictures,
videos, filmstrips and other visual work; 200,000 sound recordings and musical
scores; more than 150,000 maps; and 4,300 computer files - i.e., LC cataloging
records created since 1968 - ESS also contains the cataloging for almost 140,000
photographs and manuscripts in the National Digital Library Program's American
Memory, linking to more than 70,000 digital photographs and images available
on-line. By indexing the works selected and organized by The On-Line Books Page
at Carnegie Mellon University, links are also provided to the full-text of over
2,500 on-line books from sites across the Internet. Even early motion pictures
are available for searching and viewing once the proper viewer is installed.
(Hint: try searching on the subject heading 'shorts' in the Photographs,
Manuscripts, Movies collection.)"

Except for their prohibitive costs, the commercial databases give us an idea of
what the catalogs could be in the future: for the past several years the Dialog
Corporation, Lexis-Nexis or UnCover have been using their catalogs to provide
on-line documents.

Based in London, United Kingdom, with regional headquarters in Mountain View,
California, and Hong Kong, the Dialog Corporation is a major on-line information
company, with 900 main databases (the most well-known being Dialog and Profound)
serving over 20,000 corporate clients in 120 countries. Content areas include:
news and media; medicine; pharmaceuticals; chemicals; reference; social
sciences; business and finance; food and agriculture; intellectual property;
government and regulations; science and technology; and energy and environment.

LEXIS-NEXIS is an international provider of enhanced information services and
management tools using on-line, Internet, CD-ROM and hardcopy formats for a
variety of professionals. It serves customers in more than 60 countries. The
25-year old company has introduced Web products for business, legal and academic
research, current awareness, and both standard and customizable tracking of
competitive and business subjects and companies on a daily basis.

A service of CARL Corporation, UnCover is both a fax reprint service and the
world's largest database of magazine and journal articles, with current article
information taken from well over 17,000 multidisciplinary journals. UnCover
contains brief descriptive information for over 7,000,000 articles which have
appeared since Fall 1988. Any Internet surfer can use the free keyword access to
article titles and summaries.


8.2. International Bibliographic Databases


Two organizations, the OCLC Online Computer Library Center and the Research
Library Information Network (RLIN), run international databases of bibliographic
information through the Internet.

The OCLC Online Computer Library Center is a nonprofit, membership, library
computer service and research organization dedicated to the public purposes of
furthering access to the world's information and reducing information costs.
More than 27,000 libraries in 65 countries use OCLC services to manage their
collections and to provide on-line reference services. The site is available in
English, Chinese, French, German, Portuguese, and Spanish.

OCLC Services include: access services; collections and technical services;
reference services; resource sharing; Dewey Decimal Classification (published in
OCLC Forest Press); and preservation resources. From its headquarters in Dublin,
Ohio, OCLC operates one of the world's largest library information networks.
Libraries in the United States join OCLC through their OCLC-affiliated Regional
Networks. Libraries outside the United States receive OCLC services through OCLC
Asia Pacific, OCLC Canada, OCLC Europe, OCLC Latin America and the Caribbean, or
via international distributors.

OCLC also runs WorldCat, name of the OCLC Online Union Catalog, which is a
merged electronic catalog of libraries around the world, and probably the
world's largest bibliographic database with its 38 million records (at the
beginning of 1998) in 400 languages (with transliteration for non-Roman
languages), and an annual increase of 2 million bibliographic records.

WorldCat is derived from a concept which is the same for all union catalogs:
earn time to avoid the cataloguing of the same document by many catalogers
worldwide. When they are about to catalog a publication, the catalogers of the
member libraries search the OCLC catalog. If they find the corresponding record,
they copy it in their own catalog and add some local information. If they don't
find the record, they create it in the OCLC catalog, and this new record will
immediately be available to all the catalogers of the member libraries
worldwide.

Unlike RLIN, another international bibliographic database (see below) which
accepts several records for the same document, the OCLC Online Union Catalog
takes into consideration only one record per document, and emphatically requests
its members not to create double records for documents which have already been
cataloged. The records are created in USMARC format (MARC: machine readable
catalog) according to the Anglo-American Cataloguing Rules, 2nd version (AACR2).

What is the history of OCLC? According to the website:

"In 1967, the presidents of the colleges and universities in the state of Ohio
founded the Ohio College Library Center (OCLC) to develop a computerized system
in which the libraries of Ohio academic institutions could share resources and
reduce costs.

OCLC's first offices were in the Main Library on the campus of the Ohio State
University (OSU), and its first computer room was housed in the OSU Research
Center. It was from these academic roots that Frederick G. Kilgour, OCLC's first
president, oversaw the growth of OCLC from a regional computer system for 54
Ohio colleges into an international network. In 1977, the Ohio members of OCLC
adopted changes in the governance structure that enabled libraries outside Ohio
to become members and participate in the election of the Board of Trustees; the
Ohio College Library Center became OCLC, Inc. In 1981, the legal name of the
corporation became OCLC Online Computer Library Center, Inc. Today, OCLC serves
more than 27,000 libraries of all types in the U.S. and 64 other countries and
territories."

Both complementary and different from the OCLC Online Catalog (WordCat) with its
38 million records (with one record per document), the Research Libraries
Information Network (RLIN) includes 88 million records (with several records per
document).

RLIN is run by by the Research Libraries Group (RLG). The central RLIN database
is a union catalog of nearly 88 million items held in comprehensive research
libraries and special libraries in RLG member institutions, plus over 100
additional law, technical, and corporate libraries using RLIN. It includes:

a) Records that describe works cataloged by the Library of Congress, the
National Library of Medicine, the U.S. Government Printing Office, CONSER
(Conversion of Serials Project), The British Library, the British National
Bibliography, the National Union Catalog of Manuscript Collections, and RLG's
members and users;

b) Comprehensive representation of books cataloged since 1968 and rapidly
expanding coverage for older materials;

c) Information about non-book materials ranging from musical scores, films,
videos, serials, maps, and recordings, to archival collections and
machine-readable data files;

d) Unique on-line access to special resources, such as the United Nations'
DOCFILE and CATFILE records, and the Rigler and Deutsch Index to pre-1950
commercial sound recordings; and

e) International book vendors' in-process records that can be transferred by
bibliographers, acquisitions libraries, and catalogers to create citations,
order records, and cataloging in their local systems.

In RLIN, particularly valuable sources of processing information are available
on-line:

a) A catalog of computer files: Machine-readable data files are of value to a
growing number of disciplines. RLIN contains records describing a wide array of
such files, from the full-text French literary works in the ARTFL Database to
the statistical data collected by the Inter-university Consortium for Political
and Social Research (ICPSR) at the University of Michigan;

b) A catalog of archives and special collections: The archival and manuscript
collections of research libraries, museums, state archives, and historical
societies contain essential primary resources, but information about their
contents has often been elusive. Archivists and curators worked with RLG to
create an automated format for these collections. There are close to 500,000
records available in RLIN for archival collections located throughout North
America. These records analyze many collections by personal name, organization,
subject, and format.

Complementing the central bibliographic files of RLIN is the English Short Title
Catalogue (ESTC), an invaluable research tool for scholars in English culture,
language, and literature. This file provides extensive descriptions and holdings
information for letterpress materials printed in Great Britain or any of its
dependencies in any language, from the beginnings of print to 1800 - as well as
for materials printed in English anywhere else in the world. Produced by the
ESTC editorial offices at the University of California, Riverside, and the
British Library, in partnership with the American Antiquarian Society and over
1,600 libraries worldwide, the file continues to be updated and expanded daily.
ESTC serves as a comprehensive bibliography of the hand-press era and as a
census of surviving copies.

ESTC included 420,000 records as of June 1998. It contains records for items of
all types published in Great Britain and its dependencies or in English anywhere
in the world from the beginnings of print (1473) through the 18th century -
including materials ranging from Shakespeare and Greek New Testaments to
anonymous ballads, broadsides, songs, advertisements and other ephemera.
Extensive indexing includes imprint word, place, genre, and year as well as
copy-specific notes. Searches may also be limited by date, language and country
of publication.


8.3. Future Trends for On-Line Catalogs


The future of catalogs is linked to the harmonization of the MARC format. While
MARC is an acronym for Machine Readable Catalogue or Cataloguing, this general
description is rather misleading as MARC is neither a kind of catalogue nor a
method of cataloguing. According to UNIMARC: An Introduction, a document of the
Universal Bibliographic Control and International MARC Core Programme, MARC is
"a short and convenient term for assigning labels to each part of a catalogue
record so that it can be handled by computers. While the MARC format was
primarily designed to serve the needs of libraries, the concept has since been
embraced by the wider information community as a convenient way of storing and
exchanging bibliographic data."

MARC II established certain principles which have been followed consistently
over the years. In general terms, the MARC communication format is intended to
be:

"- hospitable to all kinds of library materials;

- sufficiently flexible for a variety of applications in addition to catalogue
production; and

- usable in a range of automated systems."

Over the years, however, despite cooperation efforts, several versions of MARC
emerged, e.g. UKMARC, INTERMARC and USMARC, whose paths diverged because of
different national cataloguing practices and requirements. Since the early 1970s
an extended family of more than 20 MARC formats has evolved. Differences in data
content means that editing is required before records can be exchanged.

One solution to the problem of incompatibility was to create an international
MARC format (UNIMARC) which would accept records created in any MARC format.
Records in one MARC format could be converted into UNIMARC and then be converted
into another MARC format, so that each national agency would need to write only
two programs - one to convert into UNIMARC and one to convert from UNIMARC -
instead of one program for each other MARC format, (e.g. INTERMARC to UKMARC,
USMARC to UKMARC etc.).

In 1977 the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutes
(IFLA) published UNIMARC: Universal MARC format, followed by a second edition in
1980 and a UNIMARC Handbook in 1983, all focussed primarily on the cataloguing
of monographs and serials, and taking advantage of international progress
towards the standardization of bibliographic information reflected in the ISBDs
(international standard bibliographic descriptions). In the mid-1980s it was
considered necessary to expand UNIMARC to cover documents other than monographs
and serials, so a new description of the format - the UNIMARC Manual -was
produced in 1987. By this time UNIMARC had been adopted by several bibliographic
agencies as their in-house format. But developments did not stop there.
Increasingly, a new kind of format - an authorities format - was being used. As
described in the website:

"Previously agencies had entered an author's name into the bibliographic format
as many times as there were documents associated with him or her. With the new
system they created a single authoritative form of the name (with references) in
the authorities file; the record control number for this name was the only item
included in the bibliographic file. The user would still see the name in the
bibliographic record, however, as the computer could import it from the
authorities file at a convenient time. So in 1991 UNIMARC/Authorities was
published."

The Permanent UNIMARC Committee, charged with regularly supervising the
development of the format, came into being that year, as users realized that
continuous maintenance - not just the occasional rewriting of manuals - was
needed. In maintaining the format, care is taken to make changes upwardly
compatible.

In the context of MARC harmonization, The British Library (using UKMARC), the
Library of Congress (using USMARC) and the National Library of Canada (using
CAN/MARC) are in the process of harmonizing their national MARC formats. A
three-year program to achieve a common MARC format was agreed on by the three
libraries in December 1995.

Other organizations recommend the use of SGML (standard generalized markup
language) as a common format for the bibliographic records and the corresponding
hypertextual and multimedia documents.

As most of the publishers use the SGML format to store their documents, a
convergence between MARC and SGML is expected to occur. The Library of Congress
set up the DTD (definition of type of document, which defines its logical
structure) for the USMARC format, because it will probably sell more and more
data both in SGML and in USMARC. A DTD for the UNIMARC format has also been
developed within the European Union. In his study L'accès aux catalogues des
bibliothèques par Internet (The Access to Library Catalogs through the
Internet), Thierry Samain specifies that some libraries choose the SGML format
to encode their bibliographic data. In the Belgian Union Catalog, for example,
the use of SGML allows one first to add descriptive elements stemming from the
MARC format and other formats, and second to facilitate the production of the
annual CD-ROM.

The libraries also have to adapt their thesauri and their key-word lists. In
international bibliographic databases like the OCLC Online Union Catalog, the
absence of a universal thesaurus is a real problem when you try to find
documents using the search by subjects. In Europe, each country uses thesauri or
key-word lists in its own language, whereas multilingual thesauri would be
essential.

Another problem is the harmonization of software. From January to December 1997,
ONE (OPAC Network in Europe) was a collaborative project involving 15
organizations in eight European countries. This project provided library users
with better ways to access library OPACs (online public access catalogs) and
national catalogs, and stimulated and facilitated interworking between libraries
in Europe.

Because of international rules, catalog records are often much more difficult to
establish today than in the past. That is why nowadays libraries often hire
full-time catalogers. Because of the knowledge and the training it requires,
cataloging has become a specialty in librarianship.

In a few years, catalogs on the Web will no longer be "only" a collection of
records, which is often a prelude to a difficult time finding the document
itself - because of the forms to fill out and the difficulties of interlibrary
loans. Catalogs on the Web will give instant access to the documents on the
screen. This is already true in an experimental way for a few thousands
documents, but has to be progressively widened to all catalogs.


9. PERSPECTIVES


[In this chapter:]

[9.1. Print Media and the Internet / 9.2. Intellectual Property / 9.3.
Multimedia Convergence / 9.4. The Information Society]


9.1. Print Media and the Internet


As shown all throughout this study, the Internet is opening new perspectives in
all the sectors of the print media.

In any field (literature, sciences, technology, etc.), authors can create a
website to post their works - they no longer need to wait for a publisher to
distribute them. And, thanks to e-mail, communication with their readers has
become much easier.

On-line booksellers are able not only to sell books published in their own
country, but also sell foreign books or sell abroad, or both. The readers can
read on their screen excerpts or full texts of books. Many on-line bookstores
offer an extensive literary magazine with an editorial content which changes
every day.

The dream of catalog managers to be able to give access to a document through
its bibliographic record is no longer totally utopian. It is already the case
for a few thousand works belonging to public domain. Organizations are also
studying the possibility of posting commercial documents on the Web, in return
for a royalty tax corresponding to the copyright rights, which could be paid by
credit card.

Libraries have a new tool for letting the public know their collections better,
and for developing projects for real or potential users. The Internet is also a
gigantic encyclopedia, easily available for consultation by the libraries' staff
and readers.

Many newspapers and magazines' latest issues are available on-line, as well as
"dossiers" on current events and archives equipped with a search engine to find
information from previous issues. We are also witnessing the first steps of an
on-line press which would be different from the paper version and would have its
own criteria. Some publishers of specialized periodicals, as well as academic
and research works, are thinking about becoming "only" electronic to escape the
paper publishing crisis, or making only small print runs when necessary.

Besides this gigantic and lively encyclopedia, the people working in these
different fields can increase exchanges thanks to electronic mail and discussion
forums. For once, a (relatively) cheap new tool permits people to communicate
quickly and worldwide with no concern for time and boundaries.

The disruption of the print media by the Internet has led to new perspectives
for intellectual property and regulations about cyberspace. The so-called
"multimedia convergence" has led to major changes in jobs. We are living the
first years of the information society. Will this society provide any changes
for the better?


9.2. Intellectual Property


The massive arrival of electronic texts on the Web is a real problem for
applying the rules relating to intellectual property. Digital libraries, for
example, would like to post commercial documents but can't do so yet, until
there is a system allowing the surfer to pay the equivalent royalties. With a
few clicks, any text or article posted on the Internet can be very easily
retrieved and copied - much more easily than by photocopying - without its
author being paid for the use of his text. And what about all the hyperlinks
giving access to all kinds of documents from one website?

The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), an intergovernmental
organization which is one of the 16 specialized agencies of the United Nations
System of Organizations, says on its website:

"As regards the number of literary and artistic works created worldwide, it is
difficult to make a precise estimate. However, the information available
indicates that at present around 1,000,000 books/titles are published and some
5,000 feature films are produced in a year, and the number of copies of
phonograms sold per year presently is more than 3,000 million."

WIPO is responsible for the promotion of the protection of intellectual property
throughout the world through cooperation among States, and for the
administration of various multilateral treaties dealing with the legal and
administrative aspects of intellectual property. Intellectual property comprises
two main branches: (1) industrial property, chiefly in inventions, trademarks,
industrial designs, and appellations of origin; and (2) copyright, chiefly in
literary, musical, artistic, photographic and audiovisual works.

Copyright protection generally means that certain uses of the work are lawful
only if they are done with the authorization of the owner of the copyright. As
explained by WIPO in International Protection of Copyright and Neighboring
Rights, the most typical are the following:

"the right to copy or otherwise reproduce any kind of work; the right to
distribute copies to the public; the right to rent copies of at least certain
categories of works (such as computer programs and audiovisual works); the right
to make sound recordings of the performances of literary and musical works; the
right to perform in public, particularly musical, dramatic or audiovisual works;
the right to communicate to the public by cable or otherwise the performances of
such works and, particularly, to broadcast, by radio, television or other
wireless means, any kind of work; the right to translate literary works; the
right to rent, particularly, audiovisual works, works embodied in phonograms and
computer programs; the right to adapt any kind of work and particularly the
right to make audiovisual works thereof."

Under some national laws, some of these rights - which together are referred to
as 'economic rights' - are not exclusive rights of authorization but, in certain
specific cases, merely rights to remuneration. In addition to economic rights,
authors (whether or not they own the economic rights) enjoy 'moral rights' on
the basis of which authors have the right to claim their authorship and require
that their names be indicated on the copies of the work and in connection with
other uses thereof, and they have the right to oppose the mutilation or
deformation of their works.

Started in July 1993, the International Trade Law (ITL) Monitor was one of the
very first law-related WWW sites, and the first dedicated to a particular area
of law. The site is run by Ralph Amissah, and hosted by the Law Faculty of the
University of Tromso, Norway. The section relating to Protection of Intellectual
Property gives access to various documents, including the European Commission
Legal Advisory Board (LAB): Intellectual Property.

Until the payment of royalties for copyright is possible on the Web, digital
libraries focus on 19th-century texts, or older texts, which belong to public
domain. In many countries, a text enters the public domain 50 years after his
author's death.