In The New York Times, Bruno Giussani wrote: "Jean-Pierre Cloutier (...) is one
of the leading figures of the French-speaking Internet community. Cloutier
writes one of the most intelligent, passionate and insightful electronic
newsletters available on the Internet (...) an original mix of relevant Internet
news, clear political analysis and no-nonsense personal opinions, (...) a
publication that gave readers the feeling that they were living 'week after week
in the intimacy of a planetary revolution'."

*Interview of June 8, 1998 (original interview in French)

= Could you tell us about your professional work?

There are two different things. First I was a translator (after working in
communications). I got connected to the Internet at the request of my small
translation company's customers because it made it easier to receive the work to
translate and then send the result back to them. Quite quickly, I began to get a
broader range of customers, including some in the US.

Then I made a switch. I stopped translating and became a columnist. At first I
was doing it part-time, but it soon became my main activity. For me it was a
return to journalism, but in a very different way. In the beginning, Chroniques
de Cybérie dealt mainly with news (new sites and new software). But gradually I
tackled more fundamental aspects of the Internet, and then branched out into
current national and international social, political and economic events.

With basic issues, it's fairly simple because all these resources (official
documents, news stories, commentary and analysis) are online. You can delve into
them, quote them, broaden the analysis and go on with the research. For current
events, the choice of subject depends on available resources, and resources are
not always easy to find. So you're in the same situation as radio or TV, that if
there aren't any audio clips or pictures, even a major event becomes less
interesting on the Internet.

= How do you see the future?

For Chroniques de Cybérie, we could introduce and maintain a formula because
entry costs are quite low in this medium. However, everything will depend on the
extent of what's called media "convergence" and on whether production costs rise
if we need to offer audio and video material to stay in the game. If that
happens, we'll have to rethink our strategic partnerships, such as the one
linking us to the Ringier group which enabled us to relaunch Chroniques after
six months of silence. But however much "convergence" there is, I think there'll
always be room for written work and for in-depth analysis of the main questions.

*Interview of August 6, 1999 (original interview in French)

= What has happened since our first interview? Any new projects, new ideas...?

No real new projects. New ideas, yes, but I'm still working on them.

= What do you think of the debate about copyright on the Web? What practical
suggestions do you have?

That's a very big subject.

First there are the copyright and reproduction rights of big companies. These
are relatively well supported legally, either through internal legal means or by
hiring specialized companies.

There's no doubt the "dematerialization" of information, brought about by the
Internet and digitization, makes it easier to undermine intellectual property in
various ways.

The danger is real for small producers/distributors of "original" content, who
don't have the means to monitor the theft of their products, or to take legal
action to ensure their rights are respected.

But all this is the "official" part -- cases of plagiarism that can be found in
"rematerialized" works. There is perhaps a more insidious form of plagiarism,
which is the theft of ideas, concepts, formulas, etc., with no mention of their
origin. It's hard to "prove" such plagiarism because it is not just a matter of
"copy and paste". But it's another aspect of the issue which is often obscured
in the debate.

What's the solution? We need a system where you can register free of charge an
article, book or piece of music with an international organization that can take
legal action against plagiarism. This wouldn't solve all the problems, but would
at least establish a basic structure and, who knows, might deter the thieves.

= How do you see the growth of a multilingual Web? What practical suggestions do
you have?

We passed the milestone this summer. Now more than half the users of the
Internet live outside the United States. Next year more than half of all users
will be non English-speaking, compared with only 5% five years ago. Isn't that
great?

At the same time, the Internet has became multi-faceted and now requires more
and more efficient tools because of the "enrichment" of content (or rather of
what contains it, because as far as the real content is concerned, there's no
enrichment, except of the firms that sell it). The Internet needs strong
systems, with good memory and powerful microprocessors. Development of the non
English-speaking Web will be mainly aimed at people who have no way of getting
powerful systems or the latest software and operating systems, or of upgrading
or renewing it all every year. Also, communication infrastructure is sorely
lacking in many places outside Europe and the United States. So there is a
problem of bandwidth.

I've been noticing this phenomenon since the very beginning of Chroniques. Some
readers (in Africa, Asia, Caribbean, South America and the Pacific) tell me they
like being able to suscribe to an e-mail version. They can get Chroniques as a
single message, read it off-line and choose the sites they want to consult
later. Often they have to plan their time online carefully because of poor
communication links.

The Web is going to grow in these non English-speaking regions. So we've got to
take into account the technical aspects of the medium if we want to reach these
"new" users.

I think it's a pity there are so few translations of important documents and
essays published on the Web -- from English into other languages and vice-versa.

Let me explain. Jon Katz published on the Web an analysis of the "Goth" culture
which the perpetrators of the Littleton slaughter were into, and of the term
"Goth". The French-speaking press quoted one or two sentences of his analysis,
lifted a few of his ideas, made an article out of it and that's all. But it
wasn't enough to allow one to understand Katz and his analysis of this youth
culture.

In the same way, the recent introduction of the Internet in regions where it is
spreading raises questions which would be good to read about. When will
Spanish-speaking communications theorists and those speaking other languages be
translated?

= What is your best experience with the Internet?

It's not a very cheerful one and has nothing to do with the significant
influence Chroniques de Cybérie has gained over the years.

At the beginning of 1996, I got a message which roughly said: "My son, in his
early twenties, has been very ill for months. Every week, he looked forward very
much to getting your newsletter in his electronic mailbox. As he could no longer
leave the house, the newsletter allowed him to 'travel', to open his mind and
think about something else other than his pain. He died this morning. I just
wanted to thank you because you lightened his last months with us."

When you get a message like this, you don't care about speaking to thousands of
people, you don't care about lots of statistics, you tell yourself you're
talking to one person at a time.

= And your worst experience?

I haven't really had a "big bad" experience. Lots of small and irritating ones,
though. The system is fragile, content takes second place, the human resources
aren't talked about much and lots of new software is inundating us. But we can
live with it all quite easily.


KUSHAL DAVE (Yale)


#Student at Yale University

*Interview of September 1, 1998

= How do you see the relationship between the print media and the Internet?

This is still being worked out, of course. So far, all I've been able to see is
that electronic media undermines the print form in two ways:

a) providing completely alternative presses that draw attention away from the
previous strongholds, and

b) forcing the print publications to spend resources trying to counteract this
trend. Both forms of media critique one another and proclaim their superiority.
Print media operates under a self-important sense of credibility. And the
electronic media operates under a belief that they are the only purveyors of
unbiased truth.

There are issues of niche and finance that need to be resolved. The Internet is
certainly a more accessible and convenient medium, and thus it would be better
in the long run if the strengths of the print media could be brought online
without the extensive costs and copyright concerns that are concomitant. As the
transition is made, the neat thing is a growing accountability for previously
relatively unreproachable edifices. For example, we already see e-mail addresses
after articles in publications, allowing readers to pester authors directly.
Discussion forums on virtually all major electronic publications show that
future is providing not just one person's opinion but interaction with those of
others as well. Their primary job is the provision of background information.
Also, the detailed statistics can be gleaned about interest in an advertisement
or in content itself will force greater adaptability and a questioning of
previous beliefs gained from focus groups. This means more finely honed content
for the individual, as quantity and customizability grows.

= How did using the Internet change your life?

The Internet has certainly been a distraction. ;) But beyond that, an
immeasurable amount of both trivial and pertinent information has been gleaned
in casual browsing sessions.

= How do you see the future?

In my personal future, I'd like to get a B.S., M.S., and M.Eng, working in the
industry for a while before moving on to write about the medium for some
reputable publication.

The future of the Internet in general I see as becoming more popular and yet
more fraught with conflict over the growth of commercialism and the perception
that the Net's devolutionary spirit has been undermined. There will also be a
need to deal with a glut of information - already we see Internet search engines
reinventing themselves to try to provide a more optimal and efficient portal.


CYNTHIA DELISLE (Montreal)


#Consultant at the CEVEIL (Centre d'expertise et de veille inforoutes et langues
- Centre for Assessment and Monitoring of Information Highways and Languages)

[Joint interview with Guy Bertrand. See: Guy Bertrand.]


BRUNO DIDIER (Paris)


#Webmaster of the Pasteur Institute Library

"The Pasteur Institutes (...) are exceptional observatories for studying
infectious and parasite-borne diseases. They are wedded to the solving of
practical public health problems, and hence carry out research programmes which
are highly original because of the complementary nature of the investigations
carried out: clinical research, epidemiological surveys and basic research work.
Just a few examples from the long list of major topics of the Institutes are:
malaria, tuberculosis, AIDS, yellow fever, dengue and poliomyelitis." (extract
of the website)

* Interview of August 10, 1999 (original interview in French)

= Can you tell us about the website you've created?

The main aim of the Pasteur Institute Library website is to serve the Institute
itself and its associated bodies. It supports applications that have became
essential in such a big organization: bibliographic databases, cataloging,
ordering of documents and of course access to online periodicals (presently more
than 100). It's also a window for our different departments, at the Institute
but also elsewhere in France and abroad. It plays a big part in documentation
exchanges with the institutes in the worldwide Pasteur network. I'm trying to
make it an interlink adapted to our needs for exploration and use of the
Internet. The website has existed in its present form since 1996 and its
audience is steadily increasing.

= What exactly is your professional activity?

I build and maintain the web pages and monitor them regularly. I'm also
responsible for training users, which you can see from my pages. The Web's an
excellent place for training and it's included in most ongoing discussion about
that.

= How did using the Internet change your professional life?

Our relationship with both the information and the users is what changes. We're
increasingly becoming mediators, and perhaps to a lesser extent "curators". My
present activity is typical of this new situation: I'm working to provide quick
access to information and to create effective means of communication, but I also
train people to use these new tools.

= How do you see the future?

I think the future of our job is tied to cooperation and use of common
resources. It's certainly an old project, but it's really the first time we've
had the means to set it up.

As for my professional future, I especially hope the Internet will eventually
allow me to work from home, at least part of the time. It would avoid two and a
half hours of travelling every day...

= What do you think of the debate about copyright on the Web?

I haven't followed these discussions. But I think it's going to be hard to
maintain the community spirit which was the basis of the Internet in the
beginning.

= How do you see the growth of a multilingual Web?

I think a multilingual Web's a very positive thing. The Internet doesn't belong
to any one nation or language. It's a vehicle for culture, and the first vector
of culture is language. The more languages there are on the Net, the more
cultures will be represented there. I don't think we should give in to the
kneejerk temptation to translate web pages into a largely universal language.
Cultural exchanges will only be real if we're prepared to meet with the other
culture in a genuine way. And this effort involves understanding the other
culture's language. This is very idealistic of course. In practice, when I'm
monitoring, I curse Norwegian or Brazilian websites where there's isn't any
English.

= What is your best experience with the Internet?

The day I won a box of Swiss chocolates on the Health On the Net site. But don't
rush to this site, the game doesn't exist any more.

= And your worst experience?

The abuse of e-mail: bad-mannered people take advantage of the distance and
relative anonymity to say not very nice things and take really juvenile
attitudes with, alas, consequences which are not always the kind you find in a