[Illustration: Dick!]


CHAPTER I.


PARIS.--THE DODGE CLUB.--HOW TO SPEAK FRENCH.--HOW TO RAISE A CROWD.


It is a glorious day in Paris. The whole city is out in the public
places, watching the departure of the army of Italy. Every imaginable
uniform, on foot and on horseback, enlivens the scene. Zouaves are
everywhere. Cent Gardes hurry to and fro, looking ferocious. Imperial
Gardes look magnificent. Innumerable little red-legged soldiers of the
line dance about, gesticulating vehemently. Grisettes hang about the
necks of departing braves. A great many tears are shed, and a great
deal of bombast uttered. For the invincible soldiers of France are off
to fight for an idea; and doesn't every one of them carry a marshal's
baton in his knapsack?

A troop of Cent Gardes comes thundering down in a cloud of dust,
dashing the people right and left. Loud cheers arise: "Vive
l'Empereur!" The hoarse voices of myriads prolong the yell. It is Louis
Napoleon. He touches his hat gracefully to the crowd.

A chasseur leaps into a cab.

"Where shall I take you?"

"To Glory!" shouts the soldier.

The crowd applaud. The cabman drives off and don't want any further
direction. Here a big-bearded Zouave kisses his big-bearded brother in
a blouse.

"Adieu, mon frère; write me."

"Where shall I write?"

"Direct to Vienna--_poste restante_."

Every body laughs at every thing, and the crowd are quite wild at
this.

A young man is perched upon a pillar near the garden wall of the
Tuileries. He enjoys the scene immensely. After a while he takes a
clay pipe from his pocket and slowly fills it. Having completed this
business he draws a match along the stone and is just about lighting
his pipe.

"Halloo!"

Down drops the lighted match on the neck of an _ouvrier_. It burns.
The man scowls up; but seeing the cause, smiles and waves his hand
forgivingly.

"Dick!"

At this a young man in the midst of the crowd stops and looks around.
He is a short young man, in whose face there is a strange mixture of
innocence and shrewdness. He is pulling a baby-carriage, containing a
small specimen of French nationality, and behind him walks a majestic
female.

The young man Dick takes a quick survey and recognizes the person who
has called him. Down drops the pole of the carriage, and, to the
horror of the majestic female, he darts off, and, springing up the
pillar, grasps first the foot and then the hand of his friend.

"Buttons!" he cried; "what, you! you here in Paris!"

"I believe I am."

"Why, when did you come?"

"About a month ago."

"I had no idea of it. I didn't know you were here."

"And I didn't know that you were. I thought by this time that you were
in Italy. What has kept you here so long?"

Dick looked confused.

"Why the fact is, I am studying German."

"German! in Paris! French, you mean."

"No, German."

"You're crazy; who with?"

Dick nodded his head toward his late companion.

"What, that woman? How she is scowling at us!"

"Is she?" said Dick, with some trepidation.

"Yes. But don't look. Have you been with her all the time?"

"Yes, seven months."

"Studying German!" cried Buttons, with a laugh. "Who is she?"

"Madame Bang."


[Illustration: Here I Invite My Friends.]


"Bang? Well, Madame Bang must look out for another lodger. You must
come with me, young man. You need a guardian. It's well that I came in
time to rescue you. Let's be off!"

And the two youths descended and were soon lost in the crowd.





"Three flights of steps are bad enough; but great Heavens! what do you
mean by taking a fellow up to the eighth story?"

Such was the exclamation of Dick as he fell exhausted into a seat in a
little room at the top of one of the tallest houses in Paris.

"Economy, my dear boy."

"Ehem!"

"Paris is overflowing, and I could get no other place without paying
an enormous price. Now I am trying to husband my means."

"I should think so."

"I sleep here--"

"And have plenty of bedfellows."

"I eat here--"

"The powers of the human stomach are astounding."

"And here I invite my friends."

"Friends only. I should think. Nothing but the truest friendship could
make a man hold out in such an ascent."

"But come. What are your plans?"

"I have none."

"Then you must league yourself with me."

"I shall be delighted."

"And I'm going to Italy."

"Then I'm afraid our league is already at an end."

"Why?"

"I haven't money enough."

"How much have you?"

"Only five hundred dollars; I've spent all the rest of my allowance."

"Five hundred? Why, man, I have only four hundred."

"What! and you're going to Italy?"

"Certainly."

"Then I'll go too and run the risk. But is this the style?" and Dick
looked dolefully around.

"By no means--not always. But you must practice economy."

"Have you any acquaintances?"

"Yes, two. We three have formed ourselves into a society for the
purpose of going to Italy. We call ourselves the Dodge Club."

"The Dodge Club?"

"Yes. Because our principle is to dodge all humbugs and swindles,
which make travelling so expensive generally. We have gained much
experience already, and hope to gain more. One of my friends is a
doctor from Philadelphia, Doctor Snakeroot, and the other is
Senator Jones from Massachusetts. Neither the Doctor nor the Senator
understands a word of any language but the American. That is the
reason why I became acquainted with them.

"First as to the Doctor, I picked him up at Dunkirk. It was in a café.
I was getting my modest breakfast when I saw him come in. He sat down
and boldly asked for coffee. After the usual delay the garçon brought
him a small cup filled with what looked like ink. On the waiter was a
cup of _eau de vie_, and a little plate containing several enormous
lumps of loaf-sugar. Never shall I forget the Doctor's face of
amazement. He looked at each article in succession. What was the ink
for? what the brandy? what the sugar? He did not know that the two
first when mixed makes the best drink in the world, and that the last
is intended for the pocket of the guest by force of a custom dear to
every Frenchman. To make a long story short, I explained to him the
mysteries of French coffee, and we became sworn friends.

"My meeting with the Senator was under slightly different
circumstances. It was early in the morning. It was chilly. I was
walking briskly out of town. Suddenly I turned a corner and came upon
a crowd. They surrounded a tall man. He was an American, and appeared
to be insane. First he made gestures like a man hewing or chopping.
Then he drew his hand across his throat. Then he staggered forward and
pretended to fall. Then he groaned heavily. After which he raised
himself up and looked at the crowd with an air of mild inquiry. They
did not laugh. They did not even smile. They listened respectfully,
for they knew that the strange gentleman wished to express something.
On the whole, I think if I hadn't come up that the Senator would have
been arrested by a stiff gendarme who was just then coming along the
street. As it was, I arrived just in time to learn that he was anxious
to see the French mode of killing cattle, and was trying to find his way
to the abattoirs. The Senator is a fine man, but eminently practical. He
used to think the French language an accomplishment only. He has
changed his mind since his arrival here. He has one little
peculiarity, and that is, to bawl broken English at the top of his
voice when he wants to communicate with foreigners."


[Illustration: The Club.]


Not long afterward the Dodge Club received a new member in the person
of Mr. Dick Whiffletree. The introduction took place in a modest café,
where a dinner of six courses was supplied for the ridiculous sum of
one franc--soup, a roast, a fry, a bake, a fish, a pie, bread at
discretion, and a glass of vinegar generously thrown in.

At one end of the table sat the Senator, a very large and muscular
man, with iron-gray hair, and features that were very strongly marked
and very strongly American. He appeared to be about fifty years of
age. At the other sat the Doctor, a slender young man in black. On
one side sat Buttons, and opposite to him was Dick.

"Buttons," said the Senator, "were you out yesterday?"

"I was."

"It was a powerful crowd."

"Rather large."

"It was immense. I never before had any idea of the population of
Paris. New York isn't to be compared to it."

"As to crowds, that is nothing uncommon in Paris. Set a rat loose in
the Champs Elysées, and I bet ten thousand people will be after it in
five minutes."

"Sho!"

"Any thing will raise a crowd in Paris."

"It will be a small one, then."

"My dear Senator, in an hour from this I'll engage myself to raise as
large a crowd as the one you saw yesterday."

"My dear Buttons, you look like it."

"Will you bet?"

"Bet? Are you in earnest?"

"Never more so."

"But there is an immense crowd outside already."

"Then let the scene of my trial be in a less crowded place--the Place
Vendôme, for instance."

"Name the conditions."

"In an hour from this I engage to fill the Place Vendôme with people.
Whoever fails forfeits a dinner to the Club."

The eyes of Dick and the Doctor sparkled.

"Done!" said the Senator.

"All that you have to do," said Buttons, "is to go to the top of the
Colonne Vendôme and wave your hat three times when you want me to
begin."

"I'll do that. But it's wrong," said the Senator. "It's taking money
from you. You must lose."

"Oh, don't be alarmed," said Buttons, cheerfully.

The Dodge Club left for the Place Vendôme, and the Senator, separating
himself from his companions, began the ascent. Buttons left his
friends at a corner to see the result, and walked quickly down a
neighboring street.


[Illustration: The Place Vendôme.]


Dick noticed that every one whom he met stopped, stared, and then
walked quickly forward, looking up at the column. These people
accosted others, who did the same. In a few minutes many hundreds of
people were looking up and exchanging glances with one another.

In a short time Buttons had completed the circuit of the block, and
re-entered the Place by another street. He was running at a quick
pace, and, at a moderate calculation, about two thousand _gamins de
Paris_ ran before, beside, and behind him. Gens d'armes caught the
excitement, and rushed frantically about. Soldiers called to one
another, and tore across the square gesticulating and shouting.
Carriages stopped; the occupants stared up at the column; horsemen
drew up their rearing horses; dogs barked; children screamed; up
flew a thousand windows, out of which five thousand heads were thrust.

At the end of twenty minutes, after a very laborious journey, the
Senator reached the top of the column. He looked down. A cry of
amazement burst from him. The immense Place Vendôme was crammed with
human beings. Innumerable upturned faces were staring at the startled
Senator. All around, the lofty houses sent all their inmates to the
open window, through which they looked up. The very house-tops were
crowded. Away down all the streets which led to the Place crowds of
human beings poured along.

"Well," muttered the Senator, "it's evident that Buttons understands
these Frenchmen. However, I must perform my part, so here goes."

And the Senator, majestically removing his hat, waved it slowly around
his head seven times. At the seventh whirl his fingers slipped, and a
great gust of wind caught the hat and blew it far out into the air.

It fell.

A deep groan of horror burst forth from the multitude, so deep, so
long, so terrible that the Senator turned pale.

A hundred thousand heads upturned; two hundred thousand arms waved
furiously in the air. The tide of new-comers flowing up the other
streets filled the Place to overflowing; and the vast host of people
swayed to and fro, agitated by a thousand passions. All this was the
work of but a short time.

"Come," said the Senator, "this is getting beyond a joke."

There was a sudden movement among the people at the foot of the
column. The Senator leaned over to see what it was.

At once a great cry came up, like the thunder of a cataract,
warningly, imperiously, terribly. The Senator drew back confounded.

Suddenly he advanced again. He shook his head deprecatingly, and waved
his arms as if to disclaim any evil motives which they might impute to
him. But they did not comprehend him. Scores of stiff gens d'armes,
hundreds of little soldiers, stopped in their rush to the foot of the
column to shake their fists and scream at him.

"Now if I only understood their doosid lingo," thought the Senator.
"But"--after a pause--"it wouldn't be of no account up here. And what
an awkward fix," he added, "for the father of a family to stand
hatless on the top of a pillory like this! Sho!"

There came a deep rumble from the hollow stairway beneath him, which
grew nearer and louder every moment.

"Somebody's coming," said the Senator. "Wa'al, I'm glad. Misery loves
company. Perhaps I can purchase a hat."

In five minutes more the heads of twenty gens d'armes shot up through
the opening in the top of the pillar, one after another, and reminded
the Senator of the "Jump-up-Johnnies" in children's toys. Six of them
seized him and made him prisoner.

The indignant Senator remonstrated, and informed them that he was an
American citizen.

His remark made no impression. They did not understand English.

The Senator's wrath made his hair fairly bristle. He contented
himself, however, with drawing up the programme of an immediate war
between France and the Great Republic.

It took an hour for the column to get emptied. It was choked with
people rushing up. Seven gentlemen fainted, and three escaped with
badly sprained limbs. During this time the Senator remained in the
custody of his captors.

At last the column was cleared.

The prisoner was taken down and placed in a cab. He saw the dense crowd
and heard the mighty murmurs of the people.

He was driven away for an immense distance. It seemed miles.

At last the black walls of a huge edifice rose before him. The cab
drove under a dark archway. The Senator thought of the dungeons of the
Inquisition, and other Old World horrors of which he had heard in his
boyhood.





So the Senator had to give the dinner. The Club enjoyed it amazingly.

Almost at the moment of his entrance Buttons had arrived, arm in arm
with the American minister, whose representations and explanations
procured the Senator's release.

"I wouldn't have minded it so much," said the Senator, from whose
manly bosom the last trace of vexation had fled, "if it hadn't been
for that darned policeman that collared me first. What a Providence
it was that I didn't knock him down! Who do you think he was?"

"Who?"

"The very man that was going to arrest me the other day when I was
trying to find my way to the slaughter-house. That man is my evil
genius. I will leave Paris before another day."

"The loss of your hat completed my plans," said Buttons. "Was that
done on purpose? Did you throw it down for the sake of saying 'Take
my hat?'"

"No. It was the wind," said the Senator, innocently. "But how did you
manage to raise the crowd? You haven't told us that yet."

"How? In the simplest way possible. I told every soul I met that a
crazy man was going up the Colonne Vendôme to throw himself down."

A light burst in upon the Senator's soul. He raised his new hat from a
chair, and placing it before Buttons, said fervently and with unction:

"Keep it, Buttons!"


[Illustration: Keep It Buttons!]




[Illustration: That's A Hotel Bill.]


CHAPTER II.


ORLEANS.--HOW TO QUELL A LANDLORD.--HOW TO FIGHT OFF HUMBUGS; AND HOW
TO TRAVEL WITHOUT BAGGAGE.

A tremendous uproar in the hall of a hotel at Orleans awaked every
member of the Dodge Club from the sound and refreshing slumber into
which they had fallen after a fatiguing journey from Paris.

Filing out into the hall one after another they beheld a singular
spectacle.

It was a fat man, bald-headed, middle-aged, with a well-to-do look,
that burst upon their sight.

He was standing in the hall with flushed face and stocking feet,
swearing most frightfully. A crowd of waiters stood around shrugging
their shoulders, and trying to soothe him. As the fat man spoke
English, and the waiters French, there was a little misapprehension.

"There, gentlemen," cried the fat man, as he caught sight of our four
friends, "look at that! What do you call that?"

"That?" said Buttons, taking a paper which the fat man thrust in his
face, "why, that's a hotel bill."

"A hotel bill? Why it's an imposition!" cried the other excitedly.

"Perhaps it is," said Buttons, coolly.

"Of course it is! Read it out loud, and let these gentlemen see what
they think of it."

"I'll read it in English," said Buttons, "for the benefit of the
Club:"


Mister Blank,

To the Hotel du Roi:


One dinner..........3 francs.
Six porters.........6 francs.
One cab.............2 francs.
One do..............2 francs.
One information.....5 francs.
Wine................5 francs.
Tobacco............ 2 francs.
One bed.............5 francs.
One boots...........1 francs.
One candle..........1 francs.
One candle..........1 francs.
One candle..........1 francs.
One candle..........1 francs.
=============================
                   35 francs.


"By Jove! Thirty-five francs! My dear Sir. I quite agree with you.
It's an imposition."

A deep sigh expressed the relief of the fat man at this mark of
sympathy.

"There's no redress," said Buttons. "You'll have to grin and bear it.
For you must know that in these inland towns hotel-keepers are in
league, offensive and defensive, with all the cab-drivers,
omnibus-drivers, postillions, truckmen, hostlers, porters,
errand-boys, café-keepers, cicerones, tradesmen, lawyers,
chambermaids, doctors, priests, soldiers, gens d'armes, magistrates,
etc., etc., etc. In short, the whole community is a joint-stock
company organized to plunder the unsuspecting traveller."

"And must I stand here and be swindled without a word?" cried the
other.

"By no means. Row like fury. Call up the whole household one by one,
and swear at them in broad Saxon. That's the way to strike terror into
the soul of a Frenchman."

The fat man stared for a moment at Buttons, and then plunging his
hands deep into his trowsers pockets he walked up and down the hall.

At last he turned to the others: "Gentlemen, is this endurable?"

"Horrible!" cried Dick.

"Abominable!" the Doctor.

"Infamous!" the Senator.

"By jingo! I've a great mind to go home. If I've pot to be plundered,
I'd a durned sight rather have my money go to support our own great
and glorious institutions."

There is no doubt that the unfortunate man would have had to pay up if
it bad not been for the energetic action of Buttons.

He summoned the hotel-keeper before him, and closing the door, asked
his friends to sit down.

Then Buttons, standing up, began to repeat to the hotel-keeper,
smilingly, but with extraordinary volubility, Daniel Webster's oration
against Hayne. The polite Frenchman would not interrupt him, but
listened with a bland though somewhat dubious smile.

The Dodge Club did infinite credit to themselves by listening without
a smile to the words of their leader.

Buttons then went through the proposition about the hypothenuse of a
right-angled triangle, and appended the words of a few negro songs.

Here the worthy landlord interrupted him, begging his pardon, and
telling him that he did not understand English very well, and could
his Excellency speak French?

His Excellency, with equal politeness, regretted his want of complete
familiarity with French. He was forced when he felt deeply on any
subject to express himself in English.

Then followed Cicero's oration against Verres, and he was just
beginning a speech of Chatham's when the landlord surrendered at
discretion.

When, after the lapse of three hours and twenty-five minutes, the fat
man held his bill toward him, and Buttons offered five francs, he did
not even remonstrate, but took the money, and hastily receipting the
bill with his pencil, darted from the room.

"Well," exclaimed the Senator, when he had recovered from the effects
of the scene--"I never before realized the truth of a story I once
heard."

"What was the story?"

"Oh, it was about a bet between a Yankee and a Frenchman, who could
talk the longest. The two were shut up in a room. They remained there
three days. At the end of that time their friends broke open the door
and entered, and what do you think they found there?"

"Nobody?" suggested the fat man.

"No," said the Senator, with a glow of patriotic pride on his fine
face. "But they found the Frenchman lying dead upon the floor, and the
Yankee whispering in his ear the beginning of the second part of the
Higgins story."

"And what is the Higgins story?"

"For Heaven's sake," gasped the Doctor, starting up, "don't ask him
now--wait till next week!"

As they passed over the Mountains of Auvergne a new member was added
to the Dodge Club.

It was the fat man.

He was President of a Western bank.

His name was Figgs.





It was a damp, dull, dreary, drenching night, when the lumbering
diligence bore the Dodge Club through the streets of Lyons and up to
the door of their hotel. Seventeen men and five small boys stood
bowing ready to receive them.

The Senator, Buttons, and Dick took the small valises which contained
their travelling apparel, and dashed through the line of servitors
into the house. The Doctor walked after, serenely and majestically.
He had no baggage. Mr. Figgs descended from the roof with considerable
difficulty. Slipping from the wheel, he fell into the outstretched
arms of three waiters. They put him on his feet.

His luggage was soon ready.

Mr. Figgs had two trunks and various other articles. Of these trunks
seven waiters took one, and four the other. Then


Waiter No. 12 took hat-box;
Waiter No. 13 took travelling desk;
Waiter No. 14 took Scotch plaid;
Waiter No. 15 took over-coat;
Waiter No. 16 took umbrella;
Waiter No. 17 took rubber coat;
Boy No. 1 took cane;
Boy No. 2 took muffler;
Boy No. 3 took one of his mittens;
Boy No. 4 took the other;
Boy No. 5 took cigar-case.


After a long and laborious dinner they rose and smoked.


[Illustration: Cicero Against Verres.]


[Illustration: Sac-r-r-r-ré.]


The head waiter informed Mr. Figgs that with his permission a
deputation would wait on him. Mr. Figgs was surprised but
graciously invited the deputation to walk in. They accordingly
walked in. Seventeen men and five boys.

"What did they want?"

"Oh, only a _pourboire_ with which to drink his Excellency's
noble health."

"Really they did his Excellency too much honor. Were they not
mistaken in their man?"

"Oh no. They had carried his luggage into the hotel."

Upon this Mr. Figgs gave strong proof of poor moral training, by
breaking out into a volley of Western oaths, which shocked one
half of the deputation, and made the other half grin.

Still they continued respectful but firm, and reiterated their
demand.

Mr. Figgs called for the landlord. That gentleman was in bed.
For his wife. She did not attend to the business. For the head
waiter. The spokesman of the deputation, with a polite bow,
informed him that the head waiter stood before him and was quite
at his service.

The scene was ended by the sudden entrance of Buttons, who,
motioning to Mr. Figgs, proceeded to give each waiter a douceur.
One after another took the proffered coin, and without looking
at it, thanked the generous donor with a profusion of bows.

Five minutes after the retreating form of Buttons had vanished
through the door, twenty-persons, consisting of men and boys,
stood staring at one another in blank amazement.

Anger followed; then
sac-r-r-r-_r-r-r_-R-R-R-_R-Ré_!

He had given each one a _centime_.

But the customs of the hotel were not to be changed by the shabby
conduct of one mean-minded person. When the Club prepared to retire
for the night they were taken to some rooms opening in to each other.
Five waiters led the way; one waiter to each man, and each carried a
pair of tall wax-candles. Mr. Figgs's waiter took him to his room,
laid down the lights, and departed.

The doors which connected the rooms were all opened, and Mr.
Figgs walked through to see about something. He saw the Doctor,
the Senator, Buttons, and Dick, each draw the short, well-used
stump of a wax-candle from his coat pocket and gravely light it.
Then letting the melted wax fall on the mantle-pieces they stuck
their candles there, and in a short time the rooms were
brilliantly illuminated.

The waiters were thunderstruck. Such a procedure had never come
within the compass of their experience of the ways of travellers.

"Bonsoir," said Buttons. "Don't let us detain you."

They went out stupefied.

"What's the idea now?" inquired Mr. Figgs.

"Oh. They charge a franc apiece for each candle, and that is a
swindle which we will not submit to."

"And will I have to be humbugged again?"

"Certainly."

"Botheration."

"My dear Sir, the swindle of bougies is the curse of the
Continental traveller. None of us are particularly prudent, but
we are all on the watch against small swindles, and of them all
this is the most frequent and most insidious, the most constantly
and ever recurrent. Beware, my dear President, of bougies--that's
what we call candles."

Mr. Figgs said nothing, but leaned against the wall for a moment
in a meditative mood, as if debating what he should do next.

He happened to be in the Doctor's room. He had already noticed
that this gentleman had no perceptible baggage, and didn't
understand it.

But now he saw it all.

The Doctor began gravely to make preparations for the night.

Before taking off his over-coat he drew various articles from
the pockets, among which were:


A hair-brush,
A tooth-brush,
A shoe-brush,
A pot of blacking,
A night-shirt,
A clothes-broth,
A pipe,
A pouch of tobacco,
A razor,
A shaving-brush,
A piece of soap,
A night-cap,
A bottle of hair-oil,
A pistol,
A guide-book,
A cigar-case,
A bowie-knife,
A piece of cord,
A handkerchief,
A case of surgical instruments,
Some bits of candles.


Mr. Figgs rushed from the room.




[Illustration: Number 729.]


CHAPTER III.


THE RHONE IN A RAIN.--THE MAD FRENCHMAN.--SUICIDE A CAPITAL
CRIME IN FRANCE.


The steamboats that run on the Rhone are very remarkable
contrivances. Their builders have only aimed at combining a
maximum of length with a minimum of other qualities, so that
each boat displays an incredible extent of deck with no
particular breadth at all. Five gentlemen took refuge in the
cabin of the _Etoile_, from the drenching rain which fell during
half of their voyage. This was an absurd vessel, that made trips
between Lyons and Avignon. Her accommodations resembled those of
a canal boat, and she was propelled by a couple of paddle-wheels
driven by a Lilliputian engine. It was easy enough for her to go
down the river, as the current took the responsibility of moving
her along; but how she could ever get back it was difficult to
tell.

They were borne onward through some of the fairest scenes on
earth. Ruined towers, ivy-covered castles, thunder-blasted
heights, fertile valleys, luxuriant orchards, terraced slopes,
trellised vineyards, broad plains, bounded by distant mountains,
whose summits were lost in the clouds; such were the successive
charms of the region through which they were passing. Yet though
they were most eloquently described in the letters which Buttons
wrote home to his friends, it must be confessed that they made
but little impression at the time, and indeed were scarcely seen
at all through the vapor-covered cabin windows.

Avignon did not excite their enthusiasm. In vain the guide-book
told them about Petrarch and Laura. The usual raptures were not
forthcoming. In vain the cicerone led them through the old papal
palace. Its sombre walls awakened no emotion. The only effect
produced was on the Senator, who whiled away the hours of early
bed-time by pointing out the superiority of American institutions
to those which reared the prisons which they had visited.

Arles was much more satisfactory. There are more pretty women in
Arles than in any other town of the same size on the Continent.
The Club created an unusual excitement in this peaceful town by
walking slowly through it in Indian file, narrowly scrutinizing
every thing. They wondered much at the numbers of people that
filled the cathedral, all gayly dressed. It was not until after
a long calculation that they found out that it was Sunday.
Buttons kept his memorandum-book in his hand all day, and took
account of all the pretty women whom he saw. The number rose as
high as 729. He would have raised it higher, but unfortunately
an indignant citizen put a stop to it by charging him with
impertinence to his wife.

On the railroad to Marseilles is a famous tunnel. At the last
station before entering the tunnel a gentleman got in. As they
passed through the long and gloomy place there suddenly arose a
most outrageous noise in the car.

It was the new passenger.

Occasionally the light shining in would disclose him, dancing,
stamping, tearing his hair, rolling his eyes, gnashing his
teeth, and cursing.

"Is he crazy?" said Dick.

"Or drunk?" said Buttons.

Lo and behold! just as the train emerged from the tunnel the
passenger made a frantic dash at the window, flung it open, and
before any body could speak or move he was half out.

To spring over half a dozen seats, to land behind him, to seize
his outstretched leg, to jerk him in again, was but the work of
a moment. It was Buttons who did this, and who banged down the
window again.

"Sac-r-r-R-R-Ré!" cried the Frenchman.

"Is it that you are mad?" said Buttons.

"Sacré Bleu!" cried the other. "Who are you that lays hands on me?"

"I saved you from destruction."

"Then, Sir, you have no thanks. Behold me, I'm a desperate man!"

In truth he looked like one. His clothes were all disordered.
His lips were bleeding, and most of his hair was torn out. By
this time the guard had come to the spot. All those in the car
had gathered round. It was a long car, second-class, like the
American.

"M'sieu, how is this? What is it that I see? You endeavor to
kill yourself?"

"Leave me. I am desperate."

"But no. M'sieu, what is it?"

"Listen. I enter the train thinking to go to Avignon. I have
important business there, most important. Suddenly I am struck by a
thought. I find I have mistaken. I am carried to Marseilles. It is
the express train, and I must go all the way. Horror! Despair! Life is
of no use! It is time to resign, it! I die! Accordingly I attempt to
leap from the window, when this gentleman seizes me by the leg and
pulls me in. Behold all."

"M'sieu," said the guard, slowly, and with emphasis, "you have
committed a grave offense. Suicide is a capital crime."

"A capital crime!" exclaimed the Frenchman, turning pale. "Great
Heaven!"

"Yes, Sir. If you leap from the car I shall put you in irons, and hand
you over to the police when we stop."

The Frenchman's pale face grew paler. He became humble. He entreated
the guard's compassion. He begged Buttons to intercede. He had a
family. Moreover he had fought in the wars of his country. He had
warred in Africa. He appealed to the Senator, the Doctor, to Figgs,
to Dick. Finally he became calm, and the train shortly after arrived
at Marseilles.

The last that was seen of him he was rushing frantically about looking
for the return train.


[Illustration: Horror! Despair!]




CHAPTER IV.


MARSEILLES.


Old Massilia wears her years well. To look at her now as she appears,
full of life and joy and gayety, no one would imagine that thirty
centuries or more had passed over her head.

Here is the first glimpse of the glorious South, with all its sunshine
and luxury and voluptuous beauty. Here the Mediterranean rolls its
waters of deepest blue, through the clear air the landscape appears
with astonishing distinctness, and the sharply-defined lines of
distinct objects surprise the Northern eye. Marseilles is always a
picturesque city. No commercial town in the world can compare with it
in this respect. On the water float the Mediterranean craft, rakish
boats, with enormous latteen sails; long, low, sharp, black vessels,
with a suspicious air redolent of smuggling and piracy. No tides
rise and fall--advance and retreat. The waters are always the same.

All the Mediterranean nations are represented in Marseilles.
Three-quarters of the world send their people here. Europe, Asia,
Africa. In the streets the Syrian jostles the Spaniard; the Italian
the Arab; the Moor jokes with the Jew; the Greek chaffers with the
Algerine; the Turk scowls at the Corsican; the Russian from Odessa
pokes the Maltese in the ribs. There is no want of variety here.
Human nature is seen under a thousand aspects. Marseilles is the most
cosmopolitan of cities, and represents not only many races but many
ages.

Moreover it is a fast city. New York is not more ambitions; Chicago
not more aspiring; San Francisco not more confident in its future.
Amazing sight! Here is a city which, at the end of three thousand
years, looks forward to a longer and grander life in the future.

And why?

Why, because she expects yet to be the arbiter of Eastern commerce.
Through her the gold, the spices, and the gems of India will yet be
conveyed over the European world. For the Suez Canal, which will once
more turn the tide of this mighty traffic through its ancient
Mediterranean channel, will raise Marseilles to the foremost rank
among cities.

So, at least, the Marseillaise believe. When our travellers arrived
there the city was crammed with soldiers. The harbor was packed with
steamships. Guns were thundering, bands playing, fifes screaming,
muskets rattling, regiments tramping, cavalry galloping. Confusion
reigned supreme. Every thing was out of order. No one spoke or thought
of any thing but the coming war in Lombardy.

Excitable little red-legged French soldiers danced about everywhere.
Every one was beside himself. None could use the plain language of
every-day life. All were intoxicated with hope and enthusiasm.

The travellers admired immensely the exciting scene, but their
admiration was changed to disgust when they found that on account
of the rush of soldiers to Italy their own prospects of getting there
were extremely slight.

At length they found that a steamer was going. It was a propeller.
Its name was the _Prince_. The enterprising company that owned her
had patriotically chartered every boat on their line to the
Government at an enormous profit, and had placed the _Prince_ on the
line for the use of travellers.




[Illustration: Those Italians.]


CHAPTER V.


THE RETIRED ORGAN-GRINDER.--THE SENATOR PHILOSOPHIZES.--EVILS OF NOT
HAVING A PASSPORT.


The Mediterranean is the most glorious of seas. The dark-blue waves;
the skies of darker blue; the distant hills of purple, with their
crowns of everlasting snow; and the beetling precipice, where the
vexed waters forever throw up their foaming spray; the frequent
hamlets that nestle among them, the castles and towers that crown the
lofty heights; and the road that winds tortuously along the shore--all
these form a scene in which beauty more romantic than that of the
Rhine is contrasted with all the grandeur of the ocean.

Buttons, with his usual flexible and easy disposition, made the
acquaintance of a couple of Italians who had been away from Italy
and were now returning. They were travelling second-class.

Buttons supposed they were glad to get back.

"Glad? Did he doubt it? Why, they were Italians."

"Are Italians fonder of their country than others?"

"Without doubt. Had they not the best reason to be?"

"Why?"

"They had the garden and pride of the world for their country.
Mention any other in the same breath with Italy."

"If they love it so much why can they not keep it for themselves?"

"How can you ask that? If you know the history of the country you will
see that it has been impossible. No other was ever so beset. It is
split up into different States. It is surrounded by powerful enemies
who take advantage of this. It would not be so bad if there were only
one foreign foe; but there are many, and if one were driven out another
would step in."

"There will be a chance for them now to show what they can do."

"True; and you will see what they will do. They only want the French
to open the way. We Italians can do the rest ourselves. It is a good
time to go to Italy. You will see devotion and patriotism such as you
never saw before. There is no country so beloved as Italy."

"I think other nations are as patriotic."

"Other nations! What nations? Do you know that the Italians can not
leave Italy? It is this love that keeps them home. French, Germans,
Spaniards, Portuguese, English--all others leave their homes, and
go all over the world to live. Italians can not and do not."

"I have seen Italians in America."

"You have seen Italian exiles, not emigrants. Or you have seen them
staying there for a few years so as to earn a little money to go back
with. They are only travellers on business. They are always unhappy,
and are always cheered by the prospect of getting home at last."

These Italians were brothers, and from experience in the world had
grown very intelligent. One had been in the hand-organ business,
the other in the image-making line. Italians can do nothing else
in the bustling communities of foreign nations. Buttons looked with
respect upon those men who thus had carried their lore for their
dear Art for years through strange lands and uncongenial climes.

"If I were an Italian I too would be an organ-grinder!" he at length
exclaimed.

The Italians did not reply, but evidently thought that Buttons could
not be in a better business.

"These _I_talians," said the Senator, to whom Buttons had told
the conversation--"these _I_talians," said he, after they had gone,
"air a singular people. They're deficient. They're wanting in the
leading element of the age. They haven't got any idee of the principle
of pro-gress. They don't understand trade. There's where they miss it.
What's the use of hand-organs? What's the use of dancers? What's the
use of statoos, whether plaster images or marble sculptoor? Can they
clear forests or build up States? No, Sir; and therefore I say that
this _I_talian nation will never be wuth a cuss until they are
inoculated with the spirit of Seventy-six, the principles of the
Pilgrim Fathers, and the doctrines of the Revolution. Boney knows it"
--he added, sententiously--"bless you, Boney knows it."

After a sound sleep, which lasted until late in the following day,
they went out on deck.

There lay Genoa.

Glorious sight! As they stood looking at the superb city the sun
poured down upon the scene his brightest rays. The city rose in
successive terraces on the side of a semicircular slope crowned with
massive edifices; moles projected into the harbor terminated by lofty
towers; the inner basin was crowded with shipping, prominent among
which were countless French ships of war and transports. The yells of
fifes, the throbbing of drums, the bang of muskets, the thunder of
cannon, and the strains of martial music filled die air. Boats crowded
with soldiers constantly passed from the ship to the stone quays,
where thousands more waited to receive them--soldiers being mixed up
with guns, cannons, wheels, muskets, drums, baggage, sails, beams,
timbers, camps, mattresses, casks, boxes, irons, in infinite
confusion.

"We must go ashore here," said Buttons. "Does any body know how long
the steamer will remain here?"

"A day."

"A day! That will be magnificent! We will be able to see the whole
city in that time. Let's go and order a boat off."

The Captain received them politely.

"What did Messieurs want? To go ashore? With the utmost pleasure. Had
they their passports? Of course they had them _viséd_ in Marseilles
for Genoa."

Buttons looked blank, and feebly inquired:

"Why?"

"It's the law, Monsieur. We are prohibited from permitting passengers
to go ashore unless their passports are all right. It's a mere form."

"A mere form!" cried Buttons. "Why, ours are _viséd_ for Naples."

"Naples!" cried the Captain, with a shrug; "you are unfortunate,
Messieurs. That will not pass you to Genoa."

"My dear Sir, you don't mean to tell me that, on account of this
little informality, you will keep us prisoners on board of this
vessel? Consider--"

"Monsieur," said the Captain, courteously, "I did not make these
laws. It is the law; I can not change it. I should be most happy
to oblige you, but I ask you, how is it possible?"

The Captain was right. He could do nothing. The travellers would
have to swallow their rage.


[Illustration: Genoa, The Superb.]


Imagine them looking all day at the loveliest of Italian scenes--
the glorious city of Genoa, with all its historic associations!--
the city of the Dorias, the home of Columbus, even now the scene
of events upon which the eyes of all the world were fastened.

Imagine them looking upon all this, and only looking, unable to go
near; seeing all the preparations for war, but unable to mingle with
the warriors. To pace up and down all day; to shake their fists at the
scene; to fret, and fume, and chafe with irrepressible impatience; to
scold, to rave, to swear--this was the lot of the unhappy tourists.

High in the startled heavens rose the thunder of preparations for the
war in Lombardy. They heard the sounds, but could not watch the scene
near at hand.

The day was as long as an ordinary week, but at length it came to an
end. On the following morning steam was got up, and they went to
Leghorn.

"I suppose they will play the same game on us at Leghorn," said Dick,
mournfully.

"Without doubt," said Buttons. "But I don't mind; the bitterness of
Death is past. I can stand any thing now."

Again the same tantalizing view of a great city from afar. Leghorn lay
inviting them, but the unlucky passport kept them on board of the
vessel. The Senator grew impatient, Mr. Figgs and the Doctor were
testy; Dick and Buttons alone were calm. It was the calmness of
despair.

After watching Leghorn for hours they were taken to Civita Vecchia.
Here they rushed down below, and during the short period of their stay
remained invisible.

At last their voyage ended, and they entered the harbor of Naples.
Glorious Naples! Naples the captivating!

"_Vede Napoli_, _e poi mori_!"

There was the Bay of Naples--the matchless, the peerless, the
indescribable! There the rock of Ischia, the Isle of Capri, there the
slopes of Sorrento, where never-ending spring abides; there the long
sweep of Naples and her sister cities; there Vesuvius, with its thin
volume of smoke floating like a pennon in the air!




[Illustration. Their Noble Excellencies.]


CHAPTER VI.


LAZARONI AND MACARONI.


About forty or fifty lazaroni surrounded the Dodge Club when they
landed, but to their intense disgust the latter ignored them
altogether, and carried their own umbrellas and carpet-bags. But the
lazaroni revenged themselves. As the Doctor stooped to pick up his
cane, which had fallen, a number of articles dropped from his
breast-pocket, and among them was a revolver, a thing which was
tabooed in Naples. A ragged rascal eagerly snatched it and handed it
to a gendarme, and it was only after paying a piastre that the Doctor
was permitted to retain it.

Even after the travellers had started on foot in search of lodgings
the lazaroni did not desert them. Ten of them followed everywhere.
At intervals they respectfully offered to carry their baggage, or show
them to a hotel, whichever was most agreeable to their Noble
Excellencies.

Their Noble Excellencies were in despair. At length, stumbling upon
The Café dell' Europa, they rushed in and passed three hours over
their breakfast. This done, they congratulated themselves on. Having
got rid of their followers.

In vain!

Scarcely had they emerged from the café than Dick uttered a cry of
horror. From behind a corner advanced their ten friends, with the
same calm demeanor, the game unruffled and even cheerful patience,
and the same respectful offer of their humble services.

In despair they separated. Buttons and Dick obtained lodgings in the
Strada di San Bartollomeo. The Senator and the other two engaged
pleasant rooms on the Strada Nuova, which overlooked the Bay.

Certainly Naples is a very curious place. There are magnificent
edifices--palaces, monuments, castles, fortresses, churches, and
cathedrals. There are majestic rows of buildings; gay shops,
splendidly decorated; stately colonnades, and gardens like Paradise.
There are streets unrivalled for gayety, forever filled to overflowing
with the busy, the laughing, the jolly; dashing officers, noisy
soldiers, ragged lazaroni, proud nobles, sickly beggars, lovely
ladies; troops of cavalry galloping up and down; ten thousand caleches
dashing to and fro. There is variety enough everywhere.

All the trades are divided, and arranged in different parts of the
city. Here are the locksmiths, there the cabinet-makers; here the
builders, there the armorers; in this place the basket-weavers, in
that the cork-makers.

And most amusing of all is the street most favored of the lazaroni.
Here they live, and move, and have their being; here they are born,
they grow, they wed, they rear families, they eat, and drink, and die.
A long array of furnaces extends up the street; over each is a
stew-pan, and behind each a cook armed with an enormous ladle. At all
hours of the day the cook serves up macaroni to customers. This is the
diet of the people.

In the cellars behind those lines of stew-pans are the eating-houses
of the vulgar--low, grimy places, floors incrusted with mud, tables of
thick deal worn by a thousand horny hands, slippery with ten thousand
upset dishes of macaroni. Here the pewter plates, and the iron knives,
forks, and spoons are chained to the massive tables. How utter must
the destitution be when it is thought necessary to chain up such
worthless trash!

Into one of these places went Buttons and Dick in their study of human
nature. They sat at the table. A huge dish of macaroni was served up.
Fifty guests stopped to look at the new-comers. The waiters winked at
the customers of the house, and thrust their tongues in their cheeks.


[Illustration: Lazaroni And Macaroni.]


Dick could not eat, but the more philosophical Buttons made an
extremely hearty meal, and pronounced the macaroni delicious.

On landing in a city which swarmed with beggars the first thought of
our tourists was, How the mischief do they all live? There are sixty
thousand lazaroni in this gay city. The average amount of clothing to
each man is about one-third of a pair of trowsers and a woolen cap.
But after spending a day or two the question changed its form, and
became, How the mischief can they all help living? Food may be picked
up in the streets. Handfuls of oranges and other fruits sell for next
to nothing; strings of figs cost about a cent.

The consequence is that these sixty thousand people, fellow-creatures
of ours, who are known as the lazaroni of Naples, whom we half pity
and altogether despise, and look upon as lowest members of the
Caucasian race, are not altogether very miserable. On the contrary,
taken as a whole, they form the oiliest, fattest, drollest, noisiest,
sleekest, dirtiest, ignorantest, prejudicedest, narrow-mindedest,
shirtlessest, clotheslessest, idlest, carelessest, jolliest,
absurdest, rascaliest--but still, all that, perhaps--taken all in
all--the happiest community on the face of the earth.




[Illustration: Yankee Doodle.]


CHAPTER VII.


DOLORES.--AN ITALIAN MAID LEARNS ENGLISH.--A ROMANTIC ADVENTURE.--A
MASQUERADE, AND WHAT BEFELL THE SENATOR.--A CHARMING DOMINO.--A
MOONLIGHT WALK, AND AN ASTOUNDING DISCOVERY.


The lodgings of Buttons and Dick were in a remarkably central part of
Naples. The landlord was a true Neapolitan; a handsome, gay, witty,
noisy, lively, rascally, covetous, ungrateful, deceitful, cunning,
good-hearted old scoundrel, who took advantage of his guests in a
thousand ways, and never spoke to them without trying to humbug them.
He was the father of a pretty daughter who had all her parent's nature
somewhat toned down, and expanded in a feminine mould.

Buttons had a chivalrous soul, and so had Dick; the vivacity of this
very friendly young lady was like an oasis in the wilderness of
travel. In the evening they loved to sit in the sunshine of her smile.
She was singularly unconventional, this landlord's daughter, and made
many informal calls on her two lodgers in their apartment.

An innocent, sprightly little maid--name Dolores--age seventeen--
complexion olive--hair jet black--eyes like stars, large, luminous,
and at the same time twinkling--was anxious to learn English,
especially to sing English songs; and so used to bring her guitar and
sing for the Americans. Would they teach her their national song? "Oh
yes happy beyond expression to do so."

The result, after ten lessons, was something like this:


  "Anty Dooda tumma towna
    By his sef a po-ne
  Stacca fadda inna sat
    Kalla Maccaroni."


She used to sing this in the most charming manner, especially the last
word in the last line. Not the least charm in her manner was her
evident conviction that she had mastered the English language.

"Was it not an astonishing thing for so young a Signorina to know
English?"

"Oh, it was indeed!" said Buttons, who knew Italian very well, and had
the lion's share of the conversation always.

"And they said her accent was fine?"

"Oh, most beautiful!"

"Bellissima! Bellissima!" repeated little Dolores, and she would laugh
until her eyes overflowed with delighted vanity.

"Could any Signorina Americana learn Italian in so short a time?"

"No, not one. They had not the spirit. They could never equal her most
beautiful accent."

"Ah! you say all the time that my accent is most beautiful."

One day she picked up a likeness of a young lady which was lying on
the table.

"Who is this?" she asked, abruptly, of Buttons.

"A Signorina."

"Oh yes! I know; but is she a relative?"

"No."

"Are you married?"

"No."

"Is this your affianced?"

"Yes."

"Ah, how strange! What will you bet?--a soldier or an advocate?"

"Neither. I will be a priest."

"A priest! Signor, what is it that you tell me? How can this be your
affianced lady?"

"Oh! in our country the priests all marry, and live in beautiful
little cottages, with a garden in front."

This Dolores treated with the most contemptuous incredulity. Who ever
heard of such a thing? Impossible! Moreover, it was so absurd. Buttons
told her that he was affianced five years ago.

"An eternity!" exclaimed Dolores. "How can you wait? But you must have
been very young."

"Young? Yes, only sixteen."

"Blessed and most venerable Virgin! Only sixteen! And is she the most
beautiful girl you know?"

"No."

"Where have you seen one more so?"

"In Naples."

"Who is she?"

"An Italian."

"What is her name?"

"Dolores."

"That's me."

"I mean you."

This was pretty direct; but Dolores was frank, and required
frankness from others. Some young ladies would have considered this
too coarse and open to be acceptable. But Dolores had so high an
opinion of herself that she took it for sincere homage. So she half
closed her eyes, leaned back in her chair, looked languishingly at
Buttons, and then burst into a merry peal of musical laughter.

"I think I am the most beautiful girl you ever saw."

It was Buttons's turn to laugh. He told Dolores that she was quite
right, and repeated her favorite word, "Belissima!"

One evening when Dick was alone in the room a knock came to the door.

"Was he disengaged?"

"Oh, quite."

"The Signora in the room next--"

"Yes."

"Would be happy to see him."

"Now?"

"Yes, as soon as he liked."


[Illustration: I Kiss Hands.]


The Signora did not have to wait long. In less time than it takes to
tell this Dick stood with his best bow before her. How he
congratulated himself on having studied Italian! The lady reclined on
a sofa. She was about thirty, and undeniably pretty. A guitar lay at
her feet. Books were scattered around--French novels, and manuals of
devotion. Intelligence beamed from her large, expressive eyes. How
delightful! Here was an adventure, perhaps a fair conquest.

"Good-evening, Signor!"

"I kiss the hands to your ladyship," said Dick, mustering a sentence
from Ollendorff.

"Pardon me for this liberty."

"I assure you it gives me the greatest happiness, and I am wholly at
your service."

"I have understood that you are an American."

"I am, Signora."

"And this is your first visit to Naples?"

"My first, Signora."

"How does Naples please you?"

"Exceedingly. The beautiful city, the crowded streets, the delightful
views--above all, the most charming ladies."

A bow--a slight flush passed over the lady's face, and Dick whispered
to himself--

"Well put, Dick, my boy--deuced well put for a beginner."

"To come to the point," said the lady, with sigh.--("Ah, here we have
it!" thought Dick--the point--blessed moment!)--"I would not have
ventured to trouble you for any slight cause, Signor, but this nearly
concerns myself."--(Keep down--our heart, murmured Dick--cool, you
dog--cool!)--"My happiness and my tenderest feelings--"(Dick's
suffused eyes expressed deep sympathy.)--"I thought of you--"

"Ah, Signora!"

"And not being acquainted with you--"(What a shame!--_aside_)--I
concluded to waive all formality"--(Social forms are generally a
nuisance to ardent souls--_aside_)--"and to communicate at once with
you."

"Signora, let me assure you that this is the happiest moment in my
life."

The Signora looked surprised, but went on in a sort of preoccupied
way:

"I want to know if you can tell me any thing about my brother."

"Brother!"

"Who is now in America."

Dick opened his eyes.

"I thought that perhaps you could tell me how he is. I have not heard
from him for two years, and feel very anxious."

Dick sat for a moment surprised at this unexpected turn. The lady's
anxiety about her brother he could see was not feigned. So he
concealed his disappointment, and in his most engaging manner informed
her that he had not seen her brother; but if she could tell him his
name, and the place where he was living, he might be able to tell
something about him.


[Illustration: The Young Hussar.]


"His name," sighed the lady, "is Giulio Fanti."

"And the place?"

"Rio Janeiro."

"Rio Janeiro?"

"Yes," said the lady, slowly.

Dick was in despair. Not to know any thing of her brother would make
her think him stupid. So he attempted to explain:

"America," he began, "is a very large country--larger, in fact, than
the whole Kingdom of Naples. It is principally inhabited by savages,
who are very hostile to the whites. The whites have a few cities,
however. In the North the whites all speak English. In the South they
all speak Spanish. The South Americans are good Catholics, and
respect the Holy Father; but the English in the North are all
heretics. Consequently there is scarcely any communication between
the two districts."

The lady had heard somewhere that in the American wars they employed
the savages to assist them. Dick acknowledged the truth of this with
candor, but with pain. She would see by this why he was unable to tell
her any thing about her brother. His not knowing that brother was now
the chief sorrow of his life. The lady earnestly hoped that Rio
Janeiro was well protected from the savages.

"Oh, perfectly so. The fortifications of that city are impregnable."

Dick thus endeavored to give the lady an idea of America. The
conversation gradually tapered down until the entrance of a gentleman
brought it to a close. Dick bowed himself out.

"At any rate," he murmured, "if the lady wanted to inspect me she had
a chance, and if she wanted to pump me she ought to be satisfied."





One evening Buttons and Dick came in and found a stranger chatting
familiarly with the landlord and a young hussar. The stranger was
dressed like a cavalry officer, and was the most astounding fop that
the two Americans had ever seen. He paced up and down, head erect,
chest thrown out, sabre clanking, spurs jingling, eyes sparkling,
ineffable smile. He strode up to the two youths, spun round on one
heel, bowed to the ground, waved his hand patronizingly, and welcomed
them in.

"A charming night, gallant gentlemen. A bewitching night. All Naples
is alive. All the world is going. Are you?"

The young men stared, and coldly asked where?

"Ha, ha, ha!" A merry peal of laughter rang out. "Absolutely--if the
young Americans are not stupid. They don't know me!"

"Dolores!" exclaimed Buttons.

"Yes," exclaimed the other. "How do you like me? Am I natural?--eh?
military? Do I look terrible?"

And Dolores skipped up and down with a strut beyond description,
breathing hard and frowning.

"If you look so fierce you will frighten us away," said Buttons.

"How do I look, now?" she said, standing full before him with folded
arms, _à la_ Napoleon at St. Helena.

"Bellissima! Bellissima!" said Buttons, in unfeigned admiration.

"Ah!" ejaculated Dolores, smacking her lips, and puffing out her
little dimpled cheeks. "Oh!" and her eyes sparkled more brightly with
perfect joy and self-contentment.

"And what is all this for?"

"Is it possible that you do not know?"

"I have no idea."

"Then listen. It is at the Royal Opera-house. It will be the greatest
masquerade ball ever given."

"Oh--a masquerade ball!--and you?"

"I? I go as a handsome young officer to break the hearts of the
ladies, and have such rare sport. My brave cousin, yonder gallant
soldier, goes with me."

The brave cousin, who was a big, heavy-headed fellow, grinned in
acknowledgment, but said nothing.

The Royal Opera-house at Naples is the largest, the grandest, and the
most capacious in the world. An immense stage, an enormous pit all
thrown into one vast room, surrounded by innumerable boxes, all
rising, tier above tier--myriads of dancers, myriads of masks,
myriads of spectators--so the scene appeared. Moreover, the Neapolitan
is a born buffoon. Nowhere is he so natural as at a masquerade. The
music, the crowd, the brilliant lights, the incessant motion are all
intoxication to this impressible being.

The Senator lent the countenance of his presence--not from curiosity,
but from benevolent desire to keep his young friends out of trouble.
He narrowly escaped being prohibited from entering by making an
outrageous fuss at the door about some paltry change. He actually
imagined that it was possible to get the right change for a large coin
in Naples.

The multitudes of moving forms made the new-comers dizzy. There were
all kinds of fantastic figures. Lions polked with sylphs, crocodiles
chased serpents, giants walked arm in arm with dwarfs, elephants on
two legs ran nimbly about, beating every body with hope probosces of
inflated India rubber. Pretty girls in dominos abounded; every body
whose face was visible was on the broad grin. All classes were
represented. The wealthier nobles entered into the spirit of the scene
with as great gusto as the humblest artisan who treated his obscure
sweet-heart with an entrance ticket.


[Illustration: A Perplexed Senator.]


Our friends all wore black dominos, "just for the fun of the thing."
Every body knew that they were English or American, which is just
the same; for Englishmen and Americans are universally recognizable by
the rigidity of their muscles.

A bevy of masked beauties were attracted by the colossal form of the
Senator. To say that he was bewildered would express his sensations
but faintly. He was distracted. He looked for Buttons. Buttons was
chatting with a little domino. He turned to Dick. Dick was walking off
with a rhinoceros. To Figgs and the Doctor. Figgs and the Doctor were
exchanging glances with a couple of lady codfishes and trying to look
amiable. The Senator gave a sickly smile.

"What'n thunder'll I do?" he muttered.

Two dominos took either arm. A third stood smilingly before him. A
fourth tried to appropriate his left hand.

"Will your Excellency dance with one of us at a time," said No. 4,
with a Tuscan accent, "or will you dance with all of us at once?"

The Senator looked helplessly at her.

"He does not know how," said No 1. "He has passed his life among the
stars."

"Begone, irreverent ones!" said No. 3. "This is an American prince.
He said I should be his partner."

"Boh! malidetta!" cried No. 2. "He told me the same; but he said he
was a Milor Inglese."

No. 4 thereupon gave a smart pull at the Senator's hand to draw him
off. Whereupon No. 2 did the same. No. 3 began singing "Come e bello!"
and No. 1 stood coaxing him to "Fly with her." A crowd of idlers
gathered grinningly around.

"My goodness!" groaned the Senator. "Me! The--the representative of a
respectable constituency; the elder of a Presbyterian church; the
president of a temperance society; the deliverer of that famous Fourth
of July oration; the father of a family--me! to be treated thus! Who
air these females? Air they countesses? Is this the way the foreign
nobility treat an American citizen?"

But the ladies pulled and the crowd grinned. The Senator endeavored to
remonstrate. Then he tried to pull his arms away; but finding that
impossible he looked in a piteous manner, first at one, and then at
the other.


[Illustration: Exit Senator.]


"He wants, I tell you, to be my partner," said No. 1.

"Bah!" cried No. 2, derisively; "he intends to be mine. I understand
the national dance of his country--the famous jeeg Irelandese."

"MRS.!!!"

The Senator shouted this one word in a stentorian voice. The ladies
dropped his arms and started.

"I say, Mrs.!" cried the Senator. "Look here. Me no speeky
_I_talian--me American. Me come just see zee fun, you know--zee
spaort--you und-stand? Ha? Hum!"

The ladies clapped their hands, and cried "Bravo!"

Quite a crowd gathered around them. The Senator, impressed with the
idea that, to make foreigners understand, it was only necessary to
yell loud enough, bawled so loudly that ever so many dancers stopped.
Among these Buttons came near with the little Domino. Little Domino
stopped, laughed, clapped her hands, and pointed to the Senator.

The Senator was yelling vehemently in broken English to a large crowd
of masks. He told them that he had a large family; that he owned a
factory; that he was a man of weight, character, influence,
popularity, wealth; that he came here merely to study their manners
and customs. He disclaimed any intention to participate in their
amusements just then, or to make acquaintances.--He would be proud to
visit them all at their houses, or see them at his apartments, or--or
--in short, would be happy to do any thing if they would only let him
go in peace.

The crowd laughed, chattered, and shouted "Bravo!" at every pause. The
Senator was covered with shame and perspiration. What would have
become of him finally it is impossible to guess; but, fortunately, at
this extremity he caught sight of Buttons. To dash away from the
charming ladies, to burst through the crowd, and to seize the arm of
Buttons was but the work of a moment.

"Buttons! Buttons! Buttons! Help me! These confounded _I_talian
wimmin! Take them away. Tell them to leave me be. Tell them I don't
know them--don't want to have them hanging round me. Tell them _I'm
your father_!" cried the Senator, his voice rising to a shout in his
distraction and alarm.

About 970 people were around him by this time.

"Goodness!" said Buttons; "you are in a fix. Why did you make yourself
so agreeable? and to so many? Why, it's too bad. One at a time!"

"Buttons," said the Senator, solemnly, "is this the time for joking?
For Heaven's sake get me away."

"Come then; you must run for it."

He seized the Senator's right arm. The little Domino clung to the
other. Away they started. It was a full run. A shout arose. So arises
the shout in Rome along the bellowing Corso when the horses are
starting for the Carnival races. It was a long, loud shout, gathering
and growing and deepening as it rose, till it burst on high in one
grand thunder-clap of sound.

Away the Senator went like the wind. The dense crowd parted on either
side with a rush. The Opera-house is several hundred feet in length.
Down this entire distance the Senator ran, accompanied by Buttons and
the little Domino. Crowds cheered him as he passed. Behind him the
passage-way closed up, and a long trail of screaming maskers pressed
after him. The louder they shouted the faster the Senator ran. At
length they reached the other end.

"Do you see that box?" asked Buttons, pointing to one on the topmost
tier.

"Yes, yes."

"Fly! Run for your life! It's your only hope. Get in there and hide
till we go."

The Senator vanished. Scarcely had his coat-tails disappeared through
the door when the pursuing crowd arrived there. Six thousand two
hundred and twenty-seven human beings, dressed in every variety of
costume, on finding that the runner had vanished, gave vent to their
excited feelings by a loud cheer for the interesting American who had
contributed so greatly to the evening's enjoyment.

Unlucky Senator! Will it be believed that even in the topmost box his
pursuers followed him? It was even so. About an hour afterward
Buttons, on coming near the entrance, encountered him. His face was
pale but resolute, his dress disordered. He muttered a few words about
"durned _I_talian countesses," and hurried out.

Buttons kept company with the little Domino. Never in his life had he
passed so agreeable an evening. He took good care to let his companion
know this. At length the crowd began to separate. The Domino would go.
Buttons would go with her. Had she a carriage? No, she walked. Then he
would walk with her.

Buttons tried hard to get a carriage, but all were engaged. But a walk
would not be unpleasant in such company. The Domino did not complain.
She was vivacious, brilliant, delightful, bewitching. Buttons had been
trying all evening to find out who she was. In vain.

"Who in the world is she? I must find out, so that I may see her
again." This was his one thought.

They approached the Strada Nuova.

"She is not one of the nobility at any rate, or she would not live
here."

They turned up a familiar street.

"How exceedingly jolly! She can't live far away from my lodgings."

They entered the Strada di San Bartolomeo.

"Hanged if she don't live on the same street!"

A strange thought occurred. It was soon confirmed. They stopped in
front of Buttons's own lodgings. A light gleamed over the door.
Another flashed into the soul of Buttons. That face, dimpled, smiling,
bewitching; flashing, sparking eyes; little mouth with its rosy lips!

"_Delores_!"

"Blessed Saints and Holy Virgin! Is it possible that you never
suspected?"

"Never. How could I when I thought you were dressed like a dragoon?"

"And you never passed so happy an evening; and never had so
fascinating and charming a partner; and you never heard such a voice
of music as mine; and you can never forget me through all life; and
you never can hope to find any one equal to me!" said Dolores, in her
usual laughing volubility.

"Never!" cried Buttons.

"Oh dear! I think you must love me very much."

And a merry peal of laughter rang up the stairs as Dolores, evading
Buttons's arm, which that young man had tried to pass about her
waist, dashed away into the darkness and out of sight.




CHAPTER VIII.


ADVENTURES AND MISADVENTURES.--A WET GROTTO AND A BOILING LAKE.--THE
TWO FAIR SPANIARDS, AND THE DONKEY RIDE.


The Grotto of Posilippo is a most remarkable place, and, in the
opinion of every intelligent traveller, is more astonishing than even
the Hoosac Tunnel, which nobody will deny except the benighted
Bostonian.

The city of Pozzuoli is celebrated for two things; first, because St.
Paul once landed there, and no doubt hurried away as fast as he could;
and, secondly, on account of the immense number of beggars that throng
around the unhappy one who enters its streets.

The Dodge Club contributed liberally. The Doctor gave a cork-screw;
the Senator, a bladeless knife; Dick, an old lottery ticket; Buttons,
a candle-stump; Mr. Figgs, a wild-cat banknote. After which
they all hurried away on donkeys as fast as possible.

The donkey is in his glory here. Nowhere else does he develop such a
variety of forms--nowhere attain such an infinity of sizes--nowhere
emit so impressive a bray. It is the Bray of Naples. "It is like the
thunder of the night when the cloud bursts o'er Cona, and a thousand
ghosts shriek at once in the hollow wind."

There is a locality in this region which the ancient named after a
certain warm region which no reined person ever permits himself to
mention in our day. Whatever it may have been when some Roman Tityrus
walked pipe in mouth along its shore, its present condition renders
its name singularly appropriate and felicitous. Here the party amused
themselves with a lunch of figs and oranges, which they gathered
indiscriminately from orchards and gardens on the road-side.

There was the Lake Lucrine. Averno and the Elysian Fields were there.
The ruins of Caligula's Bridge dotted the surface of the sea. Yet the
charms of all these classic scenes were eclipsed in the tourists' eyes
by those of a number of pretty peasants girls who stood washing
clothes in the limpid waters of the lake.

It was in this neighborhood that they found the Grotto of the Cumaean
Sibyl. They followed the intelligent cicerone, armed with torches,
into a gloomy tunnel. The intelligent cicerone walked before them with
the air of one who had something to show. Seven stoat peasants
followed after. The cavern was as dark as possible, and extended
apparently for an endless distance.

After walking a distance of about two miles, according to the
Senator's calculation, they came to the centre of interest. It was a
hole in the wall of the tunnel. The Americans were given to understand
that they must enter here.

"But how?"

"How? Why on the broad backs of the stout peasants, who all stood
politely offering their humble services." The guide went first.
Buttons, without more ado, got on the back of the nearest Italian and
followed. Dick came next; then the Doctor. Mr. Figgs and the Senator
followed in the same dignified manner.

They descended for some distance, and finally came to water about
three feet deep. As the roof was low, and only rose three feet above
the water, the party had some difficulty, not only in keeping their
feet out of the water, but also in breathing. At length they came to
a chamber about twelve feet square. From this they passed on to
another of the same size. Thence to another. And so on.

Arriving at the last, Bearer No. 1 quietly deposited Buttons on a
raised stone platform, which fortunately arose about half an inch
above the water. Three other bearers did the same. Mr. Figgs looked
forlornly about him, and, being a fat man, seemed to grow somewhat
apoplectic. Dick beguiled the time by lighting his pipe.

"So this is the Grotto of the Cumaean Sibyl, is it?" said Buttons.
"Then all I can say is that--"

What he was going to say was lost by a loud cry which interrupted
him and startled all. It came from the other chamber.

"The Senator!" said Dick.

It was indeed his well-known voice. There was a splash and a groan.
Immediately afterward a man staggered into the room. He was deathly
pale, and tottered feebly under the tremendous weight of the Senator.
The latter looked as anxious as his trembling bearer.

"Darn it! I say," he cried. "Darn it! Don't! Don't!"

"Diavo-lo!" muttered the Italian.

And in the next instant plump went the Senator into the water. A
scene then followed that baffles description. The Senator, rising
from his unexpected bath, foaming and sputtering, the Italian praying
for forgiveness, the loud voices of all the others shouting, calling,
and laughing.

The end of it was that they all left as soon as possible, and the
Senator indignantly waded back through the water himself. A furious
row with the unfortunate bearer, whom the Senator refused to pay,
formed a beautifully appropriate termination to their visit to this
classic spot. The Senator was so disturbed by this misadventure that
his wrath did not subside until his trowsers were thoroughly dried.
This, however, was accomplished at last, under the warm sun, and then
he looked around him with his usual complacency.

The next spot of interest which attracted them was the Hall of the
Subterranean Lake. In this place there is a cavern in the centre of
a hill, which is approached by a passage of some considerable length,
and in the subterranean cavern a pool of water boils and bubbles. The
usual crowd of obliging peasantry surrounded them as they entered the
vestibule of this interesting place. It was a dingy-looking chamber,
out of which two narrow subterranean passages ran. A grimy, sooty,
blackened figure stood before them with torches.


[Illustration: Darn it!--Don't.]


"Follow!"

This was all that he condescended to say, after lighting his torches
and distributing them to his visitors. He stalked off, and stooping
down, darted into the low passage-way. The cicerone followed, then
Buttons, then Dick, then the Senator, then the Doctor, then Mr. Figgs.
The air was intensely hot, and the passage-way grew lower. Moreover,
the smoke from the torches filled the air, blinding and choking them.

Mr. Figgs faltered. Fat, and not by any means nimble, he came to a
pause about twenty feet from the entrance, and, making a sudden turn,
darted out. The Doctor was tall and unaccustomed to bend his
perpendicular form. Half choked and panting heavily he too gave up,
and turning about rushed out after Mr. Figgs.

The other three went on bravely. Buttons and Dick, because they had
long since made up their minds to see every thing that presented
itself, and the Senator, because when he started on an enterprise he
was incapable of turning back.

After a time the passage went sloping steeply down. At the bottom of
the declivity was a pond of water bubbling and steaming. Down this
they ran. Now the stone was extremely slippery, and the subterranean
chamber was but faintly illuminated by the torches. And so it came to
pass that, as the Senator ran down after the others, they had barely
reached the bottom when

_Thump_!

At once all turned round with a start.

Not too quickly; for there lay the Senator, on his back, sliding, in
an oblique direction, straight toward the pool. His booted feet were
already in the seething waves; his nails were dug into the slippery
soil; he was shouting for help.

To grasp his hand, his collar, his leg--to jerk him away and place
him upright, was the work of a shorter time than is taken to tell it.

The guide now wanted them to wait till he boiled an egg. The Senator
remonstrated, stating that he had already nearly boiled a leg. The
Senator's opposition overpowered the wishes of the others, and the
party proceeded to return. Pale, grimy with soot, panting, covered
with huge drops of perspiration, they burst into the chamber where the
others were waiting--first Buttons, then Dick, then the Senator
covered with mud and slime.

The latter gentleman did not answer much to the eager inquiries of
his friends, but maintained a solemn silence. The two former loudly
and volubly descanted on the accumulated horrors of the subterranean
way, the narrow passage, the sulphurous air, the lake of boiling
floods.

In this outer chamber their attention was directed to a number of
ancient relics. These are offered for sale in such abundance that
they may be considered stable articles of commerce in this country.


[Illustration: Thump!]


So skillful are the manufacturers that they can produce unlimited
supplies of the following articles, and many others too numerous
to mention:


Cumaean and Oscan coins;
Ditto and ditto statuettes;
Ditto and ditto rings;
Ditto and ditto bracelets;
Ditto and ditto images;
Ditto and ditto toilet articles;
Ditto and ditto vases;
Ditto and ditto flasks;
Relics of Parthenope;
Ditto of Baiae;
Ditto of Misenum;
Ditto of Paestum;
Ditto of Herculaneum;
Ditto of Pompeii;
Ditto of Capraea;
Ditto of Capua;
Ditto of Cumae--


And other places too numerous to mention; all supplied to order; all
of which are eaten by rust, and warranted to be covered by the canker
and the mould of antiquity.

The good guide earnestly pressed some interesting relics upon their
attention, but without marked success. And now, as the hour of dinner
approached, they made the best of their way to a neighboring inn,
which commanded a fine view of the bay. Emerging from the chamber the
guide followed them, offering his wares.

"Tell me," he cried, in a sonorous voice, "oh most noble Americans!
how much will you give for this most ancient vase?"

"Un' mezzo carlino," said Dick,

"Un' mezzo carlino!!!"

The man's hand, which had been uplifted to display the vase, fell
downward as he said this. His tall figure grew less and less distinct
as they went further away; but long after he was out of sight the
phantom of his reproachful face haunted their minds.

After dinner they went out on the piazza in front of the hotel. Two
Spanish ladies were there, whose dark eyes produced an instantaneous
effect upon the impressible heart of Buttons.

They sat side by side, leaning against the stone balustrade. They
were smoking cigarettes, and the effect produced by waving their
pretty hands as they took the cigarettes from their mouths was, to
say the least, bewildering.

Buttons awaited his opportunity, and did not have to wait long.
Whether it was that they were willing to give the young American a
chance, or whether it was really unavoidable, can not be said, but
certainly one of the fair Spaniards found that her cigarette had
gone out. A pretty look of despair, and an equally pretty gesture of
vexation, showed at once the state of things. Upon which Buttons
stepped up, and with a bow that would have done honor to Chesterfield,
produced a box of scented allumettes, and lighting one, gravely held
it forward. The fair Spaniard smiled bewitchingly, and bending
forward without hesitation to light her cigarette, brought her rosy
lips into bewildering proximity to Buttons's hand.

It was a trying moment.

The amiable expression of the ladies' faces, combined with the
softly-spoken thanks of the lady whom Buttons first addressed,
encouraged him. The consequence was, that in about five minutes more
he was occupying a seat opposite them, chatting as familiarly as
though he were an old playmate. Dick looked on with admiration; the
others with envy.

"How in the world does it happen," asked the Senator, "that Buttons
knows the lingo of every body he meets?"


[Illustration: A Trying Moment.]


"He can't help it," said Dick. "These Continental languages are all
alike; know one, and you've got the key to the others--that is with
French, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese."

"And look at him now!" cried the Senator, his eye beaming with
cordial admiration.

"You may well look at him!" sighed Dick. "Two such pretty girls as
these won't turn up again in a hurry. Spaniards too; I always admired
them." And he walked down to the shore humming to himself something
about "the girls of Cadiz."

The ladies informed Buttons that they were travelling with their
brother, and had been through Russia, Germany, England, France, and
were now traversing Italy; did not like the three first-mentioned
countries, but were charmed with Italy.

Their _naïveté_ was delightful. Buttons found out that the name of
one was Lucia, and the other Ida. For the life of him he did not know
which he admired most; but, on the whole, rather inclined to the one
to whom he had offered the light--Ida.

He was equally frank, and let them know his name, his country, his
Creed. They were shocked at his creed, pleased with his country and
amused at his name, which they pronounced, "Señor Bo-to-nes."

After about an hour their brother came. He was a small man, very
active, and full of vivacity. Instead of looking fiercely at the
stranger, he shook hands with him very cordially. Before doing this,
however, he took one short, quick survey of his entire person, from
felt hat down to his Congress boots. The consequence was that Buttons
deserted his companions, and went off with the ladies.

Dick took the lead of the party on the return home. They viewed the
conduct of Buttons with displeasure. The Senator did not show his
usual serenity. The party were all riding on donkeys. To do this on
the minute animals which the Neapolitans furnish it is necessary to
seat one's self on the stern of the animal, and draw the legs well
up, so that they may not trail on the ground. The appearance of the
rider from behind is that of a Satyr dressed in the fashion of the
nineteenth century. Nothing can be more ridiculous than the sight
of a figure dressed in a frock-coat and beaver hat, and terminated
by the legs and tail of a donkey.

As it was getting late the party harried. The donkeys were put on the
full gallop. First rode the guide, then the others, last of whom was
the Senator, whose great weight was a sore trial to the little donkey.

They neared Pozzuoli, when suddenly the Senator gave his little beast
a smart whack to hasten his steps. The donkey lost all patience. With
a jump he leaped forward. Away he went, far ahead of the others. The
saddle whose girth was rather old, slipped off. The Senator held on
tightly. In vain! Just as he rounded a corner formed by a projecting
sandbank the donkey slipped. Down went the rider; down went the donkey
also--rider and beast floundering in the dusty road.

A merry peal of ill-suppressed laughter came from the road-side as he
rolled into view. It came from a carriage. In the carriage were the
Spaniards--there, too, was Buttons.


[Illustration: Senator And Donkey.]




CHAPTER IX.


A DRIVE INTO THE COUNTRY.--A FIGHT WITH A VETTURINO.--THE EFFECT OF
EATING "HARD BOILED EGGS."--WHAT THEY SAW AT PAESTUM.--FIVE TEMPLES
AND ONE "MILL."


To hire a carriage in Naples for any length of time is by no means
an easy thing. It is necessary to hold long commune with the
proprietor, to exert all the wiles of masterly diplomacy to circumvent
cunning by cunning, to exert patience, skill, and eloquence. After a
decision has been reached, there is but one way in which you can hold
your vetturino to his bargain, and that is to bind him to it by
securing his name to a contract. Every vetturino has a printed form
all ready. If he can't write his name, he does something equally
binding and far simpler. He dips his thumb in the ink-bottle and
stamps it on the paper. If that is not his signature, what else
is it?

"Thus," said one, "Signor Adam signed the marriage-contract with
Signora Eva."

After incredible difficulties a contract had been drawn up and
signed by the horny thumb of a certain big vetturino, who went by the
name of "II Piccolo." It was to the effect that, for a certain
specified sum, Il Piccolo should take the party to Paestum and back
with a detour to Sorrento.

It was a most delightful morning. All were in the best of spirits.
So they started. On for miles through interminable streets of houses
that bordered the circular shore, through crowds of sheep, droves of
cattle, dense masses of human beings, through which innumerable
caleches darted like meteors amid the stars of heaven. Here came the
oxen of Southern Italy, stately, solemn, long-horned, cream-colored;
there marched great droves of Sorrento hogs--the hog of hogs--a
strange but not ill-favored animal, thick in hide, leaden in color,
hairless as a hippopotamus. The flesh of the Sorrento hog bears the
same relation to common pork that "Lubin's Extrait" bears to the
coarse scent of a country grocery. A pork-chop from the Sorrento
animal comes to the palate with the force of a new revelation; it is
the highest possibility of pork--the apotheosis of the pig! Long lines
of macaroni-cooks doing an enormous business; armies of dealers in
anisette; crowds of water-carriers; throngs of fishermen, carrying
nets and singing merry songs--"Ecco mi!" "Ecco la!"--possible
Massaniellos every man of them, I assure you, Sir. And--enveloping
all, mingling with all, jostling all, busy with the busiest, idle
with the idlest, noisy with the noisest, jolly with the jolliest,
the fat, oily, swarthy, rosy--(etc., for further epithets see
preceding pages)--_Lazaroni_!

Every moment produces new effects in the ever-shifting scenes of
Naples. Here is the reverse of monotony; if any thing becomes
wearisome, it is the variety. Here is the monotony of incessant
change. The whole city, with all its vast suburbs, lives on the
streets.

The Senator wiped his fevered brow. He thought that for crowds,
noise, tumult, dash, hurry-skurry, gayety, life, laughter, joyance,
and all that incites to mirth, and all that stirs the soul, even New
York couldn't hold a candle to Naples.

Rabelais ought to have been a Neapolitan.

Then, as the city gradually faded into the country, the winding road
opened up before them with avenues of majestic trees--overhanging,
arching midway--forming long aisles of shade. Myrtles, that grew up
into trees, scented the air. Interminable groves of figs and oranges
spread away up the hill, intermingled with the darker foliage of the
olive or cypress.

The mountains come lovingly down to bathe their feet in the sea. The
road winds among them. There is a deep valley around which rise lofty
hills topped with white villages or ancient towers, or dotted with
villas which peep forth from amid dense groves. As far as the eye can
reach the vineyards spread away. Not as in France or Germany,
miserable sandy fields with naked poles or stunted bushes; but
vast extents of trees, among which the vines leap in wild luxuriance,
hanging in long festoons from branch to branch, or intertwining with
the foliage.

"I don't know how it is," said the Senator, "but I'm cussed if I feel
as if this here country was ground into the dust. If it is, it is no
bad thing to go through the mill. I don't much wonder that these
_I_talians don't emigrate. If I owned a farm in this neighborhood I'd
stand a good deal of squeezin' before I'd sell out and go anywheres
else."

At evening they reached Salerno, a watering-place the sea-coast, and
Naples in miniature.

There is no town in Italy without its opera-house or theatre, and
among the most vivid and most precious of scenic delights the
pantomime commends itself to the Italian bosom. Of course there was a
pantomime at Salerno. It was a mite of a house; on a rough calculation
thirty feet by twenty; a double tier of boxes; a parquette about
twelve feet square; and a stage of about two-thirds that size.

Yet behold what the ingenuity of man can accomplish! On that stage
there were performed all the usual exhibitions of human passion, and
they even went into the production of great scenic displays, among
which a great storm in the forest was most prominent.

Polichinello was in his glory! On this occasion the joke of the
evening was an English traveller. The ideal Englishman on the
Continent is a never-failing source of merriment. The presence of
five Americans gave additional piquancy to the show. The corpulent,
double-chinned, red-nosed Englishman, with knee-breeches,
shoe-buckles, and absurd coat, stamped, swore, frowned, doubled up
his fists, knocked down waiters, scattered gold right and left, was
arrested, was tried, was fined; but came forth unterrified from every
persecution, to rave, to storm, to fight, to lavish money as before.

How vivid were the flashes of lightning produced by touching off some
cotton-wool soaked in alcohol! How terrific the peals of thunder
produced by the vibrations of a piece of sheet-iron! Whatever was
deficient in mechanical apparatus was readily supplied by the powerful
imagination of the Italians, who, though they had often seen all this
before, were not at all weary of looking at it, but enjoyed the
thousandth repetition as much as the first.

Those merry Italians!

There is an old, old game played by every vetturino.

When our travellers had returned to the hotel, and were enjoying
themselves in general conversation, the vetturino bowed himself in.
He was a good deal exercised in his mind. With a great preamble he
came to his point. As they intended to start early in the morning,
he supposed they would not object to settle their little bill now.

"_What_!" shouted Buttons, jumping up. "What bill? Settle a bill?
_We_ settle a bill? Are you mad?"

"Your excellencies intend to settle the bill, of course," said the
vetturino, with much phlegm.

"Our excellencies never dreamed of any such thing."

"Not pay? Ha! ha! You jest, Signor."

"Do you see this?" said Buttons, solemnly producing the contract.

"Well?" responded Il Piccolo.

"What is this?"

"Our contract."

"Do you know what it is that you have engaged to do?"

"To take you to Paestum."

"Yes; to Paestum and back, with a detour to Sorrento. Moreover, you
engage to supply us with three meals a day and lodgings, to all of
which we engage to pay a certain sum. What, then," cried Buttons,
elevating his voice, "in the name of all the blessed saints and
apostles, do you mean by coming to us about hotel bills?"

"Signor," said the vetturino, meekly, "when I made that contract I
fear I was too sanguine."

"Too sanguine!"

"And I have changed my mind since."

"Indeed?"

"I find that I am a poor man."

"Did you just find that out?"

"And that if I carry out this it will ruin me."

"Well?"

"So you'll have to pay for the hotel expenses yourselves," said
Il Piccolo, with desperation.

"I will forgive this insufferable insolence," said Buttons,
Majestically, "on condition that it never occurs again. Do you
see that?" he cried, in louder tones.

And he unfolded the contract, which he had been holding in his hand,
and sternly pointed to the big blotch of ink that was supposed to be
II Piccolo's signature.

"_Do you see that_!" he cried, in a voice of thunder.

The Italian did not speak.

"And _that_?" he cried, pointing to the signature of the witness.

The Italian opened his month to speak, but was evidently nonplused.

"You are in my power!" said Buttons, in a fine melodramatic tone, and
with a vivacity of gesture that was not without its effect on the
Italian. He folded the contract, replaced it in his breast-pocket, and
slapped it with fearful emphasis. Every slap seemed to go to the heart
of Il Piccolo.


[Illustration: Do You See That?]


"If you dare to try to back out of this agreement I'll have you up
before the police. I'll enforce the awful penalty that punishes the
non-performance of a solemn engagement. I'll have you arrested by
the Royal Guards in the name of His Majesty the King, and cause you
to be incarcerated in the lowest dungeons of St. Elmo. Besides, I
won't pay you for the ride thus far."

With this last remark Buttons walked to the door, and without another
word opened it, and motioned to Il Piccolo to leave. The vetturino
departed in silence.

On the following morning he made his appearance as pleasant as though
nothing had happened.

The carriage rolled away from Salerno. Broad fields stretched away on
every side. Troops of villagers marched forth to their labor. As they
went on they saw women working in the fields, and men lolling on the
fences.

"Do you call that the stuff for a free country?" cried the Senator,
whose whole soul rose up in arms against such a sight. "Air these
things men? or can such slaves as these women seem to be give birth
to any thing but slaves?"

"Bravo!" cried Buttons.

The Senator was too indignant to say more, and so fell into a fit of
musing.

"Dick," said Buttons, after a long pause, "you are as pale as a ghost.
I believe you must be beginning to feel the miasma from these plains."

"Oh no," said Dick, dolefully; "something worse."

"What's the matter?"

"Do you remember the eggs we had for dinner last evening?"

"Yes."

"That's what's the matter," said Dick, with a groan. "I can't explain;
but this, perhaps, will tell thee all I feel."

He took from his pocket a paper and handed it to Buttons. Around the
margin were drawn etchings of countless fantastic figures,
illustrating the following lines:


A NIGHTMARE.


"_Gorgons, and hydras, and chimeras dire_."


BY A VICTIM.


  Eggs! Eggs!! Eggs!!!
    Hard boiled eggs for tea!
  And oh! the horrible nightmare dream
    They brought to luckless me!

  The hippopotamus came;
    He sat upon my chest:
  The hippopotamus roared "I'll spot him!" as
    He trampled upon my breast.

  The big iguanodon hunched
    And rooted in under me:
  The big iguanodon raised by that pan o' done
    Overdone eggs for tea.

  The ichthyosaurus tried
    To roll me up in a ball;
  While all the three were grinning at me,
    And pounding me, bed and all.

  Hip! hip! hurrah!
    It was a little black pig,
  And a big bull-frog, and a bobtailed dog--
    All of them dancing a jig.

  And oh, the snakes! the snakes!
    And the boa constrictor too!
  And the cobra capello--a terrible fellow--
    Came to my horrified view.

  Snakes and horrible beasts,
    Frog, pig, and dog
  Hustled me, pushed me, tickled me, crushed me,
    Rolled me about like a log.

  The little blue devils came on;
    They rode on a needle's point;
  And the big giraffe, with asthmatic laugh,
    And legs all out of joint.

  Bats crawled into my ears,
    Hopping about in my brain;
  And grizzly bears rode up on mares,
    And then rode down again.

  An antediluvian roared,
    In the form of a Brahmin bull;
  And a Patagonian squeezed an onion,
    Filling my aching eyes full.

  The three blue bottles that sat
    Upon the historical stones
  Sang, "Hey diddle diddle"--two on a fiddle,
    The other one on the bones.

  "Whoo! whoo! whoo!
    Get up, get up, you beauty!
  Here come the shaved monkeys, a-ridlng on donkeys,
    Fresh from Bobberty Shooty."

  They raised me up in the air,
    Bed, body, and all,
  And carried me soon to the man in the moon,
    At the siege of Sebastopol.

  Down, down, down,
    Round, round, round,
  A whirlpool hurled me out of the world,
    And on, no bottom I found.

  Down, down, down,
    Whirl, whirl, whirl,
  And the Florentine boar was pacing the shore,
    His tail all out of curl.

  He smoked my favorite pipe,
    He blew a cloud of smoke,
  He pulled me out with his porcine snout,
    And hugging him, I awoke.


"Why, Dick," cried the Senator, "what precious nonsense!"

"It was intended to be so," said Dick.

"Well, but you might as well put on an _idee_. It must have some
meaning."

"Not a bit of it. It has no meaning; that is, no more than a dream
or a nightmare."

The Senator now began to discuss the nature of poetry, but was
suddenly interrupted by a shout--

"The Temples!"

The country about Paestum is one of the most beautiful in the world.
Between the mountains and the sea lies a luxuriant plain, and in the
middle of it is the ruined city. The outlines of walls and remnants of
gates are there. Above all rise five ancient edifices. They strolled
carelessly around. The marble floors of a good many private houses
are yet visible, but the stupendous temples are the chief attractions
here; above all, the majestic shrine of Neptune.

It was while standing with head thrown back, eyes and mouth opened
wide, and thoughts all taken up with a deep calculation, that the
Senator was startled by a sudden noise.

Turning hastily he saw something that made him run with the speed of
the wind toward the place where the noise arose. Buttons and Dick were
surrounded by a crowd of fierce-looking men, who were making very
threatening demonstrations. There were at least fifteen. As the
Senator ran up from one direction, so came up Mr. Figgs and the Doctor
from another.

"What is this?" cried the Senator, bursting in upon the crowd.

A huge Italian was shaking his fist in Buttons's face, and stamping
and gesticulating violently.

"These men say we must pay five piastres each to them for strolling
about their ground, and Buttons has told this big fellow that he will
give them five kicks each. There'll be some kind of a fight. They
belong to the Camorra." Dick said all this in a hurried under-tone.

"Camorry, what's that--brigands?"

"All the same."

"They're not armed, anyhow."

Just at this moment Buttons said something which seemed to sting the
Italians to the soul, for with a wild shout they rushed forward. The
Doctor drew out his revolver. Instantly Dick snatched it from him,
and rushing forward, drove back the foremost. None of them were armed.

"Stand off!" he cried, in Italian. "The fight is between this big
fellow and my friend. If any one of you interferes I'll put a bullet
through him."

The Italians fell back cursing. Buttons instantly divested himself of
his coat, vest, and collar. The Italian waited with a grim smile.

At one end were the Senator, the Doctor, Mr. Figgs; at the other the
Italian ruffians. In the middle Buttons and his big antagonist. Near
them Dick with his pistol.

The scene that followed had better be described in Dick's own words,
as he pencilled them in his memorandum-book, from time to time,
keeping a sharp lookout with his pistol also. Afterward the
description was retouched:


_Great mill at Paestum, between E. BUTTONS, Esq., Gentleman, and
Italian party called BEPPO_.

_1st Round_.--Beppo defiant, no attitude at all. Buttons assumed an
elegant pose. Beppo made a succession of wild strokes without any
aim, which were parried without effort. After which Buttons landed
four blows, one on each peeper, one on the smeller, and one on the
mug.

_First blood for Buttons_. Beppo considerably surprised. Rushed
furiously at Buttons, arms flying everywhere, struck over Buttons's
head. Buttons lightly made obeisance, and then fired a hundred-pounder
on Beppo's left auricular, which had the effect of bringing him to the
grass. _First knock down for Buttons_.

_2nd Round_.--Foreign population quite dumbfounded. Americans amused
but not excited. One hundred to one on Buttons eagerly offered, but no
takers. Beppo jumped to his feet like a wild cat. Eyes encircled with
ebon aurioles, olfactory quite demolished. Made a rush at Buttons,
who, being a member of the Dodge Club, dodged him, and landed a
rattler on the jugular, which again sent foreign party to grass.

_3d Round_.--Nimble to the scratch. Beppo badly mashed and raving.
Buttons unscathed and laughing; Beppo more cautious made a faint
attempt to get into Buttons. No go. Tried a little sparing, which
was summarily ended by a cannonade from Buttons directly in
his countenance.

_4th Round_.--Foreigners wild. Yelling to their man to go in. Don't
understand a single one of the rules of the P.R. Very benighted.
Need missionaries. Evinced strong determination to go in themselves,
but where checked by attitude of referee, who threatened to blow out
brains of first man that interfered. Beppo's face magnified
considerably. Appearance not at all prepossessing. Much distressed but
furious. Made a bound at Buttons, who calmly, and without any apparent
effort, met him with a terrific upper cut, which made the Italian's
gigantic frame tremble like a ship under the stroke of a big wave. He
tottered, and swung his arms, trying to regain his balance, when
another annihilator most cleanly administered by Buttons laid him low.
A great tumult rose among the foreigners. Beppo lay panting with no
determination to come to the scratch. At the expiration of usual time,
opponent not appearing. Buttons was proclaimed victor. Beppo very much
mashed. Foreigners very greatly cowed. After waiting a short time
Buttons resumed his garments and walked off with his friends.


[Illustration: The Mill At Paestum.]


After the victory the travellers left Paestum on their return.

The road that turns off to Sorrento is the most beautiful in the
world. It winds along the shore with innumerable turnings, climbing
hills, descending into valleys, twining around precipices. There are
scores of the prettiest villages under the sun, ivy-covered ruins,
frowning fortresses, lofty towers, and elegant villas.

At last Sorrento smiles out from a valley which is proverbial for
beauty, where, within its shelter of hills, neither the hot blast
of midsummer nor the cold winds of winter can ever disturb its
repose. This is the valley of perpetual spring, where fruits
forever grow, and the seasons all blend together, so that the same
orchard shows trees in blossom and bearing fruit.




CHAPTER X.


ON THE WATER, WHERE BUTTONS SEES A LOST IDEA AND GIVES CHASE TO IT,
TOGETHER WITH THE HEART-SICKENING RESULTS THEREOF.


On the following morning Buttons and Dick went a little way out of
town, and down the steep cliff toward the shore.

It was a classic spot. Here was no less a place than the cave of
Polyphemus, where Homer, at least, may have stood, if Ulysses didn't.
And here is the identical stone with which the giant was wont to
block up the entrance to his cavern.

The sea rolled before. Away down to the right was Vesuvius, starting
from which the eye took in the whole wide sweep of the shore, lined
with white cities, with a background of mountains, till the land
terminated in bold promontories.

Opposite was the Isle of Capri.

Myriads of white sails flashed across the sea. One of these arrested
the attention of Buttons, and so absorbed him that he stared fixedly
at it for half an hour without moving.

At length an exclamation burst from him:

"By Jove! It is! It is!"

"What is? What is?"

"The Spaniards!"

"Where?"

"In that boat."

"Ah!" said Dick, coolly, looking at the object pointed out by
Buttons.

It was an English sail-boat, with a small cabin and an immense
sail. In the stern were a gentleman and two ladies. Buttons was
confident that they were the Spaniards.


[Illustration: The Spaniards.]


"Well," said Dick, "what's the use of getting so excited about
it?"

"Why, I'm going back to Naples by water!"

"Are you? Then I'll go too. Shall we leave the others?"

"Certainly not, if they want to come with us."

Upon inquiry they found that the others had a strong objection to
going by sea. Mr. Figgs preferred the ease of the carriage. The
Doctor thought the sea air injurious. The Senator had the honesty
to confess that he was afraid of seasickness. They would not listen
to persuasion, but were all resolutely bent on keeping to the
carriage.

Buttons exhibited a feverish haste in searching after a boat. There
was but little to choose from among a crowd of odd-looking
fishing-boats that crowded the shore. However, they selected the
cleanest from among them, and soon the boat, with her broad sail
spread, was darting over the sea.

The boat of which they went in pursuit was far away over near the
other shore, taking long tacks across the bay. Buttons headed his
boat so as to meet the other on its return tack.

It was a magnificent scene. After exhausting every shore view of
Naples, there is nothing like taking to the water. Every thing
then appears in a new light. The far, winding cities that surround
the shore, the white villages, the purple Apennines, the rocky
isles, the frowning volcano.

This is what makes Naples supreme in beauty. The peculiar combinations
of scenery that are found there make rivalry impossible. For if you
find elsewhere an equally beautiful bay, you will not have so liquid
an atmosphere; if you have a shore with equal beauty of outline, and
equal grace in its long sweep of towering headland and retreating
slope, you will not have so deep a purple on the distant hills. Above
all, nowhere else on earth has Nature placed in the very centre of so
divine a scene the contrasted terrors of the black volcano.

Watching a chase is exciting; but taking part in it is much more so.
Buttons had made the most scientific arrangements. He had calculated
that at a certain point on the opposite shore the other boat would
turn on a new tack, and that if he steered to his boat to a point
about half-way over, he would meet them, without appearing to be in
pursuit. He accordingly felt so elated at the idea that he burst
forth into song.

The other boat at length had passed well over under the shadow of
the land. It did not turn. Further and further over, and still it
did not change its course. Buttons still kept the course which he
had first chosen; but finding that he was getting far out of the way
of the other boat, he was forced to turn the head of his boat
closer to the wind, and sail slowly, watching the others.

There was an island immediately ahead of the other boat. What was his
dismay at seeing it gracefully pass beyond the outer edge of the
island, turn behind it, and vanish. He struck the taffrail furiously
with his clenched hand. However, there was no help for it; so,
changing his course, he steered in a straight line after the other,
to where it had disappeared.

Now that the boat was out of sight Dick did not feel himself called
on to watch. So he went forward into the bow, and made himself a snug
berth, where he laid down; and lighting his pipe, looked dreamily out
through a cloud of smoke upon the charming scene. The tossing of the
boat and the lazy flapping of the sails had a soothing influence. His
nerves owned the lulling power. His eyelids grew heavy and gently
descended.

The wind and waves and islands and sea and sky, all mingled together
in a confused mass, came before his mind. He was sailing on clouds,
and chasing Spanish ladies through the sky. The drifting currents of
the air bore them resistlessly along in wide and never-ending curves
upward in spiral movements towards the zenith; and then off in
ever-increasing speed, with ever-widening gyrations, toward the
sunset, where the clouds grew red, and lazaroni grinned from behind--

A sudden bang of the huge sail struck by the wind, a wild creaking
of the boom, and a smart dash of spray over the bows and into his
face waked him from his slumber. He started up, half blinded, to
look around. Buttons sat gazing over the waters with an expression
of bitter vexation. They had passed the outer point of the island,
and had caught a swift current, a chopping sea, and a brisk breeze.
The other boat was nowhere to be seen. Buttons had already headed back
again.

"I don't see the other boat," said Dick. Buttons without a word
pointed to the left. There she was. She had gone quietly around the
island, and had taken the channel between it and the shore. All the
time that she had been hidden she was steadily increasing the distance
between them.

"There's no help for it," said Dick, "but to keep straight after
them."

Buttons did not reply, but leaned back with a sweet expression of
patience. The two boats kept on in this way for a long time; but
the one in which our friends had embarked was no match at all for
the one they were pursuing. At every new tack this fact became more
painfully evident. The only hope for Buttons was to regain by his
superior nautical skill what he might lose. Those in the other boat
had but little skill in sailing. These as length became aware that
they were followed, and regarded their pursuers with earnest
attention. It did not seem to have any effect.

"They know we are after them at last!" said Dick.

"I wonder if they can recognize us?"

"If they do they have sharp eyes. I'll be hanged if I can recognize
them. I don't see how you can."

"Instinct, Dick--instinct!" said Buttons, with animation.

"What's that flashing in their boat?"

"That?" said Buttons. "It's a spy-glass. I didn't notice it before."

"I've seen it for the last half-hour."

"Then they most recognize us. How strange that they don't slacken a
little! Perhaps we are not in full view. I will sit a little more
out the shade of the sail, so that they can recognize me."

Accordingly Buttons moved out to a more conspicuous place, and Dick
allowed himself to be more visible. Again the flashing brass was seen
in the boat, and they could plainly perceive that it was passed from
one to the other, while each took a long survey.

"They must be able to see us if they have any kind of a glass at all."

"I should think so," said Buttons, dolefully.

"Are you sure they are the Spaniards?"

"Oh! quite."

"Then I must say they might be a little more civil, and not keep
us racing after them forever!"

"Oh, I don't know; I suppose they wouldn't like to sail close up
to us."

"They needn't sail up to us, but they might give us a chance to hail
them."

"I don't think the man they have with them looks like Señor Francia."

"Francia? Is that his name? He certainly looks larger. He is larger."

"Look!"

As Buttons spoke the boat ahead fell rapidly to leeward. The wind had
fallen, and a current which they had struck upon bore them away. In
the effort to escape from the current the boat headed toward Buttons,
and when the wind again arose she continued to sail toward them. As
they came nearer Buttons's face exhibited a strange variety of
expressions.


[Illustration: A Thousand Pardons!]


They met.

In the other boat sat two English ladies and a tall gentleman, who
eyed the two young men fixedly, with a "stony British stare."

"A thousand pardons!" said Buttons, rising and bowing. "I mistook you
for some acquaintances."

Whereupon the others smiled in a friendly way, bowed, and said
something. A few commonplaces were interchanged, and the boats drifted
away out of hearing.




CHAPTER XI.


THE SENATOR HAS SUCH A FANCY FOR SEEKING USEFUL INFORMATION!--CURIOUS
POSITION OF A WISE, AND WELL-KNOWN, AND DESERVEDLY-POPULAR LEGISLATOR,
AND UNDIGNIFIED MODE OF HIS ESCAPE.


It was not much after ten in the morning when Buttons and Dick
returned. On reaching the hotel they found Mr. Figgs and the Doctor,
who asked them if they had seen the Senator. To which they replied by
putting the same question to their questioners.

He had not been seen since they had all been together last. Where was
he?

Of course there was no anxiety felt about him, but still they all
wished to have him near at hand, as it was about time for them to
leave the town. The vetturino was already grumbling, and it required
a pretty strong remonstrance from Buttons to silence him.

They had nothing to do but to wait patiently. Mr. Figgs and the Doctor
lounged about the sofas. Buttons and Dick strolled about the town.
Hearing strains of music as they passed the cathedral, they turned in
there to listen to the service. Why there should be service, and full
service too, they could not imagine.

"Can it be Sunday, Dick?" said Buttons, gravely.

"Who can tell?" exclaimed Dick, lost in wonder.

The cathedral was a small one, with nave and transept as usual, and in
the Italian Gothic style. At the end of the nave stood the high altar,
which was now illuminated with wax-candles, while priests officiated
before it. At the right extremity of the transact was the organ-loft,
a somewhat unusual position; while at the opposite end of the transept
was a smaller door. The church was moderately filled. Probably there
were as many people there as it ever had. They knelt on the floor with
their faces toward the altar, Finding the nave somewhat crowded,
Buttons and Dick went around to the door at the end of the transept,
and entered there. A large space was empty as far as the junction with
the nave. Into this the two young men entered, very reverently, and on
coming near to the place where the other worshipers were they knelt
down in the midst of them.

While looking before him, with his mind full of thoughts called up by
the occasion, and while the grand music of one of Mozart's masses was
filling his soul, Buttons suddenly felt his arm twitched. He turned.
It was Dick.

Buttons was horrified. In the midst of this solemn scene the young
man was convulsed with laughter. His features were working, his lips
moving, as he tried to whisper something which his laughter prevented
him from saying, and tears were in his eyes. At last he stuck his
handkerchief in his mouth and bowed down very low, while his whole
frame shook. Some of the worshipers near by looked scandalized,
others shocked, others angry. Buttons felt vexed. At last Dick raised
his face and rolled his eyes toward the organ-loft, and instantly
bowed his head again. Buttons looked up mechanically, following the
direction of Dick's glance. The next instant he too fell forward,
tore his handkerchief out of his pocket, while his whole frame shook
with the most painful convulsion of laughter.

And how dreadful is such a convulsion in a solemn place! In a church,
amid worshipers; perhaps especially amid worshipers of another creed,
for then one is suspected of offering deliberate insult. So it was
here. People near saw the two young men, and darted angry looks at
them.

Now what was it that had so excited two young men, who were by no
means inclined to offer insult to any one, especially in religious
matters?

It was this: As they looked up to the organ-loft they saw a figure
there.

The organ projected from the wall about six feet; on the left side
was the handle worked by the man who blew it, and a space for the
choir. On the right was a small narrow space not more than about
three feet wide, and it was in this space that they saw the figure
which produced such an effect on them.

It was the Senator. He stood there erect, bare-headed of course,
with confusion in his face and vexation and bewilderment. The sight
of him was enough--the astonishing position of the man, in such a
place at such a time. But the Senator was looking eagerly for help.
And he had seen them enter, and all his soul was in his eyes, and all
his eyes were fixed on those two.

As Dick looked up startled and confounded at the sight, the Senator
projected his head as far forward as he dared, frowned, nodded, and
then began working his lips violently as certain deaf and dumb people
do, who converse by such movements, and can understand what words are
said by the shape of the mouth in uttering them. But the effect was
to make the Senator buck like a man who was making grimaces, to
wager, like those in Victor Hugo's "Notre Dame." As such the
apparition was so over-powering that neither Buttons nor Dick dared
to look up for some time. What made it worse, each was conscious that
the other was laughing, so that self-control was all the more
difficult. Worse still, each knew that this figure in the organ-loft
was watching them with his hungry glance, ready the moment that they
looked up to begin his grimaces once more.

"That poor Senator!" thought Buttons; "how did he get there? Oh, how
did he get there?"

Yet how could he be rescued? Could he be? No. He must wait till the
service should be over.

Meanwhile the young men mustered sufficient courage to look up again,
and after a mighty struggle to gaze upon the Senator for a few
seconds at a time at least. There he stood, projecting forward his
anxious face, making faces as each one looked up.


[Illustration: The Senator.]


Now the people in the immediate vicinity of the two young men had
noticed their agitation as has already been stated, and, moreover,
they had looked up to see the cause of it. They too saw the Senator.
Others again, seeing their neighbors looking up, did the same, until
at last all in the transept were staring up at the odd-looking
stranger.

As Buttons and Dick looked up, which they could not help doing often,
the Senator would repeat his mouthings, and nods, and becks, and
looks of entreaty. The consequence was, that the people thought the
stranger was making faces at them. Three hundred and forty-seven
honest people of Sorrento thus found themselves shamefully insulted
in their own church by a barbarous foreigner, probably an Englishman,
no doubt a heretic. The other four hundred and thirty-six who knelt
in the nave knew nothing about it. They could not see the organ-loft
at all. The priests at the high altar could not see it, so that they
were uninterrupted in their duties. The singers in the organ-loft saw
nothing, for the Senator was concealed from their view. Those
therefore who saw him were the people in the transept, who now kept
staring fixedly, and with angry eyes, at the man in the loft.

There was no chance of getting him out of that before the service
was over, and Buttons saw that there might be a serious tumult when
the Senator came down among that wrathful crowd. Every moment made it
worse. Those in the nave saw the agitation of those in the transept,
and got some idea of the cause.

At last the service was ended; the singers departed, the priests
retired, but the congregation remained. Seven hundred and eighty-three
human beings waiting to take vengeance on the miscreant who had
thrown ridicule on the Holy Father by making faces at the faithful
as they knelt in prayer. Already a murmur arose on every side.

"A heretic! A heretic! A blasphemer! He has insulted us!"

Buttons saw that a bold stroke alone could save them. He burst into
the midst of the throng followed by Dick.

"Fly!" he cried. "Fly for your lives! _It is a madman_! Fly! Fly!"

A loud cry of terror arose. Instantaneous conviction flashed on the
minds of all. A madman! Yes. He could be nothing else.

A panic arose. The people recoiled from before that terrible madman.
Buttons sprang up to the loft. He seized the Senator's arm and dragged
him down. The people fled in horror. As the Senator emerged he saw
seven hundred and eighty-three good people of Sorrento scampering away
like the wind across the square in front of the cathedral.

On reaching the hotel he told his story. He had been peering about
in search of useful information, and had entered the cathedral.
After going through every part he went up into the organ-loft. Just
then the singers came. Instead of going out like a man, he dodged
them from some absurd cause or other, with a half idea that he would
get into trouble for intruding. The longer he stayed the worse it
was for him. At last he saw Buttons and Dick enter, and tried to
make signals.

"Well," said Buttons, "we had better leave. The Sorrentonians will be
around here soon to see the maniac. They will find out all about him,
and make us acquainted with Lynch law."

In a quarter of an hour more they were on their way back to Naples.




CHAPTER XII.


HERCULANEUM AND POMPEII, AND ALL THAT THE SIGHT OF THOSE FAMOUS PLACES
PRODUCED ON THE MINDS OF THE DODGE CLUB.


They had already visited Herculaneum, but the only feeling which had
been awakened by the sight of that ill-fated city was one of
unmitigated disgust. As honesty was the chief characteristic of the
whole party, they did not hesitate to express themselves with the
utmost freedom on this subject. They hoped for better things from
Pompeii. At any rate Pompeii was above ground; what might be there
would be visible. No fuss with torches. No humbugging with lanterns.
No wandering through long black passages. No mountains bringing forth
mice.

Their expectations were encouraged as they walked up the street of
Tombs leading to the Herculaneum Gate. Tombs were all around, any
quantity, all sizes, little black vaults full of pigeon-holes. These
they narrowly examined, and when the guide wasn't looking they filled
their pockets with the ashes of the dead.

"Strange," quoth the Senator, musingly, "that these ancient Pompey
fellers should pick out this kind of a way of getting buried. This
must be the reason why people speak of urns and ashes when they speak
of dead people."


[Illustration: Villa Of Diomedes.]


They walked through the Villa of Diomedes. They were somewhat
disappointed. From guide-books, and especially from the remarkably
well-got-up Pompeian court at Sydenham Palace, Buttons had been led to
expect something far grander. But in this, the largest house in the
city, what did he find? Mites of rooms, in fact closets, in which even
a humble modern would find himself rather crowded. There was scarcely
a decent-sized apartment in the whole establishment, as they all
indignantly declared. The cellars were more striking. A number of
earthern vessels of enormous size were in one corner.

"What are these?" asked the Senator.

"Wine jars."

"What?"

"Wine jars. They didn't use wooden casks."

"The more fools they. Now do you mean to say that wooden casks are
not infinitely more convenient than these things that can't stand up
without they are leaned against the wall? Pho!"

At one corner the guide stopped, and pointing down, said something.

"What does he say?" asked the Senator.

"He says if you want to know how the Pompeians got choked, stoop down
and smell that. Every body who comes here is expected to smell this
particular spot, or he can't say that he has seen Pompeii."


[Illustration: Phew!]


So down went the five on their knees, and up again faster than they
went down. With one universal shout of: "Phew-w-w-w-w-h-h-h!"

It was a torrent of sulphurous vapor that they inhaled.

"Now, I suppose," said the Senator, as soon as he could speak,
"that that there comes direct in a bee-line through a subterranean
tunnel right straight from old Vesuvius."

"Yes, and it was this that suggested the famous scheme for
extinguishing the volcano."

"How? What famous scheme?"

"Why, an English stock-broker came here last year, and smelled this
place, as every one must do. An idea struck him. He started up. He ran
off without a word. He went straight to London. There he organized a
company. They propose to dig a tunnel from the sea to the interior of
the mountain. When all is ready they will let in the water. There will
be a tremendous hiss. The volcano will belch out steam for about six
weeks; but the result will be that the fires will be put out forever."

From the Villa of Diomedes they went to the gate where the guard-house
is seen. Buttons told the story of the sentinel who died there on
duty, embellishing it with a few new features of an original
character.

"Now that may be all very well," said the Senator, "but don't ask me
to admire that chap, or the Roman army, or the system. It was all
hollow. Why, don't you see the man was a blockhead? He hadn't sense
enough to see that when the whole place was going to the dogs, it was
no good stopping to guard it. He'd much better have cleared out and
saved his precious life for the good of his country. Do you suppose a
Yankee would act that way?"

"I should suppose not."

"That man, Sir, was a machine, and nothing more. A soldier must know
something else than merely obeying orders."

By this time they had passed through the gate and stood inside. The
street opened before them for a considerable distance with houses on
each side. Including the sidewalks it might have been almost twelve
feet wide. As only the lower part of the walls of the houses was
standing, the show that they made was not imposing. There was no
splendor in the architecture or the material, for the style of the
buildings was extremely simple, and they were made with brick covered
with stucco.

After wandering silently through the streets the Senator at length
burst forth:

"I say it's an enormous imposition!"

"What?" inquired Buttons, faintly.

"Why, the whole system of Cyclopedias, Panoramas, Books of Travel,
Woodbridge's Geography, Sunday-school Books--"

"What do you mean?"

"I mean the descriptions they give of this place. The fellows who
write about it get into the heroics, and what with their descriptions,
and pictures, and moralizing, you believe it is a second Babylon. It
don't seem possible for any of them to tell the truth. Why, there
isn't a single decent-sized house in the place. Oh, it's small! it's
small!"

"It certainly might be larger."

"I know," continued the Senator, with a majestic wave of his hand--"I
know that I'm expected to find this here scene very impressive; but
I'll be hanged if I'm satisfied. Why, in the name of Heaven, when they
give us pictures of the place, can't they make things of the right
size? Why, I've seen a hundred pictures of that gate. They make it
look like a triumphant arch; and now that I'm here, durn me if I can't
touch the top of it when I stand on tiptoe."

In all his walk the Senator found only one thing that pleased him.
This was the celebrated Pompeian institution of a shop under the
dwelling-house.

"Whenever I see any signs of any thing like trade among these
ancients," said he, "I respect them. And what is more satisfactory
than to see a bake-shop or an eating-saloon in the lower story of
a palace?"

Their walk was terminated by the theatre and amphitheatre. The sight
of these were more satisfactory to the Senator.

"Didn't these fellows come it uncommon strong though in the matter
of shows?" he asked, with considerable enthusiasm. "Hey? Why,
we haven't got a single travelling circus, menagerie and all, that
could come any way near to this. After all, this town might have
looked well enough when it was all bran-new and painted up. It might
have looked so then; but, by thunder! it looks any thing but that
now. What makes me mad is to see every traveller pretend to get into
raptures about it now. Raptures be hanged! I ask you, as a sensible
man, is there any thing here equal to any town of the same population
in Massachusetts?"


[Illustration: A Street In Pompeii.]


Although the expectations which he had formed were not quite realized,
yet Buttons found much to excite interest after the first
disappointment had passed away. Dick excited the Senator's disgust
by exhibiting those, raptures which the latter had condemned.

The Doctor went by the Guide-book altogether, and regulated his
emotions accordingly. Having seen the various places enumerated there,
he wished no more. As Buttons and Dick wished to stroll further
among the houses, the other three waited for them in the amphitheatre,
where the Senator beguiled the time by giving his "idee" of an ancient
show.

It was the close of day before the party left. At the outer barrier an
official politely examined them. The result of the examination was
that the party was compelled to disgorge a number of highly
interesting souvenirs, consisting of lava, mosaic stones, ashes,
plaster, marble chips, pebbles, bricks, a bronze hinge, a piece of
bone, a small rag, a stick, etc.

The official apologized with touching politeness: "It was only a
form," he said. "Yet we must do it. For look you, Signori," and
here he shrugged up his shoulders, rolled his eyes, and puffed out
his lips in a way that was possible to none but an Italian, "were it
not thus the entire city would be carried away piecemeal!"




CHAPTER XIII.


VESUVIUS.--WONDERFUL ASCENT OF THE CONE.--WONDERFUL DESCENT INTO THE
CRATER.--AND MOST WONDERFUL DISAPPEARANCE OF MR. FIGGS, AFTER WHOM
ALL HIS FRIENDS GO, WITH THEIR LIVES IN THEIR HANDS.--GREAT SENSATION
AMONG SPECTATORS.


To every visitor to Naples the most prominent object is Vesuvius. The
huge form of the volcano forever stands before him. The long pennon of
smoke from its crater forever floats out triumphantly in the air. Not
in the landscape only, but in all the picture-shops. In these
establishments they really seem to deal in nothing but prints and
paintings of Vesuvius.

It was a lovely morning when a carriage, filled with Americans, drew
up on an inn near the foot of the mountain. There were guides
without number waiting, like beasts of prey, to fall on them; and
all the horses of the country--a wonderful lot--an amazing lot--a
lean, cranky, raw-boned, ill-fed, wall-eyed, ill-natured, sneaking,
ungainly, half-foundered, half-starved lot; afflicted with all the
diseases that horse-flesh is heir to. There were no others, so but
little time was wasted. All were on an equal footing. To have a
preference was out of the question, so they amused themselves with
picking out the ugliest.

When the horses were first brought out Mr. Figgs looked uneasy,
and made some mysterious remarks about walking. He thought such nags
were an imposition. He vowed they could go faster on foot. On foot!
The others scouted the idea. Absurd! Perhaps he wasn't used to such
beasts. Never mind. He mustn't be proud. Mr. Figgs, however, seemed
to have reasons which were strictly private, and announced his
intention of walking. But the others would not hear of such a thing.
They insisted. They forced him to mount. This Mr. Figgs at length
accomplished, though he got up on the wrong side, and nearly pulled
his horse over backward by pulling at the curb-rein, shouting all
the time, in tones of agony, "Who-a!"

At length they all set out, and, with few interruptions, arrived at
a place half-way up the mountain called The Hermitage. Here they
rested, and leaving their horses behind, walked on over a barren
region to the foot of the cone. All around was the abomination of
desolation. Craggy rocks, huge, disjointed masses of shattered
lava-blocks, cooled off into the most grotesque shapes, mixed with
ashes, scoriae, and pumice-stones. The cone towered frowningly above
their heads. Looking up, the aspect was not enticing. A steep slope
ran up for an immense distance till it touched the smoky canopy.

On one side it was covered with loose sand, but in other places it
was all overlaid with masses of lava fragments. The undertaking
seemed prodigious.

The Senator looked up with a weary smile, but did not falter; the
Doctor thought they would not be able to get up to the top, and
proposed returning; the others declined; whereupon the Doctor
slowly sauntered back to the Hermitage. Mr. Figgs, whom the ride had
considerably shaken, expressed a desire to ascend but felt doubtful
about his wind. Dick assured him that he would find plenty when he
got to the top. The guides also came to his relief. Did he want to
go? Behold them. They had chairs to carry him up or straps to pull
him. Their straps were so made that they could envelop the traveller
and allow him to be pulled comfortably up. So Mr. Figgs gracefully
resigned himself to the guides, who in a short time had adjusted
their straps, and led him to the foot of the cone.

Now for the ascent.


[Illustration: The Ascent Of Vesuvius.]


Buttons went first. Like a young chamois this youth bounded up,
leaping from rock to rock, and steering in a straight line for the
summit. Next the Senator, who mounted slowly and perseveringly, as
though he had a solemn duty to perform, and was determined to do it
thoroughly. Then came Dick. More fitful. A few steps upward: then a
rest; then a fresh start; followed by another rest. At length he sat
down about one-third of the way up and took a smoke. Behind him Mr.
Figgs toiled up, pulled by the panting guides. Three stout men in
front--two others boosting from behind.

A long description might be given of this remarkable ascent. How Mr.
Figgs aggravated the guides almost beyond endurance by mere force of
inertia. Having committed himself to them he did it thoroughly, and
not by one single act of exertion did he lessen their labor. They
pulled, pushed, and shouted; then they rested; then they rose again
to pull, to push, to shout, and to rest as before; then they implored
him in the most moving terms to do something to help them, to put
one foot before the other, to brace himself firmly--in short, to do
any thing.

In vain. Mr. Figgs didn't understand a word. He was unmovable. Then
they threatened to drop him and leave him half-way. The threat was
disregarded. Mr. Figgs sat on a stone while they rested and smiled
benignantly at them. At last, maddened by his impassibility, they
screamed at him and at one another with furious gesticulations, and
then tearing off the straps, they hurried up the slope, leaving him
on the middle of the mount to take care of himself.

It might be told how the Senator toiled up slowly but surely, never
stopping till he had gained the summit; or how Buttons, who arrived
there first, spent the time in exploring the mysteries of this
elevated region; or how Dick stopped every twenty paces to rest and
smoke; how he consumed much time and much tobacco; and how he did not
gain the summit until twenty minutes after the serene face of the
Senator had confronted the terrors of the crater.

Before these three there was a wonderful scene. Below them lay the
steep sides of the cone, a waste of hideous ruin--


  "Rocks, crags, and mounds confusedly hurled,
    The fragments of a ruined world."


Before them was the crater, a vast abyss, the bottom of which was
hidden from sight by dense clouds of sulphurous smoke which forever
ascended. Far away on the other side rose the opposite wall of
abyss--black, rocky cliffs that rose precipitously upward. The side
on which they stood sloped down at a steep angle for a few hundred
feet, and then went abruptly downward. A mighty wind was blowing
and carried all the smoke away to the opposite side of the crater,
so that by getting down into the shelter of a rock they were quite
comfortable.

The view of the country that lay beneath was superb. There lay
Naples with its suburbs, extending for miles along the shore, with
Portici, Castellamare, and the vale of Sorrento. There rose the hills
of Baiae, the rock of Ischia, and the Isle of Capri. There lay
countless vineyards, fields forever green, groves of orange and
fig-trees, clusters of palms and cypresses. Mountains ascended all
around, with many heights crowned with castles or villages. There lay
the glorious Bay of Naples, the type of perfect beauty. Hundreds of
white sails dotted the intense blue of its surface. Ships were
there at anchor, and in full sail. Over all was a sky such as is
seen only in Italy, with a depth of blue, which, when seen in
paintings, seems to the inexperienced eye like an exaggeration.

The guides drew their attention from all this beauty to a solid fact.
This was the cooking of an egg by merely burying it in the hot sand
for a few minutes.

Buttons now proposed to go down into the crater. The guides looked
aghast.

"Why not?"

"Impossible, Signor. It's death."

"Death? Nonsense! come along and show us the way."

"The way? There is no way. No one ever dares to go down. Where can
we go to? Do you not see that beyond that point where the rock
projects it is all a precipice?"

"That point? Well, that is the very spot I wish to go to. Come
along."

"Never, Signor."

"Then I'll go."

"Don't. For the sake of Heaven, and in the name of the most Holy
Mother, of St. Peter in chains, of all the blessed Apostles and
Martyrs, the glorious Saints and--"

"Blessed Botheration," cried Buttons, abruptly turning his back
and preparing to descend.

"Are you in earnest, Buttons?" asked Dick. "Are you really going
down?"

"Certainly."

"Oh, then I'll go too."

Upon this the others warned, rebuked, threatened, remonstrated,
and begged. In vain. The Senator interposed the authority of years
and wisdom. But to no purpose. With much anxiety he sat on the edge
of the crater, looking for the result and expecting a tragedy.

The slope down which they ventured was covered with loose sand. At
each step the treacherous soil slid beneath them. It was a mad and
highly reprehensible undertaking. Nevertheless down they went--further
and further. The kind heart of the Senator felt a pang at every step.
His voice sounded mournfully through the rolling smoke that burst
through a million crevices, and at times hid the adventurers from
view. But down they went. Sometimes they slid fearfully. Then they
would wait and cautiously look around. Sometimes the vapors covered
them with such dense folds that they had to cover their faces.

"If they ain't dashed to pieces they'll be suffocated--sure!" cried
the Senator, starting up, and unable to control his feelings. "I can't
stand this," he muttered, and he too stepped down.

The guides looked on in horror. "Your blood will be on your own
heads!" they cried.

As the Senator descended the smoke entered his eyes, month, and
nostrils, making him cough and sneeze fearfully. The sand slid; the
heat under the surface pained his feet; every step made it worse.
However, he kept on bravely. At length he reached the spot where the
others were standing.


[Illustration: The Descent Of Vesuvius.]


At the foot of the declivity was an angular rock which jutted out
for about twelve feet. It was about six feet wide. Its sides went
down precipitously. The Senator walked painfully to where they were
standing. It was a fearful scene. All around arose the sides of
the crater, black and rocky, perpendicular on all sides, except
the small slope down which they had just descended--a vast and
gloomy circumference. But the most terrific sight lay beneath.

The sides of the crater went sheer down to a great depth enclosing
a black abyss which in the first excitement of the scene the
startled fancy might well imagine extending to the bowels of the
earth from which there came rolling up vast clouds dense black
sulphurous which at times completely encircled them shutting out
every thing from view filling eyes nose mouth with fumes of
brimstone forcing them to hold the tails of their coats or
the skirts it's all the same over their faces so as not to be
altogether suffocated while again after a while a fierce blast
of wind driving downward would hurl the smoke away and dashing it
against the other side of the crater gather it up in dense volumes
of blackest smoke in thick clouds which rolled up the flinty cliffs
and reaching the summit bounded fiercely out into the sky to pass
on and be seen from afar as that dread pennant of Vesuvius which is
the sign and symbol of its mastery over the earth around it and the
inhabitants thereof ever changing and in all its changes watched with
awe by fearful men who read in those changes their own fate now
taking heart as they see it more tenuous in its consistency anon
shuddering as they see it gathering in denser folds and finally
awe-stricken and all overcome as they see the thick black cloud rise
proudly up to heaven in a long straight column at whose upper
termination the colossal pillar spreads itself out and shows to the
startled gaze the dread symbol of the cypress tree the herald of
earthquakes eruptions and--

--There--I flatter myself that in the way of description it would not
be easy to beat the above. I just throw it off as my friend Tit-marsh,
poor fellow, once said, to show what I could do if I tried. I have
decided not to put punctuation marks there, but rather to let each
reader supply them for himself. They are often in the way,
particularly to the writer, when he has to stop in the full flow
of a description and insert them--

But--

We left our friends down in the crater of Vesuvius. Of course they
hurried out as soon as they could, and mounting the treacherous steep
they soon regained the summit, where the guides had stood bawling
piteously all the time.

Then came the descent. It was not over the lava blocks, but in
another place, which was covered with loose sliding sand. Away they
started.

Buttons ahead, went with immense strides down the slope. At every
step the sliding sand carried him about ten feet further, so that
each step was equal to about twenty feet. It was like flying. But it
was attended by so many falls that the descent of Buttons and Dick
was accomplished as much by sliding and rolling as by walking.

The Senator was more cautious. Having fallen once or twice, he tried
to correct this tendency by walking backward. Whenever he found
himself falling he would let himself go, and thus, on his hands and
knees, would let himself slide for a considerable distance. This plan
gave him immense satisfaction.

"It's quite like coasting," said he, after he had reached the bottom;
"only it does come a little hard on the trowsers."

On their arrival at the Hermitage to their surprise they saw nothing
of Mr. Figgs. The Doctor had been sleeping all the time, but the
landlord said he had not been that way. As they knew that the
neighborhood of Vesuvius was not always the safest in the world, they
all went back at once to search after him.


[Illustration: Where's Figgs?]


Arriving at the foot of the cone they went everywhere shouting his
name. There was no response. They skirted the base of the cone. They
walked up to where he had been. They saw nothing. The guides who had
thus far been with them now said they had to go. So they received
their pay and departed.

"Of all the mean, useless, chicken-hearted dolts that ever I see,"
said the Senator, "they are the wust!"

But meanwhile there was no Figgs. They began to feel anxious. At last
Buttons, who had been up to where Mr. Figgs was left, thought he saw
traces of footsteps in the sand that was nearest. He followed these
for some time, and at last shouted to the others. The others went to
where he was. They saw an Italian with him--an ill-looking, low-browed
rascal, with villain stamped on every feature.

"This fellow says he saw a man who answers the description of Figgs go
over in that direction," said Buttons, pointing toward the part of the
mountain which is furthest from the sea.

"There? What for?"

"I don't know."

"Is there any danger?"

"I think so--Figgs may have had to go--who knows?"

"Well," said the Senator, "we must go after him."

"What arms have you?" said the Doctor. "Don't show it before this
rascal."

"I have a bowie-knife," said Buttons.

"So have I," said Dick.

"And I," said the Senator, "am sorry to say that I have nothing at
all."

"Well, I suppose we must go," said the Doctor. "My revolver is
something. It is a double revolver, of peculiar shape."

Without any other thought they at once prepared to venture into a
district that for all they knew might swarm with robbers. They had
only one thought, and that was to save Figgs.

"Can this man lead us?" asked Dick.

"He says he can take us along where he saw Figgs go, and perhaps we
may see some people who can tell us about him."

"Perhaps we can," said the Senator, grimly.

They then started off with the Italian at their head. The sun was by
this time within an hour's distance from the horizon, and they had no
time to lose. So they walked rapidly. Soon they entered among hills
and rocks of lava, where the desolation of the surrounding country
began to be modified by vegetation. It was quite difficult to keep
their reckoning, so as to know in what direction they were going, but
they kept on nevertheless.

All of them knew that the errand was a dangerous one. All of them knew
that it would be better if they were armed. But no one said any thing
of the kind. In fact, they felt such confidence in their own pluck and
resolution that they had no doubt of success.

At length they came to a place where trees were on each side of the
rough path. At an opening here three men stood. Buttons at once
accosted them and told his errand. They looked at the Americans
with a sinister smile.

"Don't be afraid of us," said Buttons, quietly. "We're armed with
revolvers, but we won't hurt you. Just show us where our friend is,
for we're afraid he has lost his way."

At this strange salutation the Italians looked puzzled. They looked
at their guns, and then at the Americans. Two or three other men
came out from the woods at the same time, and stood in their rear.
At length as many as ten men stood around them.

"What are you staring at?" said Buttons again. "You needn't look so
frightened. Americans only use their revolvers against thieves."

The Doctor at this, apparently by accident, took out his revolver.
Standing a little on one side, he fired at a large crow on the top
of a tree. The bird fell dead. He then fired five other shots just
by way of amusement, laughing all the time with the Senator.

"You see," said he--"ha, ha--we're in a fix--ha, ha--and I want to
show them what a revolver is?"

"But you're wasting all your shot."

"Not a bit of it. See?" And saying this he drew a second chamber
from his pocket, and taking the first out of the pistol inserted
the other. He then fired another shot. All this was the work of a
few moments. He then took some cartridges and filled the spare
chamber once more.

The Italians looked on this display in great astonishment,
exchanging significant glances, particularly when the Doctor
changed the chambers. The Americans, on the contrary, took good care
to manifest complete indifference. The Italians evidently thought
they were all armed like the Doctor. Naturally enough, too, for if
not, why should they venture here and talk so loftily to them? So
they were puzzled, and in doubt. After a time one who appeared to
be their leader stepped aside with two or three of the men, and
talked in a low voice, after which he came to Buttons and said:

"Come, then, and we will show you."

"Go on."

The Captain beckoned to his men. Six of them went to the rear.
Buttons saw the manoeuvre, and burst into roars of laughter. The
Italians looked more puzzled than ever.

"Is that to keep us from getting away?" he cried--"ha, ha, ha,
ha, ha! Well, well!"

"He's putting a guard behind us. Laugh like fury, boys," said Buttons,
in English.

Whereupon they all roared, the tremendous laughter of the Senator
coming in with fearful effect.

"There's nothing to laugh at," said the man who appeared to be
Captain, very sulkily.

"It's evident that you Italians don't understand late improvements,"
said Buttons. "But come, hurry on."

The Captain turned and walked ahead sullenly.

"It's all very well to laugh," said the Doctor, in a cheerful tone;
"but suppose those devils behind us shoot us."

"I think if they intended to do that the Captain would not walk in
front. No, they want to take us alive, and make us pay a heavy
ransom."

After this the Club kept up an incessant chatter. They talked over
their situation, but could as yet decide upon nothing. It grew dark
at length. The sun went down. The usual rapid twilight came on.

"Dick," said the Doctor, "when it gets dark enough I'll give you my
pistol, so that you may show off with it as if it were yours."

"All right, my son," said Dick. Shortly after, when it was quite
dark, the Doctor slipped the pistol into the side-pocket of Dick's
coat. At length a light appeared before them. It was an old ruin
which stood upon an eminence. Where they were not a soul of them
could tell. Dick declared that he smelt salt water.

The light which they saw came from the broken windows of a
dilapidated hall belonging to the building. They went up some
crumbling steps, and the Captain gave a peculiar knock at the door.
A woman opened it. A bright light streamed out. Dick paused for a
moment, and took the Doctor's pistol, from his pocket. He held it up
and pretended to arrange the chamber. Then he carelessly put it in
his pocket again.

"You haven't bound them?" said the woman who opened the door to
the Captain.

"Meaning us, my joy?" said Buttons, in Italian. "Not just yet, I
believe, and not for some time. But how do you all do?"

The woman stared hard at Buttons, and then at the Captain. There
were eight or ten women here. It was a large hall, the roof still
entire, but with the plaster all gone. A bright fire burned at one
end. Torches burned around. On a stool near the fire was a familiar
form--a portly, well-fed form--with a merry face--a twinkle in his
eye--a pipe in his mouth--calmly smoking--apparently quite at home
though his feet were tied--in short, Mr. Figgs.

"Figgs, my boy!"

One universal shout and the Club surrounded their companion. In an
instant Buttons cut his bonds.

"Bless you--bless you, my children!" cried Figgs. "But how the
(Principal of Evil) did you get here? These are brigands. I've just
been calculating how heavy a bill I would have to foot."

The brigands saw the release of Figgs, and stood looking gloomily at
the singular prisoners, not quite knowing whether they were prisoners
or not, not knowing what to do. Each member of the Club took the most
comfortable seat he could find near the fire, and began talking
vehemently. Suddenly Buttons jumped up.

"A thousand pardons--I really forgot that there were ladies present.
Will you not sit here and give us the honor of your company?"

He made a profound bow and looked at several of them. They looked
puzzled, then pleased; then they all began to titter.

"Signor makes himself very much at home," said one, at length.

"And where could there be a pleasanter place? This old hall, this
jolly old fire, and this delightful company!"

Another bow. The Captain looked very sullen still. He was evidently
in deep perplexity.

"Come, cheer up there!" said Buttons. "We won't do you any harm;
we won't even complain to the authorities that we found our friend
here. Cheer up! Have you any thing to eat, most noble Captain?"

The Captain turned away.

Meanwhile Figgs had told the story of his capture. After resting
for a while on the slope he prepared to descend, but seeing sand
further away he went over toward it and descended there. Finding it
very dangerous or difficult to go down straight he made the
descent obliquely, so that when he reached the foot of the cone
he was far away from the point at which he had started to make
the ascent. Arriving there, he sat down to rest after his exertions.
Some men came toward him, but he did not think much about it.
Suddenly, before he knew what was up, he found himself a prisoner.
He had a weary march, and was just getting comfortable as they
came in.


[Illustration: Mr Figgs.]


As they sat round the fire they found it very comfortable. Like
many evenings in Italy, it was damp and quite chilly. They laughed
and talked, and appeared to be any thing but captives in a
robber's hold. The Captain had been out for some time, and at
length returned. He was now very cheerful. He came laughingly up
to the fire.

"Well, Signori Americani, what do you think of your
accommodation?"

"Delightful! Charming!" cried Buttons and Dick.

"If the ladies would only deign to smile on us--"

"Aha! You are a great man for the ladies," said the Captain.

"Who is not?" said Buttons, sententiously.

After a few pleasant words the Captain left again.

"He has some scheme in his villainous head," said Buttons.

"To drug us," said the Doctor.

"To send for others," said Dick.

"To wait till we sleep, and then fall on us," said Mr. Figgs.

"Well, gentlemen," said the Senator, drawing himself up, "we're
more than a match for them. Why, what are these brigands? Is there
a man of them who isn't a poor, miserable, cowardly cuss? Not one.
If we are captured by such as these we deserve to be captives all
our lives."


[Illustration: The Ladies.]


"If we don't get off soon we'll have a good round sum to pay," said
Mr. Figgs.

"And that I object to," said Buttons; "for I promised my Governor
solemnly that I wouldn't spend more than a certain sum in Europe,
and I won't."

"For my part," said the Doctor, "I can't afford it."

"And I would rather use the amount which they would ask in some
other way," said Dick.

"That's it, boys! You're plucky. Go in! We'll fix their flints. The
American eagle is soaring, gentlemen--let him ascend to the zenith.
Go it! But mind now--don't be too hasty. Let's wait for a time to
see further developments."

"Richard, my boy, will you occupy the time by singing a hymn?"
continued the Senator. "I see a guitar there."

Dick quietly got up, took the guitar, and, tuning it, began to sing.
The brigands were still in a state of wonder. The women looked shy.
Most of the spectators, however, were grinning at the eccentric
Americans. Dick played and sang a great quantity of songs, all of a
comic character.

The Italians were fond of music, of course. Dick had a good voice.
Most of his songs had choruses, and the whole Club joined in. The
Italians admired most the nigger songs. "Oh, Susannah!" was greeted
with great applause. So was "Doo-dah;" and the Italians themselves
joined energetically in the chorus. But the song that they loved best
was "Ole Virginny Shore." This they called for over and over, and as
they had quick ears they readily caught the tune; so that, finally,
when Dick, at their earnest request, sang it for the seventh time,
they whistled the air all through, and joined in with a thundering
chorus. The Captain came in at the midst of it, and listened with
great delight. After Dick had laid down his instrument he approached
the Americans.

"Well, ole hoss," said the Senator, "won't you take an arm-chair?"

"What is it?" said the Captain to Buttons.

"He wants to know if your Excellency will honor him by sitting near
him."

The Captain's eye sparkled. Evidently it met his wishes. The Americans
saw his delight.

"I should feel honored by sitting beside the illustrious stranger,"
said he. "It was what I came to ask. And will you allow the rest of
these noble gentlemen to sit here and participate in your amusement?"

"The very thing," said Buttons, "which we have been trying to get them
to do, but they won't. Now we are as anxious as ever, but still more
anxious for the ladies."

"Oh, the ladies!" said the Captain; "they are timid."

Saying this he made a gesture, and five of his men came up. The whole
six then sat with the five Americans. The Senator insisted that the
Captain should sit by his side. Yet it was singular. Each one of the
men still kept his gun. No notice was taken of this, however. The
policy of the Americans was to go in for utter jollity. They sat thus:


The Captain.
  The Senator.
Bandit Number 1.
  Mr. Figgs.
Bandit Number 2.
  The Doctor.
Bandit Number 3.
  Dick.
Bandit Number 4.
  Buttons.
Bandit Number 5.


Five members of the Club. Six bandits. In addition to these, four
others stood armed at the door. The women were at a distance.

But the sequel must be left to another chapter.




CHAPTER XIV.


MAGNIFICENT ATTITUDE OF THE SENATOR; BRILLIANCY OF BUTTONS; AND PLUCK
OF THE OTHER MEMBERS OF THE CLUB: BY ALL OF WHICH THE GREATEST EFFECTS
ARE PRODUCED.


"Boys," said the Senator, assuming a gay tone, "it's evident these
rascals have planned this arrangement to attack us; but I've got a
plan by which we can turn the tables. Now laugh, all of you." A roar
of laughter arose. "I'll tell it in a minute. Whenever I stop, you
all laugh, so that they may not think that we are plotting." Another
roar of laughter. "Buttons, talk Italian as hard as you can; pretend
to translate what I am saying; make up something funny, so as to get
them laughing; but take good care to listen to what I say."

"All right," said Buttons.

"Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!" said the others.

Now the Senator began to divulge his plan, and Buttons began to
talk Italian, pretending to translate what the Senator said. To do
this required much quickness, and a vivid imagination, with a sense
of the ridiculous, and many other qualities too numerous to mention.
Fortunately Buttons had all these, or else the Club would not have
acted precisely as it did act; and perhaps it might not have been
able to move along in the capacity of a Club any longer, in which
case it would, of course, have had no further adventures; and then
this history would not have been written; and whether the world
would have been better off or worse is more than I can say,
I'm sure.


[What the Senator said.]

"Boys, look at these devils, one on each side of us. They have
arranged some signal, and when it is given they will spring at us.
Look sharp for your lives, and be ready to do what I say. Buttons,
listen, and when you don't hear look at me, and I'll repeat it."

[_Club_.--"Ha! hal ha! ha! ha!"]


[What Buttons said he said.]

"He says, most noble Captain, and gentlemen, that he is desperately
hungry; that he can't get what he wants to eat. He generally eats
dried snakes, and the supply he brought from the Great American
desert is exhausted; he wants more, and will have it."

[Sensation among bandits.]


[What the Senator said.]

"My idea is to turn the tables on these varmints. They put themselves
in our power. What they have arranged for themselves will do for us
just as well as if we planned it all. In fact, if we had tried we
could not have adjusted the present company better."

[_Club_.--"Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!"]


[What Buttons said he said.]

"He says he wouldn't have come out here to-day, but had a little
difficulty just before he joined our party. He was landing from
the American ship of war, and on stepping on shore a man trod on
his foot, whereupon he put him into the water, and held him there
till he was drowned."

[Bandits looking more respectfully.]


[What the Senator said.]

"Listen now, Buttons. We will arrange a signal, and at a certain word
we will fall on our neighbors and do with them as they propose doing
with us. But first let us arrange carefully about the signal; for
every thing depends on that."

[_Club_--"Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!"]


[What Buttons said he said.]

"It makes him feel amused, he says, when he thinks how odd that
guide looked at him when he made him go down into the crater of
Vesuvius; gave him five minutes to say his prayers, and then lifted
him up in the air and pitched him down to the bottom. He thinks
he is falling still."

[Bandits exchange glances.]


[What the Senator said.]

"First, we must keep up our uproar and merriment to as great an
extent as we can, but not very long. Let it be wild, mad, boisterous,
but short. It will distract these vagabonds, and throw them off their
guard. The first thing on the programme, then, is merriment. Laugh as
loud and long as you can."

[_Club_.--"Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!"]


[What Buttons said he said.]

"He doesn't know but what he'll have a little trouble about a
priest he killed last night. He was in a church, and was walking
about whistling, when a priest came up and ordered him out;
whereupon he drew his revolver, and put all six of the bullets in
the priest's head."

[Bandits cross themselves, and look serious.]


[Illustration: The Bandits Captured.]


[What the Senator said.]

"The next thing is, to have some singing. They seem to like our
glorious national songs. Give them some of them. Let the first one
be 'Old Virginny.'"

[_Club_.--"Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!"]


[What Buttons said he said.]

"He heard that the priest was not dead. As he always makes sure
work, he intends to look in the morning, and if he's alive, he'll
cut his throat, and make all his attendants dance to the tune of
'Old Virginny.'"


Buttons had to work on that word "Old Virginny," for the quick ears
of the Italians had caught it. Bandits cross themselves again.

_Captain_.--"I don't believe a word of it. It's impossible."

Bandit No. 6.--"He looks like it, any way."

In fact, the Senator did look like it. His hair tinged to an
unnatural hue by the sulphur of Vesuvius, his square, determined
jaw, his heavy, overhanging brow, marked him as one who was capable
of any desperate enterprise.


[What the Senator said.]

"Next and last, Dick, you are to sing 'Yankee Doodle.' You know
the words about 'coming to town riding on a pony.' You know that
verse ends with an Italian word. I am particular about this, for
you might sing the wrong verse. Do you understand, all of you? If
so, wink your eyes twice."

[The Club all winked twice. Then, as usual:
"Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!"]


[What Buttons said he said.]

"He says there is no danger for him, however, for foreigners are
in terror of the tune of 'Yankee Doodle.' If he were arrested by
the Government, the American Admiral would at once send ashore a
file of marines with an 'ultimatum,' a 'Columbiad,' a 'spanker
boom,' a 'Webster's Unabridged,' and a 'brachycatalectic,' to demand
his surrender at the cannon's mouth."

[Great sensation among the bandits at the formidable arms of
American marines.]


[What the Senator said.]

"Look at me. There are six. I will take two; each of you take
one--the man on your right, remember. As Dick, in singing, comes
to that word, each of you go at your man. Buttons, you hear, of
course."

[_Club_.--"Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!"]


[What Buttons said he said.]

"They think in town that he is the Devil, because he has killed
seven men in duels since he came, and has never been wounded. People
don't know the great American invention, worn next the skin, which
makes the body impervious to bullets."

[_Captain_, sneering.--"I don't believe it."

Bandit No. 3.--"I don't know. They invented the revolver. If only I
had one."]


[What the Senator said.]

"Boys, arrange to your minds what to do. Grab the gun, and put
your man down backward. I'm almost ashamed of the game, it's so
easy. Look at these boobies by me. They are like children. No
muscle. The fellows at the end won't dare to shoot for fear of
wounding their own man."

[_Club_.--"Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!"]


[What Buttons said he said.]

"He's made up his mind to go and take part in the war in Lombardy.
He will raise a band of Americans, all clothed in the great shot-proof
shirt, and armed with revolvers like ours, that shoot twelve times,
and have bullets like bomb-shells, that burst inside of a man and
blow him to pieces."

_Captain_, coldly,--"That crow didn't blow up."

_Buttons_.--"Oh yes it did. It was dark, and you didn't notice.
Go get it to-morrow, examine it, and you will find traces of the
exploded shell."

_Bandit No. 4_.--"Santa Maria! What lies this giant tells his friends!
and they all laugh. They don't believe him."

_Bandit No. 3_. "Well, that revolver is enough for me; and they all
have them."

The above conversation was all carried on very rapidly, and did not
take up much time.

At once the Club proceeded to carry out the Senator's plan. First
they talked nonsense, and roared and laughed, and perfected their
plan, and thus passed about ten minutes. Then Buttons asked the
Italians if they wished more music.

"Answer, gallant Captain of these Kings of the Road. Will you hear
our foreign songs?"

"Most gladly," said the gallant Captain. "There will yet be time
before we get our supper."

A sinister gleam in his eye as he said this about the supper did not
escape the notice of Buttons. Thereupon he handed the guitar to Dick,
and the latter began to sing once more the strains of "Ole Virginny."
The Italians showed the same delight, and joined in a roaring chorus.
Even the men by the door stood yelling or whistling as Dick sang.

Lastly, Dick struck up the final song. The hour had come!


"Yankee Doodle came to town
  To buy himself a pony,
Stuck a feather in his hat
  And called it--_Maccaroni_!"


As the song began each man had quietly braced himself for one grand
effort. At the sound of the last word the effect was tremendous.

The Senator threw his mighty arms round the Captain and the other
bandit. They were both small men, as indeed Italians are generally,
and beside his colossal frame they were like boys to a grown man. He
held them as if a vice, and grasping their hands, twisted them back
till their guns fell from their grasp. As he hurled the affrighted
ruffians to the floor, the guns crashed on the stone pavement, one
of them exploding in its fall. He then by sheer strength jerked the
Captain over on his face, and threw the other man on him face
downward. This done he sat on them, and turned to see what the others
were doing.

Buttons had darted at No. 5 who was on his right, seized his gun and
thrown him backward. He was holding him down now while the fellow was
roaring for help.

Dick had done about the same thing, but had not yet obtained
possession of the gun. He was holding the Doctor's pistol to the
bandit's head, and telling him in choice Italian to drop his gun, or
he would send him out of the world with twelve bullets.

The Doctor was all right. He was calmly seated on Bandit No. 3, with
one hand holding the bandit's gun pointed toward the door, and the
other grasping the ruffian's throat in a death like clutch. The man's
face was black, and he did not move.

Mr. Figgs had not been so successful. Being fat, he had not been
quick enough. He was holding the bandit's gun, and aiming blows at
his face.

"Doctor," said the Senator, "your man's all right. Give it to Figgs's
man."

The Doctor sprang up, seized Figgs's man by throat, just as he
staggered back, and brought him down.

The whole thing had been done in an incredibly short time. The
robbers had been taken by complete surprise. In strength they were
far inferior to their assailants. Attacked as they were so
unexpectedly the success of the Americans was not very wonderful.
The uproar was tremendous. The women were most noisy. At first all
were paralyzed. Then wild shrieks rang through the hall. They yelled,
they shouted, they wrung their hands.

The four bandits at the end of the hall stood for a moment
horror-struck. Then they raised their guns. But they dared not fire.
They might shoot their own men. Suddenly Dick, who had got the gun
which he wished, looked at the door, and seeing the guns levelled
he fired the revolver. A loud scream followed. One of the men fell.
The women rushed to take care of him. The other three ran off.

"Doctor," said the Senator, "have you a rope? Tie that man's hands
behind him."

The Doctor took his handkerchief, twisted it, and tied the man's
hands as neatly and as firmly as though they were in handcuffs. He
then went to Buttons, got a handkerchief from him, and tied up his
man in the same way. Then Dick's man was bound. At that moment a
bullet fired through one of the windows grazed the head of Mr. Figgs.

"Dick," said the Senator, "go out and keep guard."

Dick at once obeyed. The women screamed and ran as he came along.

Then the two men whom the Senator had captured were bound. After a
while some pieces of rope and leather straps were found by Buttons.
With these all the bandits were secured more firmly. The men whom the
Senator had captured were almost lifeless from the tremendous weight
of his manly form. They made their captives squat down in one corner,
while the others possessed themselves of their guns and watched them.
The wretches looked frightened out of their wits. They were
Neapolitans and peasants, weak, feeble, nerveless.

"It's nothing to boast of," said the Senator, contemptuously, as he
looked at the slight figures. "They're a poor lot--small, no muscle,
no spirit, no nothing."

The poor wretches now began to whine and cry.

"Oh, Signore," they cried, appealing to Buttons. "Spare our lives!"

At that the whole crowd of women came moaning and screaming.

"Back!" said Buttons.

"Oh, Signori, for the sake of Heaven spare them, spare our husbands!"

"Back, all of you! We won't hurt any one if you all keep quiet."

The women went sobbing back again. The Doctor then went to look at
the wounded man by the door. The fellow was trembling and weeping.
All Italians weep easily.

The Doctor examined him and found it was only a flesh wound. The
women were full of gratitude as the Doctor bound up his arm after
probing the wound, and lifted the man on a rude couch. From time to
time Dick would look in at the door to see how things were going on.
The field was won.

"Well," said the Senator, "the other three have probably run for it.
They may bring others back. At any rate we had better hurry off. We
are armed now, and can be safe. But what ought we to do with these
fellows?"

"Nothing," said Buttons.

"Nothing?"

"No. They probably belong to the 'Camorra,' a sort of legalized
brigandage, and if had them all put in prison they would be let
out the next day."

"Well, I must say I'd rather not. They're a mean lot, but I don't
wish them any harm. Suppose we make them take us out to the road
within sight of the city, and then let them go?"

"Well."

The others all agreed to this.

"We had better start at once then."

"For my part," said Mr. Figgs, "I think we had much better get
some thing to eat before we go--"

"Pooh! We can get a good dinner in Naples. We may have the whole
country around us if we wait, and though I don't care for myself,
yet I wouldn't like to see one of you fall, boys."

So it was decided to go at once. One man still was senseless. He was
left to the care of the women after being resuscitated by the Doctor.
The Captain and four bandits were taken away.

"Attend," said Buttons, sternly. "You must show us the nearest way
to Naples. If you deceive us you die. If you show us our way we may
perhaps let you go."

The women all crowded around their husbands, screaming and yelling. In
Vain. Buttons told them there was no danger. At last he said--

"You come along too, and make them show us the way. You will then
return here with them. The sooner the better. Haste!"

The women gladly assented to this.

Accordingly they all started, each one of the Americans carrying a
gun in one hand, and holding the arm of a bandit with the other.
The women went ahead of their own accord, eager to put an end to
their fears by getting rid of such dangerous guests. After a walk of
about half an hour they came to the public road which ran near to
the sea.

"I thought I smelt the sea-air," said Dick.

They had gone by the other side of Vesuvius.

"This is the road to Naples, Signori," said the women.

"Ah! And you won't feel safe till you get the men away. Very well, you
may go. We can probably take care of ourselves now."

The women poured forth a torrent of thanks and blessings. The men were
then allowed to go, and instantly vanished into the darkness. At first
it was quite dark, but after a while the moon arose and they walked
merrily along, though very hungry.

Before they reached their hotel it was about one o'clock. Buttons and
Dick stared there. As they were all sitting over the repast which they
forced the landlord to get for them, Dick suddenly struck his hand on
the table.

"Sold!" he cried.

"What?"

"They've got our handkerchiefs."

"Handkerchiefs!" cried Mr. Figgs, ruefully, "why, I forgot to get back
my purse."


[Illustration: Sold.]


"Your purse! Well, let's go out to-morrow--"

"Pooh! It's no matter. There were only three piastres in it. I keep my
circular bill and larger money elsewhere."

"Well they made something of us after all. Three piastres and five
handkerchiefs."

The Senator frowned. "I've a precious good mind to go out there
to-morrow and make them disgorge," said he. "I'll think it over."




CHAPTER XV.


DOLORES ONCE MORE.--A PLEASANT CONVERSATION.--BUTTONS LEARNS MORE OF
HIS YOUNG FRIEND.--AFFECTING FAREWELL.


As the Club intended to leave for Rome almost immediately, the two
young men in the Strado di San Bartollo were prepared to settle with
their landlord.

When Buttons and Dick packed up their modest valises there was a
general excitement in the house; and when they called for their little
bill it appeared, and the whole family along with it. The landlord
presented it with a neat bow. Behind him stood his wife, his left the
big dragoon. And on his right Dolores.

Such was the position which the enemy took up.

Buttons took up the paper and glanced at it.

"What is this?"

"Your bill."

"My bill?"

"Yes, Signore."

"Yes," repeated Dolores, waving her little hand at Buttons.

Something menacing appeared in the attitude and tone of Dolores. Had
she changed? Had she joined the enemy? What did all this mean?

"What did you say you would ask for this room when I came here?"
Buttons at length asked.

"I don't recollect naming any price," said the landlord, evasively.

"I recollect," said Dolores, decidedly. "He didn't name any price at
all."

"Good Heavens!" cried Buttons, aghast, and totally unprepared for this
on the part of Dolores, though nothing on the part of the landlord
could have astonished him. In the brief space of three weeks that
worthy had been in the habit of telling him on an average about four
hundred and seventy-seven downright lies per day.

"You told me," said Buttons, with admirable calmness, "that it would
be two piastres a week."

"Two piastres! Two for both of you! Impossible! You might as well say
I was insane."

"Two piastres!" echoed Dolores, in indignant tones--"only think! And
for this magnificent apartment! the best in the house--elegantly
furnished, and two gentlemen! Why, what is this that he means?"

"Et tu Brute!" sighed Buttons.

"Signore!" said Dolores.

"Didn't he, Dick?'"

"He did," said Dick; "of course he did."

"Oh, that _uomicciuolo_ will say any thing," said Dolores,
contemptuously snapping her fingers in Dick's face.

"Why, Signore. Look you. How is it possible? Think what
accommodations! Gaze upon that bed! Gaze upon that furniture!
Contemplate that prospect of the busy street!"

"Why, it's the most wretched room in town," cried Buttons. "I've been
ashamed to ask my friends here."

"Ah, wretch!" cried Dolores, with flashing eyes. "You well know that
you were never so well lodged at home. This miserable! This a room to
be ashamed of! Away, American savage! And your friends, who are they?
Do you lodge with the lazaroni?"

"You said that you would charge two piastres. I will pay no more; no,
not half a carline. How dare you send me a bill for eighteen piastres?
I will pay you six piastres for the three weeks. Your bill for
eighteen is a cheat. I throw it away. Behold!"

And Buttons, tearing the paper into twenty fragments, scattered them
over the floor.

"Ah!" cried Dolores, standing before him, with her arms folded, and
her face all aglow with beautiful anger; "you call it a cheat, do you?
You would like, would you not, to run off and pay nothing? That is the
custom, I suppose, in America. But you can not do that in this honest
country."

"Signore, you may tear up fifty bills, but you must pay," said the
landlord, politely.

"If you come to travel you should bring money enough to take you
along," said Dolores.

"Then I would not have to take lodgings fit only for a Sorrento
beggar," said Buttons, somewhat rudely.

"They are too good for an American beggar," rejoined Dolores, taking
a step nearer to him, and slapping her little hands together by way
of emphasis.

"Is this the maid," thought Buttons, "that hung so tenderly on my arm
at the masquerade? the sweet girl who has charmed so many evenings
with her innocent mirth. Is this the fair young creature who--"

"Are you going to pay, or do you think you can keep us waiting
forever?" cried the fair young creature, impatiently and sharply.

"No more than six piastres," replied Buttons.

"Be reasonable, Signore. Be reasonable," said the landlord, with a
conciliatory smile; "and above all, be calm--be calm. Let us have no
contention. I feel that these honorable American gentlemen have no
wish but to act justly," and he looked benignantly at his family.

"I wish I could feel the same about these Italians," said Buttons.

"You will soon feel that these Italians are determined to have their
due," said Dolores.

"They shall have their due and no more."

"Come, Buttons," said Dick, in Italian, "let us leave this old
rascal."

"Old rascal?" hissed Dolores, rushing up toward Dick as though she
would tear his eyes out, and stamping her little foot. "Old rascal!
Ah, piccolo Di-a-vo-lo!"

"Come," said the landlord; "I have affection for you. I wish to
satisfy you. I have always tried to satisfy and please you."

"The ungrateful ones!" said Dolores. "Have we not all been as
friendly to them as we never were before? And now they try like
vipers to sting us."

"Peace, Dolores," said the landlord, majestically. "Let us all be
very friendly. Come, good American gentlemen, let us have peace. What
now _will_ you pay?"

"Stop!" cried Dolores. "Do you bargain? Why, they will try and make
you take a half a carline for the whole three weeks. I am ashamed
of you. I will not consent."


[Illustration: Two Piastres!]


"How much will you give?" said the landlord, once more, without
heeding his daughter.

"Six piastres," said Buttons.

"Impossible!"

"When I came here I took good care to have it understood. You
distinctly said two piastres per week. You may find it very
convenient to forget. I find it equally convenient to remember."

"Try--try hard, and perhaps you will remember that we offered to
take nothing. Oh yes, nothing--absolutely nothing. Couldn't think
of it," said Dolores, with a multitude of ridiculous but
extremely pretty gestures, that made the little witch charming
even in her rascality.--"Oh yes, nothing"--a shrug of the shoulders
--"we felt so honored"--spreading out her hands and bowing.--"A great
American!--a noble foreigner!"--folding her arms, and strutting up
and down.--"Too much happiness!"--here her voice assumed a tone of
most absurd sarcasm.--"We wanted to entertain them all the rest of
our lives for nothing"--a ridiculous grimace--"or perhaps your sweet
conversation has been sufficient pay--ha?" and she pointed her little
rosy taper finger at Buttons as though she would transfix him.

Buttons sighed. "Dolores!" said he, "I always thought _you_ were my
friend. I didn't think that you would turn against me."

"Ah, infamous one! and foolish too! Did you think that I could ever
help you to cheat my poor parents? Was this the reason why you sought
me? Dishonest one! I am only an innocent girl, but I can understand
your villainy."

"I think you understand a great many things," said Buttons,
mournfully.

"And to think that one would seek my friendship to save his money!"

Buttons turned away. "Suppose I stayed here three weeks longer, how
much would you charge?" he asked the landlord.

That worthy opened his eyes. His face brightened.

"Three weeks longer? Ah--I--Well--Perhaps--"

"Stop!" cried Dolores, placing her hand over her father's mouth--"not
a word. Don't you understand? He don't want to stay three minutes
longer. He wants to get you into a new bargain, and cheat you."

"Ah!" said the landlord, with a knowing wink. "But, my child, you are
really too harsh. You must not mind her, gentlemen. She's only a
willful young girl--a spoiled child--a spoiled child."

"Her language is a little strong," said Buttons, "but I don't mind
what she says."

"You may deceive my poor, kind, simple, honest, unsuspecting father,"
said she, "but you can't deceive me."

"Probably not."

"Buttons, hadn't we better go?" said Dick; "squabbling here won't
benefit us."

"Well," said Buttons, slowly, and with a lingering look at Dolores.

But as Dolores saw them stoop to take their valises she sprang to the
door-way.

"They're going! They're going!" she cried. "And they will rob us. Stop
them."

"Signore," said Buttons, "here are six piastres. I leave them on the
table. You will get no more. If you give me any trouble I will summon
you before the police for conspiracy against a traveller. You can't
cheat me. You need not try."

So saying, he quietly placed the six piastres on the table, and
advanced toward the door.

"Signore! Signore!" cried the landlord, and he put himself in his way.
At a sign from Dolores the big dragoon came also, and put himself
behind her.

"You shall not go," she cried. "You shall never pass through this door
till you pay."

"Who is going to stop us?" said Buttons.

"My father, and this brave soldier who is armed," said Dolores, in a
voice to which she tried to give a terrific emphasis.

"Then I beg leave to say this much," said Buttons; and he looked with
blazing eyes full in the face of the "brave soldier." "I am not a
'brave soldier,' and I am not armed; but my friend and I have paid
our bills, and we are going through that door. If you dare to lay so
much as the weight of your finger on me I'll show you how a man can
use his fists."

Now the Continentals have a great and a wholesome dread of the English
fist, and consider the American the same flesh and blood. They believe
that "le bogues" is a necessary, part of the education of the whole
Anglo-Saxon race, careful parents among that people being intent upon
three things for their children, to wit:

(1.) To eat _Rosbif_ and _Bifiek_, but especially the former.

(2.) To use certain profane expressions, by which the Continental can
always tell the Anglo-Saxon.

(3.) TO STRIKE FROM THE SHOULDER!!!

Consequently, when Buttons, followed by Dick, advanced to the door,
the landlord and the "brave soldier" slipped aside, and actually
allowed them to pass.

Not so Dolores.

She tried to hound her relatives on; she stormed; she taunted them;
she called them cowards; she even went so far as to run after Buttons
and seize his valise. Whereupon that young gentleman patiently waited
without a word till she let go her hold. He then went on his way.

Arriving at the foot of the stairway he looked back. There was the
slender form of the young girl quivering with rage.

"Addio, Dolores!" in the most mournful of voices.

"Scelerato!" was the response, hissed out from the prettiest of lips.

The next morning the Dodge Club left Naples.


[Illustration: The Brave Soldier.]




CHAPTER XVI.


DICK RELATES A FAMILY LEGEND.


"Dick," said the Senator, as they rolled over the road, "spin a yarn
to beguile the time."

Dick looked modest.

The rest added their entreaties.

"Oh, well," said Dick, "since you're so very urgent it would be
unbecoming to refuse. A story? Well, what? I will tell you about my
maternal grandfather.

"My maternal grandfather, then, was once out in Hong Kong, and had
saved up a little money. As the climate did not agree with him he
thought he would come home; and at length an American ship touched
there, on board of which he went, and he saw a man in the galley; so
my grandfather stepped up to him and asked him:

"'Are you the mate?'

"'No. I'm the man that boils the _mate_,' said the other, who was also
an Irishman.

"So he had to go to the cabin, where he found the Captain and mate
writing out clearance papers for the custom-house.

"'Say, captain, will you cross the sea to plow the raging main?' asked
my grandfather.

"'Oh, the ship it is ready and the wind is fair to plow the raging
main!' said the captain. Of course my grandfather at once paid his
fare without asking credit, and the amount was three hundred and
twenty-seven dollars thirty-nine cents.

"Well, they set sail, and after going ever so many thousand miles,
or hundred--I forget which, but it don't matter--a great storm arose,
a typhoon or simoon, perhaps both; and after slowly gathering up its
energies for the space of twenty-nine days, seven hours, and
twenty-three minutes, without counting the seconds, it burst upon
them at exactly forty-two minutes past five, on the sixth day of the
week. Need I say that day was Friday? Now my grandfather saw all the
time how it was going to end; and while the rest were praying and
shrieking he had cut the lashings of the ship's long-boat and stayed
there all the time, having put on board the nautical instruments, two
or three fish-hooks, a gross of lucifer matches, and a sauce-pan. At
last the storm struck the ship, as I have stated, and at the first
crack away went the vessel to the bottom, leaving my grandfather
floating alone on the surface of the ocean.

"My grandfather navigated the long-boat fifty-two days, three hours,
and twenty minutes by the ship's chronometer; caught plenty of fish
with his fish-hooks; boiled sea-water in his sauce-pan, and boiled
all the salt away, making his fire in the bottom of the boat, which
is a very good place, for the fire can't burn through without touching
the water, which it can't burn; and finding plenty of fuel in the
boat, which he gradually dismantled, taking first the thole-pins, then
the seats, then the taffrail, and so on. This sort of thing, though,
could not last forever, and at last, just in the nick of time, he came
across a dead whale.

"It was floating bottom upward, covered with barnacles of very large
size indeed; and where his fins projected there were two little coves,
one on each side. Into the one on the lee-side he ran his boat, of
which there was nothing left but the stem and stern and two side
planks.

"My grandfather looked upon the whale as an island. It was a very
nice country to one who had been so long in a boat, though a little
monotonous. The first thing that he did was to erect the banner of his
country, of which he happened to have a copy on his
pocket-handkerchief; which he did by putting it at the end of an oar
and sticking it in the ground, or the flesh, whichever you please to
call it. He then took an observation, and proceeded to make himself a
house, which he did by whittling up the remains of the long-boat, and
had enough left to make a table, a chair, and a boot-jack. So here
he stayed, quite comfortable, for forty-three days and a half, taking
observations all the time with great accuracy; and at the end of that
time all his house was gone, for he had to cut it up for fuel to cook
his meals, and nothing was left but half of the boot-jack and the oar
which served to uphold the banner of his country. At the end of this
time a ship came up.

"The men of the ship did not know what on earth to make of this
appearance on the water, where the American flag was flying. So they
bore straight down toward it.

"'I see a sight across the sea, hi ho cheerly men!' remarked the
captain to the mate, in a confidential manner.

"'Methinks it is my own countrie, hi ho cheerly men!' rejoined the
other, quietly.

"'It rises grandly o'er the brine, hi ho cheerly men!' said the
captain.

"'And bears aloft our own ensign, hi ho cheerly men!' said the mate.

"As the ship came up my grandfather placed both hands to his mouth in
the shape of a speaking-trumpet, and cried out: 'Ship ahoy across the
wave, with a way-ay-ay-ay-ay! Storm along!'

"To which the captain of the ship responded through his trumpet: 'Tis
I, my messmate bold and brave, with a way-ay-ay-ay-ay! Storm along."

"At this my grandfather inquired; 'What vessel are you gliding on?
Pray tell to me its name.'

"And the captain replied: 'Our bark it is a whaler bold, and Jones
the captain's name.'

"Thereupon the captain came on board the whale, or on shore,
whichever you like--I don't know which, nor does it matter--he came,
at any rate. My grandfather shook hands with him and asked him to
sit down. But the captain declined, saying he preferred standing.

"'Well,' said my grandfather, 'I called on you to see if you would
like to buy a whale.'


[Illustration: Buying A Whale.]


"'Wa'al, yes, I don't mind. I'm in that line myself.'

"'What'll you give for it?'

"'What'll you take for it?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"Twenty-five minutes were taken up in the repetition of this question,
for neither wished to commit himself.

"'Have you had any offers for it yet?' asked Captain Jones at last.

"'Wa'al, no; can't say that I have.'

"'I'll give as much as any body.'

"'How much?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"Then my grandfather, after a long deliberation, took the captain by
the arm and led him all around, showing him the country, as one may
say, enlarging upon the fine points, and doing as all good traders are
bound to do when they find themselves face to face with a customer.

"To which the end was:

"'Wa'al, what'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'What'll you take?'

"'What'll you give?'

"'Well,' said my grandfather, 'I don't know as I care about trading
after all. I think I'll wait till the whaling fleet comes along. I've
been waiting for them for some time, and they ought to be here soon.'

"'You're not in the right track,' said Captain Jones.

"'Yes, I am.'

"'Excuse me.'

"'Ex-cuse _me_,' said my grandfather. 'I took an observation just
before you came in sight, and I am in lat. 47° 22' 20", long. 150°
15' 55".'

"Captain Jones's face fell. My grandfather poked him in the ribs and
smiled.

"'I'll tell you what I'll do, as I don't care, after all, about
waiting here. It's a little damp, and I'm subject to rheumatics. I'll
let you have the whole thing if you give me twenty-five per cent, of
the oil after it's barreled, barrels and all.'

"The captain thought for a moment.

"'You drive a close bargain.'

"'Of course.'

"'Well, it'll save a voyage, and that's something.'

"'Something! Bless your heart! ain't that every thing?'

"'Well, I'll agree. Come on board, and we'll make out the papers.'

"So my grandfather went on board, and they made out the papers; and
the ship hauled up alongside of the whale, and they went to work
cutting, and slashing, and hoisting, and burning, and boiling, and
at last, after ever so long a time--I don't remember exactly how
long--the oil was all secured, and my grandfather, in a few months
afterward, when he landed at Nantucket and made inquiries, sold his
share of the oil for three thousand nine hundred and fifty-six dollars
fifty-six cents, which he at once invested in business in New Bedford,
and started off to Pennsylvania to visit his mother. The old lady
didn't know him at all, he was so changed by sun, wind, storm,
hardship, sickness, fatigue, want, exposure, and other things of that
kind. She looked coldly on him.

"'Who are you?'

"'Don't you know?'

"'No.'

"'Think.'

"'_Have you a strawberry on your arm_?'

"'No.'

"'Then--you are--_you are_--YOU ARE--my own--my long--lost son!'


[Illustration: The Long-Lost Son.]


"And she caught him in her arms.

"Here endeth the first part of my grandfather's adventures, but he
had many more, good and bad; for he was a remarkable man, though I
say it; and if any of you ever want to hear more about him, which I
doubt, all you've got to do is to say so. But perhaps it's just as
well to let the old gentleman drop, for his adventures were rather
strange; but the narration of them is not very profitable, not that
I go in for the utilitarian theory of conversation; but I think, on
the whole, that, in story-telling, fiction should be preferred to
dull facts like these, and so the next time I tell a story I will
make one up."

The Club had listened to the story with the gravity which should be
manifested toward one who is relating family matters. At its close
the Senator prepared to speak. He cleared his throat:

"Ahem! Gentlemen of the Club! our adventures, thus far, have not
been altogether contemptible. We have a President and a Secretary;
ought we not also to have a Recording Secretary--a Historian?"

"Ay!" said all, very earnestly.

"Who, then, shall it be?"

All looked at Dick.

"I see there is but one feeling among us all," said the Senator.
"Yes, Richard, you are the man. Your gift of language, your fancy,
your modesty, your fluency--But I spare you. From this time forth
you know your duty."

Overcome by this honor, Dick was compelled to bow his thanks in
silence and hide his blushing face.

"And now," said Mr. Figgs, eagerly, "I want to hear _the Higgins
Story_."

The Doctor turned frightfully pale. Dick began to fill his pipe.
The Senator looked earnestly out of the window. Buttons looked at
the ceiling.

"What's the matter?" said Mr. Figgs.

"What?" asked Buttons.

"The Higgins Story?"

The Doctor started to his feet. His excitement was wonderful. He
clenched his fist.

"I'll quit! I'm going back. I'll join you at Rome by another route.
I'll--"

"No, you won't!" said Buttons; "for on a journey like this it would
be absurd to begin the Higgins Story."

"Pooh!" said Dick, "it would require nineteen days at least to get
through the introductory part."

"When, then, can I hear it?" asked Mr. Figgs, in perplexity.




CHAPTER XVII.


NIGHT ON THE ROAD.--THE CLUB ASLEEP.--THEY ENTER ROME.--THOUGHTS ON
APPROACHING AND ENTERING "THE ETERNAL CITY."


[Illustration: To Rome.]




CHAPTER XVIII.


A LETTER BY DICK, AND CRITICISMS OF HIS FRIENDS.

They took lodgings near the Piazza di Spagna. This is the best part
of Rome to live in, which every traveller will acknowledge. Among
other advantages, it is perhaps the only clean spot in the Capital
of Christendom.

Their lodgings were peculiar. Description is quite unnecessary. They
were not discovered without toil, and not secured without warfare.
Once in possession they had no reason to complain. True, the
conveniences of civilized life do not exist there--but who dreams of
convenience in Rome?

On the evening of their arrival they were sitting in the Senator's
room, which was used as the general rendezvous. Dick was diligently
writing.

"Dick," said the Senator, "what are you about?"

"Well," said Dick, "the fact is, I just happened to remember that when
I left home the editor of the village paper wished me to write
occasionally. I promised, and he at once published the fact in
enormous capitals. I never thought of it till this evening, when I
happened to find a scrap of the last issue of his paper in my valise.
I recollected my promise, and I thought I might as well drop a line."

"Read what you have written."

Dick blushed and hesitated.

"Nonsense! Go ahead, my boy!" said Buttons.

Whereupon Dick cleared his throat and began:


"ROME, May 30, 1859.

MR. EDITOR,--Rome is a subject which is neither uninteresting nor
alien to the present age."


"That's a fact, or you wouldn't be here writing it," remarked
Buttons.


"In looking over the past, our view is too often hounded by the Middle
Ages. We consider that period as the chaos of the modern world, when
it lay covered with darkness, until the Reform came and said. 'Let
there be light!"


"Hang it, Dick! be original or be nothing."


"Yet, if the life of the world began anywhere, it was in Rome. Assyria
is nothing to me. Egypt is but a spectacle!"


"If you only had enough funds to carry you there you'd change your
tune. But go on."


"But Rome arises before me as the parent of the latter time. By her
the old battles between Freedom and Despotism were fought long ago,
and the forms and principles of Liberty came forth, to pass, amid
many vicissitudes, down to a new-born day."


"There! I'm coming to the point now!"

"About time, I imagine. The editor will get into despair."


"There is but one fitting approach to Rome. By any other road the
majesty of the Old Capital is lost in the lesser grandeur of the
Medieval City. Whoever goes there let him come up from Naples and
enter by the Jerusalem Gate."


"Jerusalem fiddlesticks! Why, there's no such gate!"


"There the very spirit of Antiquity sits enthroned to welcome the
traveller, and all the solemn Past sheds her influences over his
soul--"


"Excuse me; there is a Jerusalem Gate."

"Perhaps so--in Joppa."


"There the Imperial City lies in the sublimity of ruin. It is the Rome
of our dreams--the ghost of a dead and buried Empire hovering over its
own neglected grave!"


"Dick, it's not fair to work off an old college essay as European
correspondence."


"Nothing may be seen but desolation. The waste Campagna stretches its
arid surface away to the Alban mountains, uninhabited, and forsaken of
man and beast. For the dust and the works and the monuments of
millions lie here, mingled in the common corruption of the tomb, and
the life of the present age shrinks away in terror. Long lines of
lofty aqueducts come slowly down from the Alban hills, but these
crumbled stones and broken arches tell a story more eloquent than
human voice.

"The walls arise before us, but there is no city beyond. The
desolation that reigns in the Campagna has entered here. The palace
of the noble, the haunts of pleasure, the resorts of the multitude,
the garrison of the soldier, have crumbled to dust, and mingled
together in one common ruin. The soil on which we tread, which gives
birth to trees, shrubs, and wild flowers without number, is but an
assemblage of the disintegrated atoms of stones and mortar that once
arose on high in the form of palace, pyramid, or temple."


"Dick, I advise you to write all your letters before you see the
places you speak of. You've no idea how eloquent you can be!"


"Now if we pass on in this direction, we soon come to a spot which is
the centre of the world--the place where most of all we must look when
we search for the source of much that is valuable in our age.

"It in a rude and a neglected spot. At one end rises a rock crowned
with houses; on one side are a few mean edifices, mingled with masses
of tottering ruins; on the other a hill formed altogether of crumbled
atoms of bricks, mortar, and precious marbles. In the midst are a few
rough columns blackened by time and exposure. The soil is deep, and
in places there are pits where excavations have been made. Rubbish
lies around; bits of straw, and grass, and hay, and decayed leather,
and broken bottles, and old bones. A few dirty shepherds pass along,
driving lean and miserable sheep. Further up is a cluster of
wine-carts, with still more curious horses and drivers.

"What is this place?--what those ruins, these fallen monuments, these
hoary arches, these ivy-covered walls? What? This is--


  "'The field of freedom, faction, fame, and blood;
      Here a proud people's passions were exhaled,
    From the first hour of Empire in the bud
      To that when further worlds to conquer failed;
    The Forum where the immortal accents glow,
      And still the eloquent air breathes, burns with Cicero!'


"Yet if you go up to one of those people and ask this Question, he
will answer you and tell you the only name, he knows--The Cow Market!'"


"Is that all?" inquired Buttons, as Dick laid down his paper.

"That's all I've written as yet."

Whereupon Buttons clapped his bands to express applause, and all the
others laughingly followed his example.

"Dick," said the Senator, after a pause, "what you have written sounds
pretty. But look at the facts. Here you are writing a description of
Rome before you've seen any thing of the place at all. All that you
have put in that letter is what you have read in books of travel. I
mention this not from blame, but merely to show what a wrong principle
travellers go on. They don't notice real live facts. Now I've promised
the editor of our paper a letter. As soon as I write it I'll read it
for you. The style won't be equal to yours. But, if I write, I'll be
bound to tell something new. Sentiment," pursued the Senator,
thoughtfully, "is playing the dickens with the present age. What we
ought to look at is not old ruins or pictures, but men--men--live men.
I'd rather visit the cottage of an Italian peasant than any church in
the country. I'd rather see the working of the political constitution
of this 'ere benighted land than any painting you can show.
Horse-shoes before ancient stones, and macaroni before statues, say I!
For these little things show me all the life of the people. If I only
understood their cursed lingo," said the Senator, with a tinge of
regret, "I'd rather stand and hear them talk by the hour, particularly
the women, than listen to the pootiest music they can scare up!"

"I tried that game," said Mr. Figgs, ruefully, "in Naples. I went into
a broker's shop to change a Napoleon. I thought I'd like to see their
financial system. I saw enough of it; for the scoundrel gave me a lot
of little bits of coin that only passed for a few cents apiece in
Naples, with difficulty at that, and won't pass here at all!"

The Senator laughed. "Well, you shouldn't complain. You lost your
Napoleon, but gained experience. You have a new wrinkle. I gained a
new wrinkle too when I gave a half-Napoleon, by mistake, to a wretched
looking beggar, blind of one eye. I intended to give him a centime."

"Your principle," said Buttons, "does well enough for you as a
traveller. But you don't look at all the points of the subject. The
point is to write a letter for a newspaper. Now what is the most
successful kind of letter? The readers of a family paper are
notoriously women and young men, or lads. Older men only look at the
advertisements or the news. What do women and lads care for
horse-shoes and macaroni? Of course, if one were to write about
these things in a humorous style they would take; but, as a general
thing, they prefer to read about old ruins, and statues, and cities,
and processions. But the best kind of a correspondence is that which
deals altogether in adventures. That's what takes the mind! Incidents
of travel, fights with ruffians, quarrels with landlords, shipwrecks,
robbery, odd scrapes, laughable scenes; and Dick, my boy! when you
write again be sure to fill your letter with events of this sort."

"But suppose," suggested Dick, meekly, "that we meet with no
ruffians, and there are no adventures to relate?"

"Then use a traveller's privilege and invent them. What was
imagination given for if not to use?"

"It will not do--it will not do," said the Senator, decidedly. "You
must hold on to facts. Information, not amusement, should be your
aim."

"But information is dull by itself. Amusement perhaps is useless. Now
how much better to combine the utility of solid information with the
lighter graces of amusement, fun, and fancy. Your pill, Doctor, is
hard to take, though its effects are good. Coat it with sugar and
it's easy."

"What!" exclaimed the Doctor, suddenly starting up. "I'm not asleep!
Did you speak to me?"

The Doctor blinked and rubbed his eyes, and wondered what the company
were laughing at. In a few minutes, however, he concluded to resume
his broken slumber in his bed. He accordingly retired; and the
company followed his example.




CHAPTER XIX.


ST. PETER'S!--THE TRAGIC STORY OF THE FAT MAN IN THE BALL.--HOW
ANOTHER TRAGEDY NEARLY HAPPENED.--THE WOES OF MEINHERR SCHATT.


Two stately fountains, a colonnade which in spite of faults possesses
unequalled majesty, a vast piazza, enclosing many acres, in whose
immense area puny man dwindles to a dwarf, and in the distance the
unapproachable glories of the greatest of earthly temples--such is the
first view of St. Peter's.

Our party of friends entered the lordly vestibule, and lifting the
heavy mat that hung over the door-way they passed through. There came
a soft air laden with the odor of incense; and strains of music from
one of the side chapels came echoing dreamily down one of the side
aisles. A glare of sunlight flashed in on polished marbles of a
thousand colors that covered pillars, walls, and pavement. The vaulted
ceiling blazed with gold. People strolled to and fro without any
apparent object. They seemed to be promenading. In different places
some peasant women were kneeling.

They walked up the nave. The size of the immense edifice increased
with every step. Arriving under the dome they stood looking up with
boundless astonishment.

They walked round and round. They saw statues which were masterpieces
of genius; sculptures that glowed with immortal beauty; pictures which
had consumed a life-time as they grew up beneath the patient toil of
the mosaic worker. There were altars containing gems equal to a
king's ransom; curious pillars that came down from immemorial ages;
lamps that burn forever.

"This," said the Senator, "is about the first place that has really
come up to my idee of foreign parts. In fact it goes clean beyond it.
I acknowledge its superiority to any thing that America can produce.
But what's the good of it all? If this Government really cared for
the good of the people it would sell out the hull concern, and devote
the proceeds to railways and factories. Then Italy would go ahead as
Providence intended."

"My dear Sir, the people of this country would rise and annihilate
any Government that dared to touch it."

"Shows how debased they have grown. There's no utility in all this.
There couldn't be any really good Gospel preaching here.

"Different people require different modes of worship," said Buttons,
sententiously.

"But it's immense," said the Senator, as they stood at the furthest
end and looked toward the entrance. "I've been calc'latin' that you
could range along this middle aisle about eighteen good-sized
Protestant churches, and eighteen more along the side aisles. You
could pile them up three tiers high. You could stow away twenty-four
more in the cross aisle. After that you could pile up twenty more in
the dome. That would make room here for one hundred and fifty-two,
good-sized Protestant churches, and room enough would be left to
stow away all their spires."

And to show the truth of his calculation he exhibited a piece of paper
on which he had pencilled it all.

If the interior is imposing the ascent to the roof is equally so.
There is a winding path so arranged that mules can go up carrying
loads. Up this they went and reached the roof. Six or seven acres of
territory snatched from the air spread around; statutes rose from the
edge; all around cupolas and pillars rose. In the center the huge dome
itself towered on high. There was a long low building filled with
people who lived up here. They were workmen whose duty it was to
attend to the repairs of the vast structure. Two fountains poured
forth a never-ceasing supply of water. It was difficult to conceive
that this was a roof of a building.

Entering the base of the central cupola a stairway leads up. There is
a door which leads to the interior, where one can walk around a
gallery on the inside of the dome and look down. Further up where
the arch springs there is another. Finally at the apex of the dome
there is a third opening. Looking down through this the sensation
is terrific.

Upon the summit of the vast dome stands an edifice of large size,
which is called the lantern, and appears insignificant in comparison
with the mighty structure beneath. Up this the stairway goes until
at length the opening into the ball is reached.

The whole five climbed up into the ball. They found to their surprise
that it would hold twice as many more. The Senator reached up his
hand. He could not touch the top. They looked through the slits in
the side. The view was boundless; the wide Campagna, the purple
Apennines, the blue Mediterranean, appeared from different sides.

"I feel," said the Senator, "that the conceit is taken out of me.
What is Boston State House to this; or Bunker Hill monument! I
used to see pictures of this place in Woodbridge's Geography; but
I never had a realizing sense of architecture until now."

"This ball," said Buttons, "has its history, its associations. It
has been the scene of suffering. Once a stoutish man came up here.
The guides warned him, but to no purpose. He was a willful
Englishman. You may see, gentlemen, that the opening is narrow. How
the Englishman managed to get up does not appear; but it is certain
that when he tried to get down he found it impossible. He tried for
hours to squeeze through. No use. Hundreds of people came up to help
him. They couldn't. The whole city got into a state of wild
excitement. Some of the churches had prayers offered up for him
though he was a heretic. At the end of three days he tried again.
Fasting and anxiety had come to his relief, and he slipped through
without difficulty."

"He must have been a London swell," said Dick.

"I don't believe a word of it," said Mr. Figgs, looking with an
expression of horror, first at the opening, and then at his own
rotundity. Then springing forward he hurriedly began to descend.

Happy Mr. Figgs! There was no danger for him. But in his eagerness to
get down he did not think of looking below to see if the way was
clear. And so it happened, that as he descended quickly and with
excited haste, he stepped with all his weight upon the hand of a man
who was coming up. The stranger shouted. Mr. Figgs jumped. His foot
slipped. His hand loosened, and down he fell plump to the bottom. Had
he fallen on the floor there is no doubt that he would have sustained
severe injury. Fortunately for himself he fell upon the stranger and
nearly crushed his life out.

The stranger writhed and rolled till he had got rid of his heavy
burden. The two men simultaneously started to their feet. The
stranger was a short stout man with an unmistakable German face. He
had bright blue eyes, red hair, and a forked red beard. He stared
with all his might, stroked his forked red beard piteously, and then
ejaculated most gutturally, in tones that seemed to come from his
boots--

"Gh-h-h-r-r-r-r-r-acious me!"

Mr. Figgs overwhelmed him with apologies, assured him that it was
quite unintentional, hoped that he wasn't hurt, begged his pardon;
but the stranger only panted, and still he stroked his forked red
beard, and still ejaculated--

"Gh-h-h-r-r-r-r-r-acious me!"

Four heads peered through the opening above; but seeing no accident
their owners, one by one, descended, and all with much sympathy asked
the stranger if he was much hurt. But the stranger, who seemed quite
bewildered, still panted and stroked his beard, and ejaculated--

"Gh-h-h-r-r-r-r-r-acious me!"

At length he seemed to recover his faculties, and discovered that he
was not hurt. Upon this he assured Mr. Figgs, in heavy guttural
English, that it was nothing. He had often been knocked down before.
If Mr. Figgs was a Frenchman, he would feel angry. But as he was an
American he was glad to make his acquaintance. He himself had once
lived in America, in Cincinnati, where he had edited a German paper.
His name was Meinherr Schatt.

Meinherr Schatt showed no further disposition to go up; but
descended with the others down as far as the roof, when they went to
the front and stood looking down on the piazza. In the course of
conversation Meinherr Schatt informed them that he belonged to the
Duchy of Saxe Meiningen, that he had been living in Rome about two
years, and liked it about as well as any place that he had seen.

He went every autumn to Paris to speculate on the Bourse, and
generally made enough to keep him for a year. He was acquainted with
all the artists in Rome. Would they like to be introduced to some
of them?


[Illustration: Gracious Me!]


Buttons would be most charmed. He would rather become acquainted
with artists than with any class of people.

Meinherr Schatt lamented deeply the present state of things arising
from the war in Lombardy. A peaceful German traveller was scarcely
safe now. Little boys made faces at him in the street, and shouted
after him, "Mudedetto Tedescho!"

Just at this moment the eye of Buttons was attracted by a carriage
that rolled away from under the front of the cathedral down the
piazza. In it were two ladies and a gentleman. Buttons stared eagerly
for a few moments, and then gave a jump.

"What's the matter?" cried Dick.

"It is! By Jove! It is!"

"What? Who?"

"I see her face! I'm off!"

"Confound it! Whose face?"

But Buttons gave no answer. He was off like the wind, and before the
others could recover from their surprise had vanished down the
descent.

"What upon airth has possessed Buttons now?" asked the Senator.

"It must be the Spanish girl," said Dick.

"Again? Hasn't his mad chase at sea given him a lesson? Spanish
girl! What is he after? If he wants a girl, why can't he wait and
pick out a regular thorough-bred out and outer of Yankee stock?
These Spaniards are not the right sort."

In an incredible short space of time the figure of Buttons was
seen dashing down the piazza, in the direction which the carriage
had taken. But the carriage was far ahead, and even as he left the
church it had already crossed the Ponte di S. Angelo. The others
then descended. Buttons was not seen till the end of the day.

He then made his appearance with a dejected air.

"What luck?" asked Dick, as he came in.

"None at all," said Buttons, gloomily.

"Wrong ones again?"

"No, indeed. I'm not mistaken this time. But I couldn't catch them.
They got out of sight, and kept out too. I've been to every hotel
in the place, but couldn't find them. It's too bad."

"Buttons," said the Senator, gravely, "I'm sorry to see a young man
like you so infatuated. Beware--Buttons--beware of wimmin! Take the
advice of an older and more experienced man. Beware of wimmin.
Whenever you see one coming--dodge! It's your only hope. If it
hadn't been for wimmin"--and the Senator seemed to speak half to
himself, while his face assumed a pensive air--"if it hadn't been
for wimmin, I'd been haranguing the Legislatoor now, instead of
wearying my bones in this benighted and enslaved country."




CHAPTER XX.


THE GLORY, GRANDEUR, BEAUTY, AND INFINITE VARIETY OF THE PINCIAN
HILL; NARRATED AND DETAILED NOT COLUMNARILY BUT EXHAUSTIVELY,
AND AFTER THE MANNER OF RABELAIS.


Oh, the Pincian Hill!--Does the memory of that place affect all
alike? Whether it does or not matters little to the chronicler of
this veracious history. To him it is the crown and glory of modern
Rome; the centre around which all Rome clusters. Delightful walks!
Views without a parallel! Place on earth to which no place else can
hold a candle!

Pooh--what's the use of talking? Contemplate, O Reader, from the
Pincian Hill the following:


The Tiber, The Campagna, The Aqueducts, Trajan's Column,
Antonine's Pillar, The Piazza del Popolo, The Torre del Capitoglio,
The Hoar Capitoline, The Palatine, The Quirinal, The Viminal,
The Esquiline, The Caelian, The Aventine, The Vatican, The Janiculum,
St. Peter's, The Lateran, The Stands for Roast Chestnuts, The New
York _Times_, the Hurdy-gurdys, The London _Times_, The Raree-shows,
The Obelisk of Mosaic Pharaoh, The Wine-carts, Harper's Weekly,
Roman Beggars, Cardinals, Monks, Artists, Nuns, The New York
_Tribune_, French soldiers, Swiss Guards, Dutchmen, Mosaic-workers,
Plane-trees, Cypress-trees, Irishmen, Propaganda Students, Goats,
Fleas, Men from Bosting, Patent Medicines, Swells Lager,
Meerschaum-pipes, The New York _Herald_, Crosses, Rustic Seats,
Dark-eyed Maids, Babel, Terrapins, Marble Pavements, Spiders,
Dreamy Haze, Jews, Cossacks, Hens, All the Past, Rags, The
original Barrel-organ, The original Organ-grinder, Bourbon Whisky,
Civita Vecchia Olives, Hadrian's Mausoleum, _Harper's Magazine_,
The Laurel Shade, Murray's Hand-book, Cicerones, Englishmen,
Dogcarts, Youth, Hope, Beauty, Conversation Kenge, Bluebottle Flies,
Gnats, _Galignani_, Statues, Peasants, Cockneys, Gas-lamps,
Dundreary, Michiganders, Paper-collars, Pavilions, Mosaic Brooches,
Little Dogs, Small Boys, Lizards, Snakes, Golden Sunsets, Turks,
Purple Hills, Placards, Shin-plasters, Monkeys, Old Boots,
Coffee-roasters, Pale Ale, The Dust of Ages, The Ghost of Rome,
Ice Cream, Memories, Soda-Water, Harper's Guide-Book.




CHAPTER XXI.


HARMONY ON THE PINCIAN HILL.--MUSIC HATH CHARMS.--AMERICAN MELODIES.
--THE GLORY, THE POWER, AND THE BEAUTY OF YANKEE DOODLE, AND THE
MERCENARY SOUL OF AN ITALIAN ORGAN-GRINDER.


The Senator loved the Pincian Hill, for there he saw what he loved
best; more than ruins, more than churches, more than pictures and
statues, more than music. He saw man and human nature.

He had a smile for all; of superiority for the bloated aristocrat; of
friendliness for the humble, yet perchance worthy mendicant. He longed
every day more and more to be able to talk the language of the people.

On one occasion the Club was walking on the Pincian Hill, when
suddenly they were arrested by familiar sounds which came from some
place not very far away. It was a barrel-organ; a soft and musical
organ; but it was playing "Sweet Home."

"A Yankee tune," said the Senator. "Let us go and patronize domestic
manufacture. That is my idee of political economy."

Reaching the spot they saw a pale, intellectual-looking Italian
working away at his instrument.

"It's not bad, though that there may not be the highest kind of
musical instrument."

"No," said Buttons; "but I wonder that you, an elder of a church,
can stand here and listen to it."

"Why, what has the church to do with a barrel-organ?"

"Don't you believe the Bible?"

"Of course," said the Senator, looking mystified.

"Don't you know what it says on the subject?"

"What the Bible says? Why no, of course not. It says nothing."

"I beg your pardon. It says, 'The sound of the grinding is low.' See
Ecclesiastes, twelfth, fourth."

The Senator looked mystified, but said nothing. But suddenly the
organ-grinder struck up another tune.

"Well, I do declare," cried the Senator, delighted, "if it isn't
another domestic melody!"

It was "Independence Day."

"Why, it warms my heart," he said, as a flush spread over his fine
countenance.

The organ-grinder received any quantity of _baiocchi_, which so
encouraged him that he tried another--"Old Virginny."

"That's better yet," said the Senator. "But how on airth did this
man manage to get hold of these tunes?"

Then came others. They were all American: "Old Folks at Home,"
"Nelly Ely," "Suwannee Ribber," "Jordan," "Dan Tucker," "Jim Crow."

The Senator was certainly most demonstrative, but all the others
were equally affected.

Those native airs; the dashing, the reckless, the roaringly-humorous,
the obstreperously jolly--they show one part of the many-sided
American character.

Not yet has justice been done to the nigger song. It is not a
nigger song. It is an American melody. Leaving out those which have
been stolen from Italian Operas, how many there are which are truly
American in their extravagance, their broad humor, their glorious
and uproarious jollity! The words are trash. The melodies are every
thing.

These melodies touched the hearts of the listeners. American life
rose before them as they listened.--American life--free, boundless,
exuberant, broadly-developing, self-asserting, gaining its
characteristics from the boundless extent of its home--a continental
life of limitless variety. As mournful as the Scotch; as reckless as
the Irish; as solemnly patriotic as the English.

"Listen!" cried the Senator, in wild excitement.

It was "Hail Columbia."

"The Pincian Hill," said the Senator, with deep solemnity, "is
glorified from this time forth and for evermore. It has gained a
new charm. The Voice of Freedom hath made itself heard!"

The others, though less demonstrative, were no less delighted. Then
came another, better yet. "The Star-Spangled Banner."

"There!" cried the Senator, "is our true national anthem--the
commemoration of national triumph; the grand upsoaring of the
victorious American Eagle as it wings its everlasting flight
through the blue empyrean away up to the eternal stars!"

He burst into tears; the others respected his emotion.

Then he wiped his eyes and looked ashamed of himself--quite
uselessly--for it is a mistake to suppose that tears are unmanly.
Unmanly! The manliest of men may sometimes shed tears out of his
very manhood.

At last there arose a magic strain that produced an effect to
which the former was nothing. It was "Yankee Doodle!"

The Senator did not speak. He could not find words. He turned
his eyes first upon one, and then another of his companions; eyes
beaming with joy and triumph--eyes that showed emotion arising
straight from a patriot's heart--eyes which seemed to say: Is there
any sound on earth or above the earth that can equal this?


[Illustration: Old Virginny.]


Yankee Doodle has never, received justice. It is a tune without
words. What are the recognized words? Nonsense unutterable--the
sneer of a British officer. But the tune!--ah that is quite
another thing!

The tune was from the very first taken to the national heart, and
has never ceased to be cherished there. The Republic has grown to
be a very different thing from that weak beginning, but its
national air is as popular as ever. The people do not merely
love it. They glory in it. And yet apologies are sometimes made
for it. By whom? By the soulless dilettante. The people know
better:--the farmers, the mechanics, the fishermen, the
dry-goods clerks, the newsboys, the railway stokers, the butchers,
the bakers, the candlestick-makers, the tinkers, the tailors, the
soldiers, the sailors. Why? Because this music has a voice of its
own, more expressive than words; the language of the soul, which
speaks forth in certain melodies which form an utterance of
unutterable passion.

The name was perhaps given in ridicule. It was accepted with pride.
The air is rash, reckless, gay, triumphant, noisy, boisterous,
careless, heedless, rampant, raging, roaring, rattle, brainish,
devil-may-care-ish, plague-take-the-hindmost-ish; but! solemn,
stern, hopeful, resolute, fierce, menacing, strong, cantankerous
(cantankerous is entirely an American idea), bold, daring--

Words fail.

Yankee Doodle has not yet received its Doo!

The Senator had smiled, laughed, sighed, wept, gone through many
variations of feeling.

He had thrown _baiocchi_ till his pockets were exhausted, and then
handed forth silver. He had shaken hands with all his companions ten
times over. They themselves went not quite as far in feeling as he,
but yet to a certain extent they went in.

And yet Americans are thought to be practical, and not ideal. Yet here
was a true American who was intoxicated--drunk! By what? By sound,
notes, harmony. By music!

"Buttons," said he, as the music ceased and the Italian prepared to
make his bow and quit the scene, "I must make that gentleman's
acquaintance."

Buttons walked up to the organ-grinder.

"Be my interpreter," said the Senator. "Introduce me."

"What's your name?" asked Buttons.

"Maffeo Cloto."

"From where?"

"Urbino."

"Were you ever in America?"

"No, Signore."

"What does he say?" asked the Senator, impatiently.

"He says his name is Mr. Cloto, and he was never in America."

"How did you get these tunes?"

"Out of my organ," said the Italian, grinning.

"Of course; but how did you happen to get an organ with such tunes?"

"I bought it."

"Oh yes; but how did you happen to buy one with these tunes?"

"For you illustrious American Signore. You all like to hear them."

"Do you know any thing about the tunes?"

"Signore?"

"Do you know what the words are?"

"Oh no. I am an Italian."

"I suppose you make money out of them."

"I make more in a day with these than I could in a week with other
tunes."

"You lay up money, I suppose."

"Oh yes. In two years I will retire and let my younger brother play
here."

"These tunes?"

"Yes, Signore."

"To Americans?"

"Yes, Signore."

"What is it all?" asked the Senator.

"He says that he finds he makes money by playing American tunes to
Americans."

"Hm," said the Senator, with some displeasure; "and he has no soul
then to see the--the beauty, the sentiment, the grandeur of his
vocation!"

"Not a bit--he only goes in for money."

The Senator turned away in disgust. "Yankee Doodle," he murmured,
"ought of itself to have a refining and converting influence on the
European mind; but it is too debased--yes--yes--too debased."




CHAPTER XXII.


HOW A BARGAIN IS MADE.--THE WILES OF THE ITALIAN TRADESMAN.--THE NAKED
SULKY BEGGAR, AND THE JOVIAL WELL-CLAD BEGGAR.--WHO IS THE KING OF
BEGGARS?


"What are you thinking about, Buttons?"

"Well, Dick, to tell the truth, I have been thinking that if I do
find the Spaniards they won't have reason to be particularly proud of
me as a companion. Look at me."

"I look, and to be frank, my dear boy, I must say that you look more
shabby-genteel than otherwise."

"That's the result of travelling on one suit of clothes--without
considering fighting. I give up my theory."

"Give it up, then, and come out as a butterfly."

"Friend of my soul, the die is cast. Come forth with me and seek a
clothing-store."

It was not difficult to find one. They entered the first one that they
saw. The polite Roman overwhelmed them with attention.

"Show me a coat, Signore."

Signore sprang nimbly at the shelves and brought down every coat in
his store. Buttons picked out one that suited his fancy, and tried it
on.

"What is the price?"

With a profusion of explanation and description the Roman informed
him: "Forty piastres."

"I'll give you twelve," said Buttons, quietly.

The Italian smiled, put his head on one side, drew down the corners
of his mouth, and threw up his shoulders. This is the _shrug_. The
shrug requires special attention. The shrug is a gesture used by the
Latin race for expressing a multitude of things, both objectively and
subjectively. It is a language of itself. It is, as circumstances
require, a noun, adverb, pronoun, verb, adjective, preposition,
interjection, conjunction. Yet it does not supersede the spoken
language. It comes in rather when spoken words are useless, to convey
intensity of meaning or delicacy. It is not taught, but it is learned.

The coarser, or at least blunter, Teutonic race have not cordially
adopted this mode of human intercommunication. The advantage of the
shrug is that in one slight gesture it contains an amount of meaning
which otherwise would require many words. A good shrugger in Italy is
admired, just as a good conversationist is in England, or a good stump
orator in America. When the merchant shrugged, Buttons understood him
and said:

"You refuse? Then I go. Behold me!"

"Ah, Signore, how can you thus endeavor to take advantage of the
necessities of the poor?"

"Signore, I must buy according to my ability."

The Italian laughed long and quietly. The idea of an Englishman or
American not having much money was an exquisite piece of humor.

"Go not, Signore. Wait a little. Let me unfold more garments. Behold
this, and this. You shall have many of my goods for twelve piastres."


[Illustration: The Shrug.]


"No, Signore; I must have this, or I will have none."

"You are very hard, Signore. Think of my necessities. Think of the
pressure of this present war, which we poor miserable tradesmen feel
most of all."

"Then addio, Signore; I must depart."

They went out and walked six paces.

"P-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-t!" (Another little idea of the Latin race. It is
a much more penetrating sound than a loud Hallo! Ladies can use it.
Children too. This would be worth importing to America.)

"P-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-t!"

Buttons and Dick turned. The Italian stood smiling and bowing and
beckoning.

"Take it for twenty-four piastres."

"No, Signore; I can only pay twelve."

With a gesture of ruffled dignity the shopkeeper withdrew. Again they
turned away. They had scarcely gone ten paces before the shop-keeper
was after them:

"A thousand pardons. But I have concluded to take twenty."

"No; twelve, and no more."

"But think, Signore; only think."

"I do think, my friend; I do think."

"Say eighteen."

"No, Signore."

"Seventeen."

"Twelve."

"Here. Come back with me."

They obeyed. The Italian folded the coat neatly, tied it carefully,
stroked the parcel tenderly, and with a meek yet sad smile handed it
to Buttons.

"There--only sixteen piastres."

Buttons had taken out his purse. At this he hurriedly replaced it,
with an air of vexation.

"I can only give twelve."

"Oh, Signore, be generous. Think of my struggles, my expenses, my
family. You will not force me to lose."

"I would scorn to force you to any thing, and therefore I will
depart."

"Stop, Signore," cried the Italian, detaining them at the door. "I
consent. You may take it for fourteen."

"For Heaven's sake, Buttons, take it," said Dick, whose patience was
now completely exhausted. "Take it."

"Twelve," said Buttons.

"Let me pay the extra two dollars, for my own peace of mind," said
Dick.

"Nonsense, Dick. It's the principle of the thing. As a member of the
Dodge Club, too, I could not give more."

"Thirteen, good Signore mine," said the Italian piteously.

"My friend, I have given my word that I would pay only twelve."

"Your word? Your pardon, but to whom?"

"To you."

"Oh, then, how gladly I release you from your word!"

"Twelve, Signore, or I go."

"I can not."

Buttons turned away. They walked along the street, and at length
arrived at another clothier's. Just as they stepped in a hand was
laid on Buttons's shoulder, and a voice cried out--

"Take it! Take it, Signore!"

"Ah! I thought so. Twelve?"

"Twelve."

Buttons paid the money and directed where it should be sent. He found
out afterward that the price which an Italian gentleman would pay was
about ten piastres.

There is no greater wonder than the patient waiting of an Italian
tradesman, in pursuit of a bargain. The flexibility of the Italian
conscience and imagination under such circumstances is truly
astonishing.

Dress makes a difference. The very expression of the face changes when
one has passed from shabbiness into elegance. After Buttons had
dressed himself in his gay attire his next thought was what to do with
his old clothes.

"Come and let us dispose of them."

"Dispose of them!"

"Oh, I mean get rid of them. I saw a man crouching in a corner nearly
naked as I came up. Let us go and see if we can find him. I'd like to
try the effect."

They went to the place where the man had been seen. He was there
still. A young man, in excellent health, brown, muscular, lithe.
He had an old coverlet around his loins--that was all. He looked up
sulkily.

"Are you not cold?"

"No," he blurted out, and turned away.

"A boor," said Dick. "Don't throw away your charity on him."

"Look here."

The man looked up lazily.

"Do you want some clothes?"

No reply.

"I've got some here, and perhaps will give them to you."

The man scrambled to his feet.

"Confound the fellow!" said Dick. "If he don't want them let's find
some one who does."

"Look here," said Buttons.

He unfolded his parcel. The fellow looked indifferently at the things.

"Here, take this," and he offered the pantaloons.

The Italian took them and slowly put them on. This done, he stretched
himself and yawned.

"Take this."

It was his vest.

The man took the vest and put it on with equal _sang froid_. Again
he yawned and stretched himself.

"Here's a coat."

Buttons held it out to the Italian. The fellow took it, surveyed it
closely, felt in the pockets, and examined very critically the
stiffening of the collar. Finally he put it on. He buttoned it
closely around him, and passed his fingers through his matted hair.
Then he felt the pockets once more. After which he yawned long and
solemnly. This done, he looked earnestly at Buttons and Dick. He saw
that they had nothing more. Upon which he turned on his heel, and
without saying a word, good or bad, walked off with immense strides,
turned a corner, and was out of sight. The two philanthropists were
left staring at one another. At last they laughed.

"That man is an original," said Dick.

"Yes, and there is another," said Buttons.

As he spoke he pointed to the flight of stone steps that goes up from
the Piazza di Spagna. Dick looked up. There sat The Beggar!

ANTONIO!

Legless, hatless, but not by any means penniless, king of Roman
beggars, with a European reputation, unequalled, in his own
profession--there sat the most scientific beggar that the world has
ever seen.

He had watched the recent proceedings, and caught the glance of the
young men.

As they looked up his voice came clear and sonorous through the air:

"O most generous--0 most noble--O most illustrious youths--Draw near
--Look in pity upon the abject--Behold legless, armless, helpless, the
beggar Antonio forsaken of Heaven--For the love of the Virgin--For the
sake of the saints--In the name of humanity--Date me uno mezzo
baioccho--Sono poooocooooovero--Miseraaaaaaaaaabile--
Desperrrraaaaaaaado!"




CHAPTER XXIII.


THE MANIFOLD LIFE OF THE CAFÉ NUOVO, AND HOW THEY RECEIVED THE NEWS
ABOUT MAGENTA.--EXCITEMENT.--ENTHUSIASM.--TEARS.--EMBRACES.


All modern Rome lives in the Café Nuovo. It was once a palace. Lofty
ceilings, glittering walls, marble pavements, countless tables,
luxurious couches, immense mirrors, all dazzle the eye. The hubbub is
immense, the confusion overpowering.

The European mode of life is not bad. Lodgings in roomy apartments,
where one sleeps and attends to one's private affairs; meals
altogether at the café. There one invites one's friends. No delay with
dinner; no badly-cooked dishes; no stale or sour bread; no timid,
overworn wife trembling for the result of new experiments in
housekeeping. On the contrary, one has: prompt meals; exquisite food;
delicious bread; polite waiters; and happy wife, with plenty of
leisure at home to improve mind and adorn body.

The first visit which the Club paid to the Café Nuovo was an eventful
one. News had just been received of the great strife at Magenta. Every
one was wild. The two _Galignani's_ had been appropriated by two
Italians, who were surrounded by forty-seven frenzied Englishmen, all
eager to get hold of the papers. The Italians obligingly tried to read
the news. The wretched mangle which they made of the language, the
impatience, the excitement, and the perplexity of the audience,
combined with the splendid self-complacency of the readers, formed a
striking scene.

The Italians gathered in a vast crowd in one of the billiard-rooms,
where one of their number, mounted on a table, was reading with
terrific volubility, and still more terrific gesticulations, a
private letter from a friend at Milan.

"Bravo!" cried all present.

In pronouncing which word the Italians rolled the "r" so tumultuously
that the only audible sound was--

B-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-f-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-ah! Like the letter B
in a railway train.

The best of all was to see the French. They were packed in a dense
mass at the furthest extremity of the Grand Saloon. Every one was
talking. Every one was describing to his neighbor the minute
particulars of the tremendous contest. Old soldiers, hoarse with
excitement, emulated the volubility of younger ones. A thousand arms
waved energetically in the air. Every one was too much interested in
his own description to heed his neighbor. They were all talkers, no
listeners.

A few Germans were there, but they sat forsaken and neglected. Even
the waiters forsook them. So they smoked the cigars of sweet and
bitter fancy, occasionally conversing in thick gutturals. It was
evident that they considered the present occasion as a combined crow
of the whole Latin race over the German. So they looked on with
impassive faces.


[Illustration: News Of Magenta!]


Perhaps the most stolid of all was Meinheer Schatt, who smoked and
sipped coffee alternately, stopping after each sip to look around
with mild surprise, to stroke his forked beard, and to ejaculate--

"Gr-r-r-r-r-r-acious me!"

Him the Senator saw and accosted, who, making room for the Senator,
conversed with much animation. After a time the others took seats near
them, and formed a neutral party. At this moment a small-sized
gentleman with black twinkling eyes came rushing past, and burst into
the thick of the crowd of Frenchmen. At the sight of him Buttons
leaped up, and cried:

"There's Francia! I'll catch him now!"

Francia shouted a few words which set the Frenchmen wild.

"The Allies have entered Milan! A dispatch has just arrived!"

There burst a shrill yell of triumph from the insane Frenchmen. There
was a wild rushing to and fro, and the crowd swayed backward and
forward. The Italians came pouring in from the other room. One word
was sufficient to tell them all. It was a great sight to see. On each
individual the news produced a different effect. Some stood still as
though petrified; others flung up their arms and yelled; others
cheered; others upset tables, not knowing what they were doing;
others threw themselves into one another's arms, and embraced and
kissed; others wept for joy:--these last were Milanese.

Buttons was trying to find Francia. The rush of the excited crowd
bore him away, and his efforts were fruitless. In fact, when he
arrived at the place where that gentleman had been, he was gone. The
Germans began to look more uncomfortable than ever. At length Meinheer
Schatt proposed that they should all go in a body to the Café Scacchi.
So they all left.




CHAPTER XXIV.


CHECKMATE!


The Café Scacchi, as its name implies, is devoted to chess. Germans
patronize it to a great extent. Politics do not enter into the
precincts sacred to Caissa.

After they had been seated about an hour Buttons entered. He had not
been able to find Francia. To divert his melancholy he proposed that
Meinheer Schatt should play a game of chess with the Senator. Now,
chess was the Senator's hobby. He claimed to be the best player in
his State. With a patronizing smile he consented to play with a tyro
like Meinheer Schatt. At the end of one game Meinheer Schatt stroked
his beard and meekly said--

"Gr-r-r-acious me!"

The Senator frowned and bit his lips. He was checkmated.

Another game. Meinheer Schatt played in a calm, and some might say a
stupid, manner.

"Gr-r-r-acious me!"

It was a drawn game.

Another: this was a very long game. The Senator played laboriously.
It was no use. Slowly and steadily Meinheer Schatt won the game.

When he uttered his usual exclamation the Senator felt strongly
inclined to throw the board at his head. However, he restrained
himself, and they commenced another game. Much to delight the
Senator beat. He now began to explain to Buttons exactly why it was
that he had not beaten before.

Another game followed. The Senator lost woefully. His defeat was in
fact disgraceful. When Meinheer Schatt said the ominous word the
Senator rose, and was so overcome with vexation he had not the
courtesy to say Good-night.

As they passed out Meinheer Schatt was seen staring after them with
his large blue eyes, stroking his beard, and whispering to himself--

"Gr-r-r-acious me!"


[Illustration: Before And After.]




CHAPTER XXV.


BUTTONS A MAN OF ONE IDEA.--DICK AND HIS MEASURING TAPE.--DARK EYES.
--SUSCEPTIBLE HEART.--YOUNG MAIDEN WHO LIVES OUT OF TOWN.--GRAND
COLLISION OF TWO ABSTRACTED LOVERS IN THE PUBLIC STREETS.


Too much blame can not be given to Buttons for his behavior at this
period. He acted as though the whole motive of his existence was to
find the Francias. To this he devoted his days, and of this he dreamed
at night. He deserted his friends. Left to themselves, without his
moral influence to keep them together and give aim to their efforts,
each one followed his own inclination.

Mr. Figgs spent the whole of his time in the Café Nuovo, drawing out
plans of dinners for each successive day. The Doctor, after sleeping
till noon, lounged on the Pincian Hill till evening, when he joined
Mr. Figgs at dinner. The Senator explored every nook and corner of
Rome. At first Dick accompanied him, but gradually they diverged
from one another in different paths. The Senator visited every place
in the city, peered into dirty houses, examined pavements,
investigated fountains, stared hard at the beggars, and looked
curiously at the Swiss Guard in the Pope's Palace. He soon became
known to the lower classes, who recognized with a grin the tall
foreigner that shouted queer foreign words and made funny gestures.

Dick lived among churches, palaces, and ruins. Tired at length of
wandering, he attached himself to some artists, in whose studios he
passed the greater part of his afternoons. He became personally
acquainted with nearly every member of the fraternity, to whom he
endeared himself by the excellence of his tobacco, and his great
capacity for listening. Your talkative people bore artists more
than any others.

"What a lovely girl! What a look she gave!"

Such was the thought that burst upon the soul of Dick, after a
little visit to a little church that goes by the name of Saint
Somebody _ai quattri fontani_. He had visited it simply because he
had heard that its dimensions exactly correspond with those of each
of the chief piers that support the dome of Saint Peter's. As he
wished to be accurate, he had taken a tape-line, and began stretching
it from the altar to the door. The astonished priests at first stood
paralyzed by his sacrilegious impudence, but finally, after a
consultation, they came to him and ordered him to be gone. Dick looked
up with mild wonder. They indignantly repeated the order.

Dick was extremely sorry that he had given offense. Wouldn't they
overlook it? He was a stranger, and did not know that they would be
unwilling. However, since he had begun, he supposed they would kindly
permit him to finish.

--"They would kindly do no such thing," remarked one of the priests,
brusquely. "Was their church a common stable or a wine-shop that he
should presume to molest them at their services? If he had no
religion, could he not have courtesy; or, if he had no faith himself,
could he not respect the faith of others?"

Dick felt abashed. The eyes of all the worshipers were on him, and it
was while rolling up his tape that his eyes met the glance of a
beautiful Italian girl, who was kneeling opposite. The noise had
disturbed her devotions, and she had turned to see what it was. It was
a thrilling glance from deep black lustrous orbs, in which there was
a soft and melting languor which he could not resist. He went out
dazzled, and so completely bewildered that he did not think of
waiting. After he had gone a few blocks he hurried back. She had gone.
However, the impression of her face remained.

He went so often to the little church that the priests noticed him;
but finding that he was quiet and orderly they were not offended. One
of them seemed to think that his rebuke had awakened the young
foreigner to a sense of higher things; so he one day accosted him
with much politeness. The priest delicately brought forward the claims
of religion. Dick listened meekly. At length he asked the priest if
he recollected a certain young girl with beautiful face, wonderful
eyes, and marvellous appearance that was worshiping there on the day
that he came to measure the church.

"Yes," said the priest, coldly.

Could he tell her name and where she lived?

"Sir," said the priest, "I had hoped that you came here from a higher
motive. It will do you no good to know, and I therefore decline
telling you."

Dick begged most humbly, but the priest was inexorable. At last Dick
remembered having heard that an Italian was constitutionally unable
to resist a bribe. He thought he might try. True, the priest was a
gentleman; but perhaps an Italian gentleman was different from an
English or American; so he put his hand in his pocket and blushing
violently, brought forth a gold piece of about twenty dollars value.
He held it out. The priest stared at him with a look that was
appalling.

"If you know--" faltered Dick--"any one--of course I don't mean
yourself--far from it--but--that is--"

"Sir," cried the priest, "who are you? Are there no bounds to your
impudence? Have you come to insult me because I am a priest, and
therefore can not revenge myself? Away!"

The priest choked with rage. Dick walked out. Bitterly he cursed
his wretched stupidity that had led him to this. His very ears
tingled with shame as he saw the full extent of the insult that he
had offered to a priest and a gentleman. He concluded to leave Rome
at once.

But at the very moment when he had made this desperate resolve he
saw some one coming. A sharp thrill went through his heart.

It was SHE! She looked at him and glanced modestly away. Dick at
once walked up to her.

"Signorina," said he, not thinking what a serious thing it was to
address an Italian maiden in the streets. But this one did not
resent it. She looked up and smiled. "What a smile!" thought Dick.

"Signorina," he said again, and then stopped, not knowing what to
say. His voice was very tremulous, and the expression of his face
tender and beseeching. His eyes told all.

"Signore," said the girl, with a sweet smile. The smile encouraged
Dick.

"Ehem--I have lost my way. I--I--could you tell me how I could get
to Piazza del Popolo? I think I might find my way home from there."

The girl's eyes beamed with a mischievous light.

"Oh yes, most easily. You go down that street; when you pass four
side-streets you turn; to the left--the left--remember, and then you
keep on till you come to a large church with a fountain before it,
then you turn round that, and you see the obelisk of the Piazza del
Popolo."

Her voice was the sweetest that Dick had ever heard. He listened as
he would listen to music, and did not hear a single word that he
comprehended.

"Pardon me," said he, "but would you please to tell me again. I can
not remember all. Three streets?"

The girl laughed and repeated it

Dick sighed.

"I'm a stranger here, and am afraid that I can not find my way. I left
my map at home. If I could find some one who would go with me and
show me."

He looked earnestly at her, but she modestly made a movement to go.

"Are you in a great hurry?" said he.

"No, Signore," replied the girl, softly.

"Could you--a--a--would you be willing--to--to--walk a little part
of the way with me, and--show me a very little part of the way--only
a very little?"


[Illustration: Away!]


The girl seemed half to consent, but modestly hesitated, and a faint
flush stole over her face.

"Ah do!" said Dick. He was desperate.

"It's my only chance," thought he.

The girl softly assented and walked on with him.

"I am very much obliged to you for your kindness," said Dick. "It's
very hard for a stranger to find his way in Rome."

"But, Signore, by this time you ought to know the whole of our city."

"What? How?"

"Why, you have been here three weeks at least."

"How do you know?" and the young man blushed to his eyes. He had been
telling lies, and she knew it all the time.

"Oh, I saw you once in the church, and I have seen you with that tall
man. Is he your father?"

"No, only a friend."

"I saw you," and she shook her little head triumphantly, and her
eyes beamed with fun and laughter.

"Any way," thought Dick, "she ought to understand."

"And did you see me when I was in that little church with a measuring
line?"

The young girl looked up at him, her large eyes reading his very soul.

"Did I look at you? Why, I was praying."

"You looked at me, and I have never forgotten it."

Another glance as though to assure herself of Dick's meaning. The
next moment her eyes sank and her face flushed crimson. Dick's heart
beat so fast that he could not speak for some time.

"Signore," said the young girl at last, "when you turn that corner
you will see the Piazza del Popolo."

"Will you not walk as far as that corner?" said Dick.

"Ah, Signore, I am afraid I will not have time."

"Will I never see you again?" asked he, mournfully.

"I do not know, Signore. You ought to know."

A pause. Both had stopped, and Dick was looking earnestly at her, but
she was looking at the ground.

"How can I know when I do not know even your name? Let me know that,
so that I may think about it."

"Ah, how you try to flatter! My name is Pepita Gianti."

"And do you live far from here?"

"Yes. I live close by the Basilica di San Paolo fuori le mure."

"A long distance. I was out there once."

"I saw you."

Dick exulted.

"How many times have you seen me? I have only seen you once before."

"Oh, seven or eight times."

"And will this be the last?" said Dick, beseechingly.

"Signore, if I wait any longer the gates will be shut."

"Oh, then, before you go, tell me where I can find you to-morrow. If
I walk out on that road will I see you? Will you come in to-morrow?
or will you stay out there and shall I go there? Which of the houses
do you live in? or where can I find you? If you lived over on the
Alban Hills I would walk every day to find you."

Dick spoke with ardor and impetuosity. The deep feeling which he
showed, and the mingled eagerness and delicacy which he exhibited,
seemed not offensive to his companion. She looked up timidly.

"When to-morrow comes you will be thinking of something else--or
perhaps away on those Alban mountains. You will forget all about
me. What is the use of telling you? I ought to go now."

"I'll never forget!" burst forth Dick. "Never--never. Believe me.
On my soul; and oh, Signorina, it is not much to ask!"


[Illustration: Pepita.]


His ardor carried him away. In the broad street he actually made a
gesture as though he would take her hand. The young girl drew back
blushing deeply. She looked at him with a reproachful glance.

"You forget--"

Whereupon Dick interrupted her with innumerable apologies.

"You do not deserve forgiveness. But I will forgive you if you leave
me now. Did I not tell you that I was in a hurry?"

"Will you not tell me where I can see you again?"

"I suppose I will be walking out about this time to-morrow."

"Oh, Signorina! and I will be at the gate."

"If you don't forget."

"Would you be angry if you saw me at the gate this evening?"

"Yes; for friends are going out with me. Addio, Signore."

The young girl departed, leaving Dick rooted to the spot. After a
while he went on to the Piazza del Popolo. A thousand feelings
agitated him. Joy, triumph, perfect bliss, were mingled with countless
tender recollections of the glance, the smile, the tone, and the
blushes of Pepita. He walked on with new life. So abstracted was his
mind in all kinds of delicious anticipations that he ran full against
a man who was hurrying at full speed and in equal abstraction in the
opposite direction. There was a recoil. Both fell. Both began to make
apologies. But suddenly:

"Why, Buttons!"

"Why, Dick!"

"Where in the world did you come from?"

"Where in the world did you come from?"

"What are you after, Buttons?"

"Did you see a carriage passing beyond that corner?"

"No, none."

"You must have seen it."

"Well, I didn't."

"Why, it must have just passed you."

"I saw none."

"Confound it!"

Buttons hurriedly left, and ran all the way to the corner, round which
he passed.




CHAPTER XXVI.


CONSEQUENCES OF BEING GALLANT IN ITALY, WHERE THERE ARE LOVERS,
HUSBANDS, BROTHERS, FATHERS, COUSINS, AND INNUMERABLE OTHER RELATIVES
AND CONNECTIONS, ALL READY WITH THE STILETTO.


After his meeting with Pepita, Dick found it extremely difficult to
restrain his impatience until the following evening. He was at the
gate long before the time, waiting with trembling eagerness.

It was nearly sundown before she came; but she did come at last. Dick
watched her with strange emotions, murmuring to himself all those
peculiar epithets which are commonly used by people in his situation.
The young girl was unmistakably lovely, and her grace and beauty might
have affected a sterner heart than Dick's.

"Now I wonder if she knows how perfectly and radiantly lovely she
is," thought he, as she looked at him and smiled.

He joined her a little way from the gate.

"So you do not forget."

"_I_ forget! Before I spoke to you I thought of you without ceasing,
and now I can never forget you."

"Do your friends know where you are?" she asked, timidly.

"Do you think I would tell them?"

"Are you going to stay long in Rome?"

"I will not go away for a long time."

"You are an American."

"Yes."

"America is very far away."

"But it is easy to get there."

"How long will you be in Rome?"

"I don't know. A very long time."

"Not in the summer?"

"Yes, in the summer."

"But the malaria. Are you not afraid of that? Will your friends stay?"

"I do not care whether my friends do or not."

"But you will be left alone."

"I suppose so."

"But what will you do for company? It will be very lonely."

"I will think of you all day, and at evening come to the gate."

"Oh, Signore! You jest now!"

"How can I jest with you?"

"You don't mean what you say."

"Pepita!"

Pepita blushed and looked embarrassed. Dick had called her by her
Christian name; but she did not appear to resent it.

"You don't know who I am," she said at last. "Why do you pretend to
be so friendly?"

"I know that you are Pepita, and I don't want to know any thing
more, except one thing, which I am afraid to ask."

Pepita quickened her pace.

"Do not walk so fast, Pepita," said Dick, beseechingly. "Let the walk
be as long as you can."

"But if I walked so slowly you would never let me get home."

"I wish I could make the walk so slow that we could spend a
life-time on the road."

Pepita laughed. "That would be a long time."

It was getting late. The sun was half-way below the horizon. The sky
was flaming with golden light, which glanced dreamily through the hazy
atmosphere. Every thing was toned down to soft beauty. Of course it
was the season for lovers and lovers' vows. Pepita walked a little
more slowly to oblige Dick. She uttered an occasional murmur at their
slow progress, but still did not seem eager to quicken her pace. Every
step was taken unwillingly by Dick, who wanted to prolong the happy
time.

Pepita's voice was the sweetest in the world, and her soft Italian
sounded more musically that that language had ever sounded before.
She seemed happy, and by many little signs showed that her companion
was not indifferent to her. At length Dick ventured to offer his arm.
She rested her hand on it very gently, and Dick tremulously took it in
his. The little hand fluttered for a few minutes, and then sank to
rest.

The sun had now set. Evening in Italy is far different from what it
is in northern latitudes. There it comes on gently and slowly,
sometimes prolonging its presence for hours, and the light will be
visible until very late. In Italy, however, it is short and abrupt.
Almost as soon as the sun disappears the thick shadows come swiftly
on and cover every thing. It was so at this time. It seemed but a
moment after sunset, and yet every thing was growing indistinct. The
clumps of trees grew black; the houses and walls of the city behind
all faded into a mass of gloom. The stars shone faintly. There was
no moon.

"I will be very late to-night," said Pepita, timidly.

"But are you much later than usual?"

"Oh, very much!"

"There is no danger, is there? But if there is you are safe. I can
protect you. Can you trust me?"

"Yes," said Pepita, in a low voice.

It was too dark to see the swiftly-changing color of Pepita's face as
Dick murmured some words in her ear. But her hand trembled violently
as Dick held it. She did not say a word in response. Dick stood still
for a moment and begged her to answer him. She made an effort and
whispered some indistinct syllables. Whereupon Dick called her by
every endearing name that he could think of, and--Hasty footsteps!
Exclamations! Shouts! They were surrounded! Twelve men or more--
stout, strong fellows, magnified by the gloom. Pepita shrieked.

"Who are you?" cried Dick. "Away, or I'll shoot you all. I'm armed."

"Boh!" said one of the men, contemptuously. "Off!" cried Dick, as
the fellow drew near. He put himself before Pepita to protect her,
and thrust his right hand in the breast-pocket of his coat.

"Who is that with you?" said a voice. At the sound of the voice
Pepita uttered a cry. Darting from behind Dick she rushed up to him.

"It is Pepita, Luigi!"

"Pepita! Sister! What do you mean by this?" said the man hoarsely.
"Why are you so late? Who is this man?"

"An American gentleman who walked out as far as this to protect me,"
said Pepita, bursting into tears.

"An American gentleman!" said Luigi, with a bitter sneer. "He came
to protect you, did he? Well; we will show him in a few minutes
how grateful we are."

Dick stood with folded arms awaiting the result of all this.

"Luigi! dearest brother!" cried Pepita, with a shudder, "on my soul
--in the name of the Holy Mother--he is an honorable American
gentleman, and he came to protect me."

"Oh! we know, and we will reward him."

"Luigi! Luigi!" moaned Pepita, "if you hurt him I will die!"

"Ah! Has it come to that?" said Luigi, bitterly. "A half-hour's
acquaintance, and you talk of dying. Here, Pepita; go home with
Ricardo."

"I will not. I will not go a step unless you let him go."

"Oh, we will let him go!"

"Promise me you will not hurt him."

"Pepita, go home!" cried her brother, sternly.

"I will not unless you promise."

"Foolish girl! Do you suppose we are going to break the laws and
get into trouble? No, no. Come, go home with Ricardo. I'm going to
the city."

Ricardo came forward, and Pepita allowed herself to be led away.

When she was out of sight and hearing Luigi approached Dick. Amid
the gloom Dick did not see the wrath and hate that might have been on
his face, but the tone of his voice was passionate and menacing. He
prepared for the worst. "That is my sister.--Wretch! what did you
mean?"

"I swear--"

"Peace! We will give you cause to remember her."

Dick saw that words and excuses were useless. He thought his hour had
come. He resolved to die game. He hadn't a pistol. His manoeuvre of
putting his hand in his pocket was merely intended to deceive. The
Italians thought that if he had one he would have done more than
mention it. He would at least have shown it. He had stationed
himself under a tree. The men were before him. Luigi rushed at him
like a wild beast. Dick gave him a tremendous blow between his eyes
that knocked him headlong.

"You can kill me," he shouted, "but you'll find it hard work!"

Up jumped Luigi, full of fury; half a dozen others rushed
simultaneously at Dick. He struck out two vigorous blows, which
crashed against the faces of two of them. The next moment he was on
the ground. On the ground, but striking well-aimed blows and kicking
vigorously. He kicked one fellow completely over. The brutal Italians
struck and kicked him in return. At last a tremendous blow descended
on his head. He sank senseless.

When he revived it was intensely dark. He was covered with painful
bruises. His head ached violently. He could see nothing. He arose
and tried to walk, but soon fell exhausted. So he crawled closer to
the trunk of the tree, and groaned there in his pain. At last he
fell into a light sleep, that was much interrupted by his suffering.

He awoke at early twilight. He was stiff and sore, but very much
refreshed. His head did not pain so excessively. He heard the
trickling of water near, and saw a brook. There he went and washed
himself. The water revived him greatly. Fortunately his clothes were
only slightly torn. After washing the blood from his face, and
buttoning his coat over his bloodstained shirt, and brushing the
dirt from his clothes, he ventured to return to the city.

He crawled rather than walked, often stopping to rest, and once
almost fainting from utter weakness. But at last he reached the
city, and managed to find a wine-cart, the only vehicle that he
could see, which took him to his lodgings. He reached his room
before any of the others were up, and went to bed.


[Illustration: An Interruption.]




CHAPTER XXVII.


DICK ON THE SICK LIST.--RAPTURE OF BUTTONS AT MAKING AN IMPORTANT
DISCOVERY.


Great was the surprise of all on the following morning at finding that
Dick was confined to his bed. All were very anxious, and even Buttons
showed considerable feeling. For as much as a quarter of an hour he
ceased thinking about the Spaniards. Poor Dick! What on earth was the
matter? Had he fever? No. Perhaps it was the damp night-air. He should
not have been out so late. Where was he? A confounded pity! The Doctor
felt his pulse. There was no fever. The patient was very pale, and
evidently in great pain. His complaint was a mystery. However, the
Doctor recommended perfect quiet, and hoped that a few days would
restore him. Dick said not a word about the events of the evening. He
thought it would do no good to tell them. He was in great pain. His
body was black with frightful bruises, and the depression of his mind
was as deep as the pain of his body.

The others went out at their usual hour.

The kind-hearted Senator remained at home all day, and sat by Dick's
bedside, sometimes talking, sometimes reading. Dick begged him not to
put himself to so much inconvenience on his account; but such language
was distasteful to the Senator.

"My boy," he said, "I know that you would do as much for me. Besides,
it is a far greater pleasure to do any thing for you than to walk
about merely to gratify myself. Don't apologize, or tell me that I am
troubling myself. Leave me to do as I please."

Dick's grateful look expressed more than words.

In a few days his pain had diminished, and it was evident that he
would be out in a fortnight or so. The kind attentions of his friends
affected him greatly. They all spent more time than ever in his room,
and never came there without bringing some little trifle, such as
grapes, oranges, or other fruit. The Senator hunted all over Rome for
a book, and found Victor Hugo's works, which he bought on a venture,
and had the gratification of seeing that it was acceptable.

All suspected something. The Doctor had contended from the first that
Dick had met with an accident. They had too much delicacy to question
him, but made many conjectures amongst themselves. The Doctor thought
that he had been among some ruins, and met with a fall. Mr. Figgs
suggested that he might have been run over. The Senator thought it was
some Italian epidemic. Buttons was incapable of thinking rationally
about any thing just then. He was the victim of a monomania: the
Spaniards!

About a week after Dick's adventure Buttons was strolling about on
his usual quest, when he was attracted by a large crowd around the
Chiesa di Gesu. The splendid equipages of the cardinals were crowded
about the principal entrance, and from the interior sounds of music
came floating magnificently down. Buttons went in to see what was
going on. A vast crowd filled the church. Priests in gorgeous
vestments officiated at the high altar, which was all ablaze with
the light of enormous wax-candles. The gloom of the interior was
heightened by the clouds of incense that rolled on high far within
the vaulted ceiling.


[Illustration: Poor Dick!]


The Pope was there. In one of the adjoining chambers he was performing
a ceremony which sometimes takes place in this church. Guided by
instinct, Buttons pressed his way into the chamber. A number of people
filled it. Suddenly he uttered an exclamation.

Just as His Holiness was rising to leave, Buttons saw the group that
had filled his thoughts for weeks.

The Spaniards! No mistake this time. And he had been right all along.
All his efforts had, after all, been based on something tangible. Not
in vain had he had so many walks, runnings, chasings, searchings,
strolls, so many hopes, fears, desires, discouragements. He was
right! Joy, rapture, bliss, ecstasy, delight! There they were: _the
little Don_--THE DONNA--IDA!

Buttons, lost for a while in the crowd, and pressed away, never lost
sight of the Spaniards. They did not see him, however, until, as
they slowly moved out, they were stopped and greeted with astonishing
eagerness. The Don shook hands cordially. The Donna--that is, the
elder sister--smiled sweetly. Ida blushed and cast down her eyes.

Nothing could be more gratifying than this reception. Where had he
been? How long in Rome? Why had they not met before? Strange that
they had not seen him about the city. And had he really been here
three weeks? Buttons informed them that he had seen them several
times, but at a distance. He had been at all the hotels, but had
not seen their names.

Hotels! Oh, they lived in lodgings in the Palazzo Concini, not far
from the Piazza del Popolo. And how much longer did he intend to
stay?--Oh, no particular time. His friends enjoyed themselves here
very much. He did not know exactly when they would leave. How long
would they remain?--They intended to leave for Florence on the
following week.--Ah! He was thinking of leaving for the same place
at about the same time. Whereupon the Don expressed a polite hope
that they might see one another on the journey.

By this time the crowd had diminished. They looked on while the Pope
entered his state-coach, and with strains of music, and prancing of
horses, and array of dragoons, drove magnificently away.

The Don turned to Buttons: Would he not accompany them to their
lodgings? They were just about returning to dinner. If he were
disengaged they should be most happy to have the honor of his
company.

Buttons tried very hard to look as though he were not mad with
eagerness to accept the invitation, but not very successfully. The
carriage drove off rapidly. The Don and Buttons on one seat, the
ladies on the other.

Then the face of Ida as she sat opposite! Such a face! Such a smile!
Such witchery in her expression! Such music in her laugh!

At any rate so it seemed to Buttons, and that is all that is needed.

On through the streets of Rome; past the post-office, round the column
of Antoninus, up the Corso, until at last they stopped in front of
an immense edifice which had once been a palace. The descendants of
the family lived in a remote corner, and their poverty compelled them
to let out all the remainder as lodgings. This is no uncommon thing
in Italy. Indeed, there are so many ruined nobles in the country that
those are fortunate who have a shelter over their heads. Buttons
remarked this to the Don, who told some stories of these fallen
nobles. He informed him that in Naples their laundress was said to be
the last scion of one of the most ancient families in the kingdom.
She was a countess in her own right, but had to work at menial labor.
Moreover, many had sunk down to the grade of peasantry, and lived in
squalor on lands which were once the estates of their ancestors.

Buttons spent the evening there. The rooms were elegant. Books lay
around which showed a cultivated taste. The young man felt himself in
a realm of enchantment. The joy of meeting was heightened by their
unusual complaisance. During the evening he found out all about them.
They lived in Cadiz, where the Don was a merchant. This was their
first visit to Italy.

They all had fine perceptions for the beautiful in art or nature,
and, besides, a keen sense of the ludicrous. So, when Buttons, growing
communicative, told them about Mr. Figgs's adventure in the ball of
St. Peter's, they were greatly amused. He told about the adventures
of all his friends. He told of himself: all about the chase in Naples
Bay, and his pursuit of their carriage from St. Peter's. He did not
tell them that he had done this more than once. Ida was amused; but
Buttons felt gratified at seeing a little confusion on her face, as
though she was conscious of the real cause of such a persevering
pursuit. She modestly evaded his glance, and sat at a little
distance from the others. Indeed, she said but little during the
whole evening.

When Buttons left he felt like a spiritual being. He was not conscious
of treading on any material earth, but seemed to float along through
enchanted air over the streets into his lodgings, and so on into the
realm of dreams.




CHAPTER XXVIII.


WHAT KIND OF A LETTER THE SENATOR WROTE FOR THE "NEW ENGLAND PATRIOT,"
WHICH SHOWS A TRITE, LIBERAL, UNBIASED, PLAIN, UNVARNISHED VIEW OF
ROME.


"Dick," said the Senator, as he sat with him in his room, "I've been
thinking over your tone of mind, more particularly as it appears in
those letters which you write home, such as you read the other day.
It is a surprising thing to me how a young man with your usual good
sense, keenness of perception, and fine education, can allow yourself
to be so completely carried away by a mawkish sentiment. What is the
use of all these memories and fancies and hysterical emotions that
you talk about? In one place you call yourself by the absurd name of
'A Pensive Traveller.' Why not be honest? Be a sensible American,
exhibiting in your thoughts and in all your actions the effect of
democratic principles and stiff republican institutions. Now I'll
read you what I have written. I think the matter is a little nearer
the mark than your flights of fancy. But perhaps you don't care just
now about hearing it?"

"Indeed I do; so read on," said Dick.


"As I have travelled considerable in Italy," said the Senator,
reading from a paper which he drew from his pocket, "with my eyes
wide open, I have some idea of the country and of the general
condition of the farming class."


The Senator stopped. "I forgot to say that this is for the _New
England Patriot_, published in our village, you know."

Dick nodded. The Senator resumed:


"The soil is remarkably rich. Even where there are mountains they
are well wooded. So if the fields look well it is not surprising.
What is surprising is the cultivation. I saw ploughs such as Adam
might have used when forced for the first time to turn up the
ground outside the locality of Eden; harrows which were probably
invented by Numa Pompey, an old Roman that people talk about.

"They haven't any idea of draining clear. For here is a place called
the Pontine Marsh, beautiful soil, surrounded by a settled country,
and yet they let it go to waste almost entirely.

"The Italians are lazy. The secret of their bad farming lies in
this. For the men loll and smoke on the fences, leaving the poor
women to toil in the fields. A woman ploughing! And yet these people
want to be free.

"They wear leather leggins, short breeches, and jackets. Many of
them wear wooden shifts. The women of the south use a queer kind of
outlandish head-dress, which if they spent less time in fixing it
would be better for their own worldly prosperity.

"The cattle are fine: very broad in the chest, with splendid action.
I don't believe any other country can show such cattle. The pigs are
certainly the best I ever saw by a long chalk. Their chops beat all
creation. A friend of mine has made some sketches, which I will give
to the Lyceum on my return. They exhibit the Sorrento pig in
various attitudes.


[Illustration: Sketches By A Friend.]


"The horses, on the contrary, are poor affairs. I have yet to see
the first decent horse. The animals employed by travellers generally
are the lowest of their species. The shoes which the horses wear are
of a singular shape. I can't describe them in writing, but they look
more like a flat-iron than any thing else.

"I paid a visit to Pompeii, and on coming back I saw some of the carts
of the country. They gave one a deplorable idea of the state of the
useful arts in this place. Scientific farming is out of the question.
If fine plantations are seen it's Nature does it.

"Vineyards abound everywhere. Wine is a great staple of the country.
Yet they don't export much after all. In fact the foreign commerce
is comparatively trifling. Chestnuts and olives are raised in
immense quantities. The chestnut is as essential to the Italian as
the potato is to the Irishman. A failure in the crop is attended
with the same disastrous consequences. They dry the nuts, grind them
into a kind of flour, and make them into cakes. I tasted one and
found it abominable. Yet these people eat it with garlic, and grow
fat on it. Chestnut bread, oil instead of butter, wine instead of
tea, and you have an Italian meal.

"It's a fine country for fruit. I found Gaeta surrounded by orange
groves. The fig is an important article in the economy of an Italian
household.

"I have been in Rome three weeks. Many people take much interest in
this place, though quite unnecessarily. I do not think it is at all
equal to Boston. Yet I have taken great pains to examine the place.
The streets are narrow and crooked, like those of Boston. They are
extremely dirty. There are no sidewalks. The gutter is in the middle
of the street. The people empty their slops from their windows. The
pavements are bad and very slippery. The accumulation of filth about
the streets is immense. The drainage is not good. They actually use
one old drain which, they tell me, was made three thousand years ago.

"Gas has only been recently introduced. I understand that a year or
two ago the streets were lighted by miserable contrivances, consisting
of a mean oil lamp swung from the middle of a rope stretched across
the street.

"The shops are not worth mentioning. There are no magnificent
_Dry-goods Stores_, such as I have seen by the hundred in Boston;
no _Hardware Stores_; no palatial _Patent Medicine Edifices_; no
signs of enterprise, in fact, at all.

"The houses are very uncomfortable. They are large, and built in the
form of a square. People live on separate flats. If it is cold they
have to grin and bear it. There are no stoves. I have suffered more
from the cold on some evenings since I have been here than ever I
did in-doors at home. I have asked for a fire, but all they could
give me was a poisonous fire of charcoal in an earthen thing like
a basket.

"Some of their public buildings are good, but that can't make the
population comfortable. In fact, the people generally are ill-cared
for. Here are the wretched Jews, who live in a filthy quarter of
the city crowded together like pigs.

"The people pass the most of their time in coffee-houses. They are
an idle set--have nothing in the world to do. It is still a mystery
to me how they live.

"The fact is, there are too many soldiers and priests. Now it is
evident that these gentry, being non-producers, must be supported
directly or indirectly by the producers. This is the cause, I suppose,
of the poverty of a great part of the population.

"Begging is reduced to a science. In this I confess the Italian beats
the American all to pieces. The American eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, the devices of an Italian beggar to get along.

"I have seen them in great crowds waiting outside of a monastery for
their dinner, which consists of huge bowls of porridge given by the
monks. Can any thing be more ruinous to a people?

"The only trade that I could discover after a long and patient search
was the trade in brooches and toys which are bought as curiosities by
travellers.

"There are nothing but churches and palaces wherever you go. Some
of these palaces are queer-looking concerns. There isn't one in the
whole lot equal to some of the Fifth Avenue houses in New York in
point of real genuine style.

"There has been too much money spent in churches, and too little
on houses. If it amounted to any thing it would not be so bad, but
the only effect has been to promote an idle fondness for music
and pictures and such like. If they tore down nine-tenths of their
churches and turned them into school-houses on the New England
system, it would not be bad for the rising generation.

"The newspapers which they have are miserable things-wretched
little sheets, full of lies--no advertisements, no news, no nothing.
I got a friend to translate what pretended to be the latest American
news. It was a collection of murders, duels, railway accidents, and
steamboat explosions.

"I don't see what hope there is for this unfortunate country; I don't
really. The people have gone on so long in their present course that
they are now about incorrigible. If the entire population were to
emigrate to the Western States, and mix up with the people there,
it might be possible for their descendants in the course of time to
amount to something.

"I don't see any hope except perhaps in one plan, which would be no
doubt impossible for these lazy and dreamy Italians to carry out.
It is this: Let this poor, brokendown, bankrupt Government make an
inventory of its whole stock of jewels, gold, gems, pictures, and
statues. I understand that the nobility throughout Europe would
be willing to pay immense sums of money for these ornaments. If they
are fools enough to do so, then in Heaven's name let them have the
chance. Clear out the whole stock of rubbish, and let the hard cash
come in to replace it. That would be a good beginning, with something
tangible to start from. I am told that the ornaments of St. Peter's
Cathedral cost ever so many millions of dollars. In the name of
goodness why not sell out the stock and realize instead of issuing
those ragged notes for twenty-five cents, which circulate among
the people here at a discount of about seventy-five per cent?

"Then let them run a railroad north to Florence and south to Naples.
It would open up a fine tract of county which is capable of growing
grain; it would tap the great olive-growing districts, and originate
a vast trade of oil, wine, and dried fruits.

"The country around Rome is uninhabited, but not barren. It is sickly
in summer-time, but if there was a population on it who would
cultivate it property I calculate the malaria would vanish, just as
the fever and ague do from many Western districts in our country by
the same agencies. I calculate that region could be made one of the
most fertile on this round earth if occupied by an industrious class
of emigrants.

"But there is a large space inside the walls of the city which could
be turned to the best of purposes.

"The place which used to be the Roman Forum is exactly calculated
to be the terminus of the railroad which I have suggested. A
commodious depot could be made, and the door-way might be worked up
out of the arch of Titus, which now stands blocking up the way, and
is of no earthly use.

"The amount of crumbling stones and old mined walls that they
leave about this quarter of the city is astonishing. It ought not
to be so.

"What the Government ought to do after being put in funds by the
process mentioned above is this:

"The Government ought to tear down all those unsightly heaps of
stone and erect factories and industrial schools. There is plenty
of material to do it with. For instance, take the old ruin called
the Coliseum. It is a fact, arrived at by elaborate calculation,
that the entire contents of that concern are amply sufficient
to construct no less than one hundred and fifty handsome
factories, each two hundred feet by seventy-five.

"The factories being built, they could be devoted to the
production of the finer tissues. Silks and velvets could be produced
here. Glass-ware of all kinds could be made. There is a fine Italian
clay that makes nice cups and crocks.

"I could also suggest the famous Roman cement as an additional
article of export. The Catacombs under the city could be put to
some direct practical use.

"I have hastily put out these few ideas to show what a liberal
and enlightened policy might effect even in such an unpromising
place as Rome. It is not probable, however, that my scheme would
meet with favor here. The leading classes in this city are such
an incurable get of old fogies that, I verily believe, rather
than do what I have suggested, they would choose to have the
earth open beneath them and swallow them up forever--city, churches,
statues, pictures, museums, palaces, ruins and all.

"I've got a few other ideas, some of which will work some day.
Suppose Russia should sell us her part of America. Spain sell us
Cuba, Italy give us Rome, Turkey an island or two--then what? But
I'll keep this for another letter."


"That's all," said the Senator.

Dick's face was drawn up into the strangest expression. He did not
say any thing, however. The Senator calmly folded up his paper, and
with a thoughtful air took up his hat.

"I'm going to that Coliseum again to measure a place I forgot,"
said he.

Upon which he retired, leaving Dick alone.




CHAPTER XXIX.


THE LONELY ONE AND HIS COMFORTER.--THE TRUE MEDICINE FOR A SICK MAN.


Dick was alone in his chamber. Confinement to his room was bad
enough, but what was that in comparison with the desolation of soul
that afflicted him? Pepita was always in his thoughts. The bright
moment was alone remembered, and the black sequel could not efface
her image. Yet his misadventure showed him that his chances of
seeing her again were extremely faint. But how could he give her
up? They would soon be leaving for Florence. How could he leave
never to see her again--the lovely, the sweet, the tender, the--

A faint knock at the door.

"Come in," said Dick, without rising from his chair.

A female entered. She was dressed in black. A thick veil hid her
features, but her bent figure denoted age and weariness. She slowly
closed the door.

"Is it here where a young American lives with this name?"

She held out a card. It was his name, his card. He had only given it
to one person in Rome, and that one was Pepita.

"Oh!" cried Dick, rising, his whole expression changing from sadness
to eager and beseeching hope, "oh, if you know where she is--where I
may find her--"

The female raised her form, then with a hand that trembled
excessively she slowly lifted her veil. It was a face not old and
wrinkled but young and lovely, with tearful eyes downcast, and
cheeks suffused with blushes.

With an eager cry Dick bounded from his chair and caught her in
his arms. Not a word was spoken. He held her in a strong embrace as
though he would not let her go. At last he drew her to a seat beside
him, still holding her in his arms.

"I could not stay away. I led you into misfortune. Oh, how you
have suffered. You are thin and wan. What a wretch am I! When you see
me no more will you forgive me?"

"Forgive!" and Dick replied in a more emphatic way than words afford.

"They would not let me leave the house for ten days. They told me
if I ever dared to see you again they would kill you. So I knew you
were not dead. But I did not know how they had beaten you till one
day Ricardo told me all. To think of you unarmed fighting so
gallantly. Four of them were so bruised that they have not yet
recovered. To-day Luigi went to Civita Vecchia. He told me that
if I dared to go to Rome he would send me to a convent. But I
disobeyed him. I could not rest. I had to come and see how you
were, and to--bid--adieu--"

"Adieu! bid adieu?--never. I will not let you."

"Ah, now you talk wildly," said Pepita, mournfully, "for you know
we must part."

"We shall not part."

"I will have to go home, and you can not follow me."

"Oh, Pepita, I can not give you up. You shall be mine--now--my wife
--and come with me home--to America. And we shall never again have
to part."

"Impossible," said Pepita, as big tear-drops fell from her eyes.
"Impossible!"

"Why impossible?"

"Luigi would track us to the end of the world."

"Track us! I would like to see him try it!" cried Dick in a fury. "I
have an account to settle with him which will not be pleasant for
him to pay. Who is he to dare to stand between me and you? As to
following me--Well, I have already given him a specimen of what I
am. I would give a year of my life to have him alone for about half
an hour."

"You wrong him," cried Pepita, earnestly. "You wrong him. You must
not talk so. He is not a bravo. He is my brother. He has been like
a father to me. He loves me dearly, and my good name is dearer to
him than life. He is so good and so noble, dear Luigi! It was his
love for me that blinded him and made him furious. He thought you
were deceiving us all, and would not listen to you."

"But if he were so noble would he have attacked one unarmed man,
and he at the head of a dozen?"

"I tell you," cried Pepita, "you do not know him. He was so blinded
by passion that he had no mercy. Oh, I owe every thing to him! And
I know how good and noble he is!"

"Pepita, for your sake I will forgive him every thing."

"I can not stay longer," said Pepita, making an effort to rise.

"Oh, Pepita! you can not leave me forever."

Pepita fell weeping into his arms, her slender form convulsed with
emotion.

"You shall not."

"I must--there is no help."

"Why must you? Can you not fly with me? What prevents you from being
mine? Let us go and be united in the little church where I saw you
first."

"Impossible!" moaned Pepita.

"Why?"

"Because I could not do you such injustice. You have your father far
away in America. You might offend him."

"Bother my father!" cried Dick.

Pepita looked shocked.

"I mean--he would allow me to do any thing I liked, and glory in it,
because I did it. He would chuckle over it for a month."

"Luigi--"

"Pepita, do you love him better than me?"

"No, but if I leave him so it would break his heart. He will think I
am ruined. He will declare a vendetta against you, and follow you to
the end of the world."

"Is there no hope?"

"No--not now."

"Not now? And when will there be? Can it be possible that you would
give me up? Then I would not give you up! If you do not love me I
must love you."

"Cruel!" murmured Pepita.

"Forgive," said Dick, penitently. "Perhaps I am too sudden. If I
come back again in two or three months will you be as hardhearted
as you are now?"

"Hard-hearted!" sighed Pepita, tearfully. "You should not reproach
me. My troubles are more than I can bear. It is no slight thing that
you ask."

"Will waiting soften you? Will it make any difference? If I came for
you--"

"You must not leave me so," said Pepita, reproachfully. "I will tell
you all. You will understand me better. Listen. My family is noble."

"Noble!" cried Dick, thunderstruck. He had certainly always thought
her astonishingly lady--like for a peasant girl, but attributed this
to the superior refinement of the Italian race.

"Yes, noble," said Pepita, proudly. "We seem now only poor peasants.
Yet once we were rich and powerful. My grandfather lost all in the
wars in the time of Napoleon, and only left his descendants an
honorable name. Alas! honor and titles are worth but little when one
is poor. My brother Luigi is the Count di Gianti."

"And you are the Countess di Gianti."

"Yes," said Pepita, smiling at last, and happy at the change that
showed itself in Dick. "I am the Countess Pepita di Gianti. Can you
understand now my dear Luigi's high sense of honor and the fury
that he felt when he thought that you intended an insult? Our
poverty, which we can not escape, chafes him sorely. If I were to
desert him thus suddenly it would kill him."

"Oh, Pepita! if waiting will win you I will wait for years. Is there
any hope?"

"When will you leave Rome?"

"In a few days my friends leave."

"Then do not stay behind. If you do you can not see me."

"But if I come again in two or three months? What then? Can I see
you?"

"Perhaps," said Pepita, timidly.

"And you will apt refuse? No, no! You can not! How can I find you?"

"Alas! you will by that time forget all about me."

"Cruel Pepita! How can you say I will forget? Would I not die for
you? How can I find you?"

"The Padre Lignori."

"Who?"

"Padre Lignori, at the little church. The tall priest--the one who
spoke to you."

"But he will refuse. He hates me."

"He is a good man. If he thinks you are honorable he will be your
friend. He is a true friend to me."

"I will see him before I leave and tell him all."

There were voices below.

Pepita started.

"They come. I must go," said she, dropping her veil.

"Confound them!" cried Dick.

"_Addio_!" sighed Pepita.

Dick caught her in his arms. She tore herself away with sobs.

She was gone.

Dick sank back in his chair, with his eyes fixed hungrily on the door.

"Hallo!" burst the Doctor's voice on his ears. "Who's that old girl?
Hey? Why, Dick, how pale you are! You're worse. Hang it! you'll have
a relapse if you don't look out. You must make a total change in your
diet--more stimulating drink and generous food. However, the drive to
Florence will set you all right again."




CHAPTER XXX.


OCCUPATIONS AND PEREGRINATIONS OF BUTTONS.


If Buttons had spent little time in his room before he now spent less.
He was exploring the ruins of Rome, the churches, the picture
galleries, and the palaces under new auspices. He knew the name of
every palace and church in the place. He acquired this knowledge by
means of superhuman application to "Murray's Hand-book" on the
evenings after leaving his companions. They were enthusiastic,
particularly the ladies. They were perfectly familiar with all the
Spanish painters and many of the Italian. Buttons felt himself far
inferior to them in real familiarity with Art, but he made amends by
brilliant criticisms of a transcendental nature.


[Illustration: Buttons and Murray.]


It was certainly a pleasant occupation for youth, sprightliness, and
beauty. To wander all day long through that central world from which
forever emanate all that is fairest and most enticing in Art,
Antiquity, and Religion; to have a soul open to the reception of all
these influences, and to have all things glorified by Almighty love;
in short, to be in love in Rome.

Rome is an inexhaustible store-house of attractions. For the lovers
of gayety there are the drives of the Pincian Hill, or the Villa
Borghese. For the student, ruins whose very dust is eloquent. For the
artist, treasures beyond price. For the devotee, religion. How
fortunate, thought Buttons, that in addition to all this there is,
for the lovers of the beautiful, beauty!

Day after day they visited new scenes. Upon the whole, perhaps, the
best way to see the city, when one can not spend one's life there,
is to take Murray's Hand-book, and, armed with that red necessity,
dash energetically at the work; see every thing that is mentioned;
hurry it up in the orthodox manner; then throw the book away, and go
over the ground anew, wandering easily wherever fancy leads.




CHAPTER XXXI.


BUTTONS ACTS THE GOOD SAMARITAN, AND LITERALLY UNEARTHS A MOST
UNEXPECTED VICTIM OF AN ATROCIOUS ROBBERY.--GR-R-R-A-CIOUS ME!

To these, once wandering idly down the Appian Way, the ancient tower
of Metella rose invitingly. The carriage stopped, and ascending,
they walked up to the entrance. They marvelled at the enormous blocks
of travertine of which the edifice was built, the noble simplicity of
the style, the venerable garment of ivy which hid the ravages of
time.

The door was open, and they walked in. Buttons first; the ladies
timidly following; and the Don bringing up the rear. Suddenly a low
groan startled them. It seemed to come from the very depths of the
earth. The ladies gave a shriek, and dashing past their brother, ran
out. The Don paused. Buttons of course advanced. He never felt so
extensive in his life before. What a splendid opportunity to give
an exhibition of manly courage! So he walked on, and shouted:

"Who's there?"

A groan!

Further in yet, till he came to the inner chamber. It was dark there,
the only light coming in through the passages. Through the gloom he
saw the figure of a man lying on the floor so tied that he could not
move.

"Who are you? What's the matter?"

"Let me loose, for God's sake!" said a voice, in thick Italian, with
a heavy German accent. "I'm a traveller. I've been robbed by brigands."

To snatch his knife from his pocket, to cut the cords that bound the
man, to lift him to his feet, and then to start back with a cry of
astonishment, were all the work of an instant. By this time the others
had entered.

The man was a German, unmistakably. He stood blinking and staring.
Then he stretched his several limbs and rubbed himself. Then he took
a long survey of the new-comers. Then he stroked a long, red, forked
beard, and, in tones expressive of the most profound bewilderment,
slowly ejaculated--

"Gr-r-r-r-acious me!"

"Meinheer Schatt!" cried Buttons, grasping his hand. "How in the name
of wonder did you get here? What has happened to you? Who tied you up?
Were you robbed? Were you beaten? Are you hurt? But come out of this
dark hole to the sunshine."

Meinheer Schatt walked slowly out, saying nothing to these rapid
inquiries of Buttons. The German intellect is profound, but slow; and
so Meinheer Schatt took a long time to collect his scattered ideas.
Buttons found that he was quite faint; so producing a flask from
his pocket he made him drink a little precious cordial, which revived
him greatly. After a long pull he heaved a heavy sigh, and looked
with a piteous expression at the new-comers. The kind-hearted
Spaniards insisted on taking him to their carriage. He was too weak
to walk. They would drive him. They would listen to no refusal. So
Meinheer Schatt was safely deposited in the carriage, and told his
story.

He had come out very early in the morning to visit the Catacombs. He
chose the early part of the day so as to be back before it got hot.
Arriving at the Church of St. Sebastian he found to his disappointment
that it was not open yet. So he thought he would beguile the time by
walking about. So he strolled off to the tomb of Caecelia Metella,
which was the most striking object in view. He walked around it, and
broke off a few pieces of stone. He took also a few pieces of ivy.
These he intended to carry away as relics. At last he ventured to
enter and examine the interior. Scarce had he got inside than he
heard footsteps without. The door was blocked up by a number of
ill-looking men, who came in and caught him.

Meinheer Schatt confessed that he was completely overcome by terror.

However, he at last mustered sufficient strength to ask what they
wanted.

"You are our prisoner."

"Why? Who are you?"

"We are the secret body-guard of His Holiness, appointed by the
Sacred Council of the Refectory," said one of the men, in a mocking
tone.

Then Meinheer Schatt knew that they were robbers. Still he indignantly
protested he was an unoffending traveller.

"It's false! You have been mutilating the sacred sepulchre of the
dead, and violating the sanctity of their repose!"

And the fellow, thrusting his hands in the prisoner's pockets,
brought forth the stones and ivy. The others looked into his other
pockets, examined his hat, made him strip, shook his clothes, pried
into his boots--in short, gave him a thorough overhaul.

They found nothing, except, as Meinheer acknowledged, with a faint
smile, a piece of the value of three half-cents American, which he
had brought as a fee to the guide through the Catacombs. It was that
bit of money that caused his bonds. It maddened them. They danced
around him in perfect fury, and asked what he meant by daring to
come out and give them so much trouble with only that bit of impure
silver about him.

"Dog of a Tedescho! Your nation has trampled upon our liberties; but
Italy shall be avenged! Dog! scoundrel! villain! Tedescho!
Tedes-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-cho!"

The end of it was that Meinheer Schatt was tied in a singularly
uncomfortable position and left there. He thought he had been there
about five hours. He was faint and hungry.

They took him home.




CHAPTER XXXII.


ANOTHER DISCOVERY MADE BY BUTTONS.


On the evening after this adventure the Don turned the conversation
into a new channel. They all grew communicative. Buttons told them
that his father was an extensive merchant and ship-owner in Boston.
His business extended over many parts of the world. He thought he
might have done something in Cadiz.

"Your father a ship-owner in Boston! I thought you belonged to New
York," said the Don, in surprise.

"Oh," said Buttons, "I said I came from there. The fact is, I lived
there four years at college, and will live there when I return."

"And your father lives in Boston," said the Don, with an interest
that surprised Buttons.

"Yes."

"Is his name Hiram Buttons?"

"Yes," cried Buttons, eagerly. "How do you know?"

"My dear Sir," cried the Don, "Hiram Buttons and I are not only
old business correspondents, but I hope I can add personal friends."

The Don rose and grasped Buttons cordially by the hand. The young man
was overcome by surprise, delight, and triumph.

"I liked you from the first," said the Don. "You bear your character
in your face. I was happy to receive you into our society. But now I
feel a still higher pleasure, for I find you are the son of a man
for whom I assure you I entertain an infinite respect."

The sisters were evidently delighted at the scene. As to Buttons, he
was overcome.

Thus far he often felt delicacy about his position among them, and
fears of intruding occasionally interfered with his enjoyment. His
footing now was totally different; and the most punctilious Spaniard
could find no fault with his continued intimacy.

"Hurrah for that abominable old office, and that horrible business to
which the old gentleman tried to bring me! It has turned out the best
thing for me. What a capital idea it was for the governor to trade
with Cadiz!"

Such were the thoughts of Buttons as he went home.




CHAPTER XXXIII.