Foreign translations are also available. However, if no text containing
the required word is found, the system acts as a search engine, sending
the user to other websites mentioning the term in question. In the case
of certain words, you can even hear the pronunciation. If there is no
translation currently available, the system calls on the public to
contribute. Everyone can make their own suggestions, after which Logos
translators and the company check the forwarded translations."



1997: MULTIMEDIA CONVERGENCE


[Overview]

As more and more people were using digital technology, previously
distinct information-based industries, such as printing and publishing,
graphic design, media, sound recording and film making, were converging
into one industry, with information as a common product. This trend was
named "multimedia convergence", with a massive loss of jobs, and a
serious enough issue to be tackled by the ILO (International Labor
Organization) by 1997. The first ILO Symposium on Multimedia
Convergence was held in January 1997 at ILO headquarters in Geneva,
Switzerland. This international symposium was a tripartite meeting with
employers, unionists, and government representatives. Some
participants, mostly employers, demonstrated the information society
was generating or would generate jobs, whereas other participants,
mostly unionists, demonstrated there was a rise in unemployment
worldwide.


[In Depth (published in 1999)]

The first ILO Symposium on Multimedia Convergence was held in January
1997 at the headquarters of ILO (International Labor Office) in Geneva,
Switzerland.

Peter Leisink, associate professor of labor studies at the Utrecht
University, Netherlands, explained: "A survey of the United Kingdom
book publishing industry showed that proofreaders and editors have been
externalized and now work as home-based teleworkers. The vast majority
of them had entered self-employment, not as a first-choice option, but
as a result of industry mergers, relocations and redundancies. These
people should actually be regarded as casualized workers, rather than
as self-employed, since they have little autonomy and tend to depend on
only one publishing house for their work."

This international symposium was held as a tripartite meeting with
employers, unionists and government representatives. Some participants
still thought our information society would generate jobs, whereas it
was already stated worldwide that multimedia convergence was leading to
a massive loss of jobs.

Michel Muller, secretary-general of the French Federation of Book,
Paper and Communication Industry, stated that the French graphics
industry had lost 20,000 jobs - falling from 110,000 to 90,000 - within
the last decade, and that expensive social plans had been necessary to
re-employ those people. He explained: "If the technological
developments really created new jobs, as had been suggested, then it
might have been better to invest the money in reliable studies about
what jobs were being created and which ones were being lost, rather
than in social plans which often created artificial jobs. These studies
should highlight the new skills and qualifications in demand as the
technological convergence process broke down the barriers between the
printing industry, journalism and other vehicles of information.
Another problem caused by convergence was the trend towards ownership
concentration. A few big groups controlled not only the bulk of the
print media, but a wide range of other media, and thus posed a threat
to pluralism in expression. Various tax advantages enjoyed by the press
today should be re-examined and adapted to the new realities facing the
press and multimedia enterprises. Managing all the social and societal
issues raised by new technologies required widespread agreement and
consensus. Collective agreements were vital, since neither individual
negotiations nor the market alone could sufficiently settle these
matters."

Quite theoretical compared to the unionists' interventions, here was
the answer of Walter Durling, director of AT&T Global Information
Solutions: "Technology would not change the core of human relations.
More sophisticated means of communicating, new mechanisms for
negotiating, and new types of conflicts would all arise, but the
relationships between workers and employers themselves would continue
to be the same. When film was invented, people had been afraid that it
could bring theatre to an end. That has not happened. When television
was developed, people had feared that it would do away cinemas, but it
had not. One should not be afraid of the future. Fear of the future
should not lead us to stifle creativity with regulations. Creativity
was needed to generate new employment. The spirit of enterprise had to
be reinforced with the new technology in order to create jobs for those
who had been displaced. Problems should not be anticipated, but tackled
when they arose." In short, humanity shouldn't fear technology.

In fact, employees were not so much afraid of the future as they were
afraid of losing their jobs. In 1997, our society already had a high
unemployment rate, which was not the case when film was invented and
television developed. During the next years, what would be the balance
between job creation and lay-off? Unions were struggling worldwide to
promote the creation of jobs through investment, innovation, vocational
training, computer literacy, retraining for new jobs, fair conditions
for contracts and collective agreements, defense of copyright,
protection of workers in the artistic field, and defense of teleworkers
as workers having full rights. The European Commission was expecting 10
million European teleworkers in the year 2000, which would represent
20% of teleworkers worldwide.

Despite unions' efforts, would the situation become as tragic as what
we read in the report of the symposium? "Some fear a future in which
individuals will be forced to struggle for survival in an electronic
jungle. And the survival mechanisms which have been developed in recent
decades, such as relatively stable employment relations, collective
agreements, employee representation, employer-provided job training,
and jointly funded social security schemes, may be sorely tested in a
world where work crosses borders at the speed of light."



1998: ONLINE BEOWULF


[Overview]

Libraries began putting (digital versions of) their treasures on the
web for the world to enjoy. The British Library was a pioneer in this
field. Several treasures were online in 1998, including  Beowulf, known
as the first great English masterpiece. Beowulf is the earliest known
narrative poem in English, and one of the most famous works of
Anglo-Saxon poetry. The British Library holds the only known manuscript
of Beowulf, dated circa 1000. The poem itself is much older than the
manuscript - some historians believe it might have been written circa
750. Scholarly discussions on the date of creation and provenance of
the poem continue around the world, and researchers regularly require
access to the manuscript. Taking Beowulf out of its display case for
study not only raised conservation issues, it also made it unavailable
for the many visitors who were coming to the Library expecting to see
this literary treasure on display. The digitization of the manuscript
offered a solution to these problems, while providing new opportunities
for researchers and book lovers worldwide.


[In Depth (published in 1999)]

Libraries began using the web to make their treasures freely available
to the world.

Here is the story of Beowulf.

Beowulf is a treasure of the British Library. "It is an Old English
heroic epic poem of anonymous authorship. This work of Anglo-Saxon
literature dates to between the 8th and the 11th century, the only
surviving European manuscript dating to the early 11th century. At
3,183 lines, it is notable for its length." (excerpt from Wikipedia)

The manuscript was badly damaged by fire in 1731. 18th-century
transcripts mention hundreds of words and letters which were then
visible along the charred edges, and subsequently crumbled away over
the years. To halt this process, each leaf was mounted on a paper frame
in 1845.

Scholarly discussions on the date of creation and provenance of the
poem continue around the world, and researchers regularly require
access to the manuscript. Taking Beowulf out of its display case for
study not only raised conservation issues, it also made it unavailable
for the many visitors who were coming to the Library expecting to see
this literary treasure on display. Digitization of the manuscript
offered a solution to these problems, as well as providing new
opportunities for readers, and for the world to enjoy.

The Electronic Beowulf Project was launched as a huge database of
digital images of the Beowulf manuscript and related manuscripts and
printed texts. In 1998, the database included fiber-optic readings of
hidden letters and ultraviolet readings of erased text in the
manuscript; full electronic facsimiles of the 18th-century transcripts
of the manuscript; and selections from important 19th-century
collations, editions and translations. Major additions were planned,
such as images of contemporary manuscripts, and links with the Toronto
Dictionary of Old English Project and with the comprehensive
Anglo-Saxon bibliographies of the Old English Newsletter.

The project was developed in partnership with two leading experts,
Kevin Kiernan, from the University of Kentucky and Paul Szarmach, from
the Medieval Institute, Western Michigan University. Professor Kiernan
edited the electronic archive and produced a CD-ROM containing a number
of electronic images.

Brian Lang, chief executive of the British Library, explained in 1998:
"The Beowulf manuscript is a unique treasure and imposes on the Library
a responsibility to scholars throughout the world. Digital photography
offered for the first time the possibility of recording text concealed
by early repairs, and a less expensive and safer way of recording
readings under special light conditions. It also offers the prospect of
using image enhancement technology to settle doubtful readings in the
text. Network technology has facilitated direct collaboration with
American scholars and makes it possible for scholars around the world
to share in these discoveries. Curatorial and computing staff learned a
great deal which will inform any future programmes of digitization and
network service provision the Library may undertake, and our publishing
department is considering the publication of an electronic scholarly
edition of Beowulf. This work has not only advanced scholarship; it has
also captured the imagination of a wider public, engaging people
(through press reports and the availability over computer networks of
selected images and text) in the appreciation of one of the primary
artifacts of our shared cultural heritage." (excerpt from the 1998
website)

The British Library was a pioneer in Europe. Other treasures of the
library were already online: Magna Carta, the first English
constitutional text, signed in 1215, with the Great Seal of King John;
the Lindisfarne Gospels, dated 698; the Diamond Sutra, dated 868, which
could be the world's earliest print book; the Sforza Hours, dated
1490-1520, an outstanding Renaissance treasure; the Codex Arundel, a
notebook of Leonardo Da Vinci (1452-1519), and the Tyndale New
Testament, the first English version of the New Testament, printed by
Peter Schoeffer, in Worms.

Brian King also stated the importance of the paper world, and the
ongoing commitment of the British Library to its paper collections. He
added: "The importance of digital materials will, however, increase. We
recognize that network infrastructure is at present most strongly
developed in the higher education sector, but there are signs that
similar facilities will also be available elsewhere, particularly in
the industrial and commercial sector, and for public libraries. Our
vision of network access encompasses all these. (...) The development
of the Digital Library will enable the British Library to embrace the
digital information age. Digital technology will be used to preserve
and extend the Library's unparalleled collection. Access to the
collection will become boundless with users from all over the world, at