21. When are _prima facie_ and _ex officio_ italicized, and when not?

22. How are names of ships printed?

23. How are names of paintings, statues, musical compositions, and
characters in plays treated?

24. What is the rule about letters used to indicate subdivisions, etc.?

25. How do we print letters of the alphabet when referred to as such?

26. What can you say of the use of italic in scientific matter
generally?

27. Give the particular rules for the use of italic in certain sciences.

28. What is the rule for italic in resolutions?

29. How are italics used in legal matter?

30. How are italics used in signatures?

31. Where are titles placed when following names in signatures?

32. How may texts of sermons and the like be printed?

33. What can you say of the use of italic in running titles, table
heads, side notes, and the like?

34. What should be looked out for in combining italic with roman?

35. What has been the influence of machine composition in the use of
italic, and why?

36. How does the use of italic in newspapers at present compare with
that of a hundred years ago, and why?

37. How are italics indicated in manuscript?


As elsewhere in this section of the Typographic Technical Series, the
learning of the rules must be supplemented by extended practice in their
application. Constant drill should be given the apprentice in the
setting of matter requiring the use of italics, or in writing out
manuscripts with the italics properly indicated. There is no other way
in which accuracy and practical proficiency can be acquired. Printed
matter may be shown for criticism and discussion, and incorrectly
italicized matter may be given out for correction.




TYPOGRAPHIC TECHNICAL SERIES FOR APPRENTICES


The following list of publications, comprising the TYPOGRAPHIC TECHNICAL
SERIES FOR APPRENTICES, has been prepared under the supervision of the
Committee on Education of the United Typothetae of America for use in
trade classes, in course of printing instruction, and by individuals.

Each publication has been compiled by a competent author or group of
authors, and carefully edited, the purpose being to provide the printers
of the United States--employers, journeymen, and apprentices--with a
comprehensive series of handy and inexpensive compendiums of reliable,
up-to-date information upon the various branches and specialties of the
printing craft, all arranged in orderly fashion for progressive study.

The publications of the series are of uniform size, 5 × 8 inches. Their
general make-up, in typography, illustrations, etc., has been, as far as
practicable, kept in harmony throughout. A brief synopsis of the
particular contents and other chief features of each volume will be
found under each title in the following list.

Each topic is treated in a concise manner, the aim being to embody in
each publication as completely as possible all the rudimentary
information and essential facts necessary to an understanding of the
subject. Care has been taken to make all statements accurate and clear,
with the purpose of bringing essential information within the
understanding of beginners in the different fields of study. Wherever
practicable, simple and well-defined drawings and illustrations have
been used to assist in giving additional clearness to the text.

In order that the pamphlets may be of the greatest possible help for use
in trade-school classes and for self-instruction, each title is
accompanied by a list of Review Questions covering essential items of
the subject matter. A short Glossary of technical terms belonging to the
subject or department treated is also added to many of the books.

These are the Official Text-books of the United Typothetae of America.

Address all orders and inquiries to COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, UNITED
TYPOTHETAE OF AMERICA, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS, U. S. A.


PART I--Types, Tools, Machines, and Materials

1. =Type: a Primer of Information= By A. A. Stewart

    Relating to the mechanical features of printing types; their sizes,
    font schemes, etc., with a brief description of their manufacture.
    44 pp.; illustrated; 74 review questions; glossary.

2. =Compositors' Tools and Materials= By A. A. Stewart

    A primer of information about composing sticks, galleys, leads,
    brass rules, cutting and mitering machines, etc. 47 pp.;
    illustrated; 50 review questions; glossary.

3. =Type Cases, Composing Room Furniture= By A. A. Stewart

    A primer of information about type cases, work stands, cabinets,
    case racks, galley racks, standing galleys, etc. 43 pp.;
    illustrated; 33 review questions; glossary.

4. =Imposing Tables and Lock-up Appliances= By A. A. Stewart

    Describing the tools and materials used in locking up forms for the
    press, including some modern utilities for special purposes. 59 pp.;
    illustrated; 70 review questions; glossary.

5. =Proof Presses= By A. A. Stewart

    A primer of information about the customary methods and machines for
    taking printers' proofs. 40 pp.; illustrated; 41 review questions;
    glossary.

6. =Platen Printing Presses= By Daniel Baker

    A primer of information regarding the history and mechanical
    construction of platen printing presses, from the original hand
    press to the modern job press, to which is added a chapter on
    automatic presses of small size. 51 pp.; illustrated; 49 review
    questions; glossary.

7. =Cylinder Printing Presses= By Herbert L. Baker

    Being a study of the mechanism and operation of the principal types
    of cylinder printing machines. 64 pp.; illustrated; 47 review
    questions; glossary.

8. =Mechanical Feeders and Folders= By William E. Spurrier

    The history and operation of modern feeding and folding machines;
    with hints on their care and adjustments. Illustrated; review
    questions; glossary.

9. =Power for Machinery in Printing Houses= By Carl F. Scott

    A treatise on the methods of applying power to printing presses and
    allied machinery with particular reference to electric drive.
    53 pp.; illustrated; 69 review questions; glossary.

10. =Paper Cutting Machines= By Niel Gray, Jr.

    A primer of information about paper and card trimmers, hand-lever
    cutters, power cutters, and other automatic machines for cutting
    paper, 70 pp.; illustrated; 115 review questions; glossary.

11. =Printers' Rollers= By A. A. Stewart

    A primer of information about the composition, manufacture, and care
    of inking rollers. 46 pp.; illustrated; 61 review questions;
    glossary.

12. =Printing Inks= By Philip Ruxton

    Their composition, properties and manufacture (reprinted by
    permission from Circular No. 53, United States Bureau of Standards);
    together with some helpful suggestions about the everyday use of
    printing inks by Philip Ruxton. 80 pp.; 100 review questions;
    glossary.

13. =How Paper is Made= By William Bond Wheelwright

    A primer of information about the materials and processes of
    manufacturing paper for printing and writing. 68 pp.; illustrated;
    62 review questions; glossary.

14. =Relief Engravings= By Joseph P. Donovan

    Brief history and non-technical description of modern methods of
    engraving; woodcut, zinc plate, halftone; kind of copy for
    reproduction; things to remember when ordering engravings.
    Illustrated; review questions; glossary.

15. =Electrotyping and Stereotyping= By Harris B. Hatch and A. A. Stewart

    A primer of information about the processes of electrotyping and
    stereotyping. 94 pp.; illustrated; 129 review questions; glossaries.


PART II--Hand and Machine Composition

16. =Typesetting= By A. A. Stewart

    A handbook for beginners, giving information about justifying,
    spacing, correcting, and other matters relating to typesetting.
    Illustrated; review questions; glossary.

17. =Printers' Proofs= By A. A. Stewart

    The methods by which they are made, marked, and corrected, with
    observations on proofreading. Illustrated; review questions;
    glossary.

18. =First Steps in Job Composition= By Camille DeVéze

    Suggestions for the apprentice compositor in setting his first jobs,
    especially about the important little things which go to make good
    display in typography. 63 pp.; examples; 55 review questions;
    glossary.

19. =General Job Composition=

    How the job compositor handles business stationery, programs and
    miscellaneous work. Illustrated; review questions; glossary.

20. =Book Composition= By J. W. Bothwell

    Chapters from DeVinne's "Modern Methods of Book Composition,"
    revised and arranged for this series of text-books by J. W. Bothwell
    of The DeVinne Press, New York. Part I: Composition of pages.
    Part II: Imposition of pages. 229 pp.; illustrated; 525 review
    questions; glossary.

21. =Tabular Composition= By Robert Seaver

    A study of the elementary forms of table composition, with examples
    of more difficult composition. 36 pp.; examples; 45 review
    questions.

22. =Applied Arithmetic= By E. E. Sheldon

    Elementary arithmetic applied to problems of the printing trade,
    calculation of materials, paper weights and sizes, with standard
    tables and rules for computation, each subject amplified with
    examples and exercises. 159 pp.

23. =Typecasting and Composing Machines= A. W. Finlay, Editor

    Section I--The Linotype By L. A. Hornstein
    Section II--The Monotype By Joseph Hays
    Section III--The Intertype By Henry W. Cozzens
    Section IV--Other Typecasting and Typesetting Machines
                                                       By Frank H. Smith

    A brief history of typesetting machines, with descriptions of their
    mechanical principles and operations. Illustrated; review questions;
    glossary.


PART III--Imposition and Stonework

24. =Locking Forms for the Job Press= By Frank S. Henry

    Things the apprentice should know about locking up small forms, and
    about general work on the stone. Illustrated; review questions;
    glossary.

25. =Preparing Forms for the Cylinder Press= By Frank S. Henry

    Pamphlet and catalog imposition; margins; fold marks, etc. Methods
    of handling type forms and electrotype forms. Illustrated; review
    questions; glossary.


PART IV--Presswork

26. =Making Ready on Platen Presses= By T. G. McGrew

    The essential parts of a press and their functions; distinctive
    features of commonly used machines. Preparing the tympan, regulating
    the impression, underlaying and overlaying, setting gauges, and
    other details explained. Illustrated; review questions; glossary.

27. =Cylinder Presswork= By T. G. McGrew

    Preparing the press; adjustment of bed and cylinder, form rollers,
    ink fountain, grippers and delivery systems. Underlaying and
    overlaying; modern overlay methods. Illustrated; review questions;
    glossary.

28. =Pressroom Hints and Helps= By Charles L. Dunton

    Describing some practical methods of pressroom work, with directions
    and useful information relating to a variety of printing-press
    problems. 87 pp.; 176 review questions.

29. =Reproductive Processes of the Graphic Arts= By A. W. Elson

    A primer of information about the distinctive features of the
    relief, the intaglio, and the planographic processes of printing.
    84 pp.; illustrated; 100 review questions; glossary.


PART V--Pamphlet and Book Binding

30. =Pamphlet Binding= By Bancroft L. Goodwin

    A primer of information about the various operations employed in
    binding pamphlets and other work in the bindery. Illustrated; review
    questions; glossary.

31. =Book Binding= By John J. Pleger

    Practical information about the usual operations in binding books;
    folding; gathering, collating, sewing, forwarding, finishing. Case
    making and cased-in books. Hand work and machine work. Job and
    blank-book binding. Illustrated; review questions; glossary.


PART VI--Correct Literary Composition

32. =Word Study and English Grammar= By F. W. Hamilton

    A primer of information about words, their relations, and their
    uses. 68 pp.; 84 review questions; glossary.

33. =Punctuation= By F. W. Hamilton

    A primer of information about the marks of punctuation and their
    use, both grammatically and typographically. 56 pp.; 59 review
    questions; glossary.

34. =Capitals= By F. W. Hamilton

    A primer of information about capitalization, with some practical
    typographic hints as to the use of capitals. 48 pp.; 92 review
    questions; glossary.

35. =Division of Words= By F. W. Hamilton

    Rules for the division of words at the ends of lines, with remarks
    on spelling, syllabication and pronunciation. 42 pp.; 70 review
    questions.

36. =Compound Words= By F. W. Hamilton

    A study of the principles of compounding, the components of
    compounds, and the use of the hyphen. 34 pp.; 62 review questions.

37. =Abbreviations and Signs= By F. W. Hamilton

    A primer of information about abbreviations and signs, with
    classified lists of those in most common use. 58 pp.; 32 review
    questions.

38. =The Uses of Italic= By F. W. Hamilton

    A primer of information about the history and uses of italic
    letters. 31 pp.; 37 review questions.

39. =Proofreading= By Arnold Levitas

    The technical phases of the proofreader's work; reading, marking,
    revising, etc.; methods of handling proofs and copy. Illustrated by
    examples. 59 pp.; 69 review questions; glossary.

40. =Preparation of Printers' Copy= By F. W. Hamilton

    Suggestions for authors, editors, and all who are engaged in
    preparing copy for the composing room. 36 pp.; 67 review questions.

41. =Printers' Manual of Style=

    A reference compilation of approved rules, usages, and suggestions
    relating to uniformity in punctuation, capitalization,
    abbreviations, numerals, and kindred features of composition.

42. =The Printer's Dictionary= By A. A. Stewart

    A handbook of definitions and miscellaneous information about
    various processes of printing, alphabetically arranged. Technical
    terms explained. Illustrated.


PART VII--Design, Color, and Lettering

43. =Applied Design for Printers= By Harry L. Gage

    A handbook of the principles of arrangement, with brief comment on
    the periods of design which have most influenced printing. Treats of
    harmony, balance, proportion, and rhythm; motion; symmetry and
    variety; ornament, esthetic and symbolic. 37 illustrations;
    46 review questions; glossary; bibliography.

44. =Elements of Typographic Design= By Harry L. Gage

    Applications of the principles of decorative design. Building
    material of typography paper, types, ink, decorations and
    illustrations. Handling of shapes. Design of complete book, treating
    each part. Design of commercial forms and single units.
    Illustrations; review questions; glossary; bibliography.

45. =Rudiments of Color in Printing= By Harry L. Gage

    Use of color: for decoration of black and white, for broad poster
    effect, in combinations of two, three, or more printings with
    process engravings. Scientific nature of color, physical and
    chemical. Terms in which color may be discussed: hue, value,
    intensity. Diagrams in color, scales and combinations. Color theory
    of process engraving. Experiments with color. Illustrations in full
    color, and on various papers. Review questions; glossary;
    bibliography.

46. =Lettering in Typography= By Harry L. Gage

    Printer's use of lettering: adaptability and decorative effect.
    Development of historic writing and lettering and its influence on
    type design. Classification of general forms in lettering.
    Application of design to lettering. Drawing for reproduction. Fully
    illustrated; review questions; glossary; bibliography.

47. =Typographic Design in Advertising= By Harry L. Gage

    The printer's function in advertising. Precepts upon which
    advertising is based. Printer's analysis of his copy. Emphasis,
    legibility, attention, color. Method of studying advertising
    typography. Illustrations; review questions; glossary; bibliography.

48. =Making Dummies and Layouts= By Harry L. Gage

    A layout: the architectural plan. A dummy: the imitation of a
    proposed final effect. Use of dummy in sales work. Use of layout.
    Function of layout man. Binding schemes for dummies. Dummy
    envelopes. Illustrations; review questions; glossary; bibliography.


PART VIII--History of Printing

49. =Books Before Typography= By F. W. Hamilton

    A primer of information about the invention of the alphabet and the
    history of bookmaking up to the invention of movable types. 62 pp.;
    illustrated; 64 review questions.

50. =The Invention of Typography= By F. W. Hamilton

    A brief sketch of the invention of printing and how it came about.
    64 pp.; 62 review questions.

51. =History of Printing--Part I= By F. W. Hamilton

    A primer of information about the beginnings of printing, the
    development of the book, the development of printers' materials, and
    the work of the great pioneers. 63 pp.; 55 review questions.

52. =History of Printing--Part II= By F. W. Hamilton

    A brief sketch of the economic conditions of the printing industry
    from 1450 to 1789, including government regulations, censorship,
    internal conditions and industrial relations. 94 pp.; 128 review
    questions.

53. =Printing in England= By F. W. Hamilton

    A short history of printing in England from Caxton to the present
    time. 89 pp.; 65 review questions.

54. =Printing in America= By F. W. Hamilton

    A brief sketch of the development of the newspaper, and some notes
    on publishers who have especially contributed to printing. 98 pp.;
    84 review questions.

55. =Type and Presses in America= By F. W. Hamilton

    A brief historical sketch of the development of type casting and
    press building in the United States. 52 pp.; 61 review questions.


PART IX--Cost Finding and Accounting

56. =Elements of Cost in Printing= By Henry P. Porter

    The Standard Cost-Finding Forms and their uses. What they should
    show. How to utilize the information they give. Review questions.
    Glossary.

57. =Use of a Cost System= By Henry P. Porter

    The Standard Cost-Finding Forms and their uses. What they should
    show. How to utilize the information they give. Review questions.
    Glossary.

58. =The Printer as a Merchant= By Henry P. Porter

    The selection and purchase of materials and supplies for printing.
    The relation of the cost of raw material and the selling price of
    the finished product. Review questions. Glossary.

59. =Fundamental Principles of Estimating= By Henry P. Porter

    The estimator and his work; forms to use; general rules for
    estimating. Review questions. Glossary.

60. =Estimating and Selling= By Henry P. Porter

    An insight into the methods used in making estimates, and their
    relation to selling. Review questions. Glossary.

61. =Accounting for Printers= By Henry P. Porter

    A brief outline of an accounting system for printers; necessary
    books and accessory records. Review questions. Glossary.


PART X--Miscellaneous

62. =Health, Sanitation, and Safety= By Henry P. Porter

    Hygiene in the printing trade; a study of conditions old and new;
    practical suggestions for improvement; protective appliances and
    rules for safety.

63. =Topical Index= By F. W. Hamilton

    A book of reference covering the topics treated in the Typographic
    Technical Series, alphabetically arranged.

64. =Courses of Study= By F. W. Hamilton

    A guidebook for teachers, with outlines and suggestions for
    classroom and shop work.




ACKNOWLEDGMENT


This series of Typographic Text-books is the result of the splendid
co-operation of a large number of firms and individuals engaged in the
printing business and its allied industries in the United States of
America.

The Committee on Education of the United Typothetae of America, under
whose auspices the books have been prepared and published, acknowledges
its indebtedness for the generous assistance rendered by the many
authors, printers, and others identified with this work.

While due acknowledgment is made on the title and copyright pages of
those contributing to each book, the Committee nevertheless felt that a
group list of co-operating firms would be of interest.

The following list is not complete, as it includes only those who have
co-operated in the production of a portion of the volumes, constituting
the first printing. As soon as the entire list of books comprising the
Typographic Technical Series has been completed (which the Committee
hopes will be at an early date), the full list will be printed in each
volume.

The Committee also desires to acknowledge its indebtedness to the many
subscribers to this Series who have patiently awaited its publication.

                            COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION,
                            UNITED TYPOTHETAE OF AMERICA.

                                  HENRY P. PORTER, _Chairman_,
                                  E. LAWRENCE FELL,
                                  A. M. GLOSSBRENNER,
                                  J. CLYDE OSWALD,
                                  TOBY RUBOVITS.

                            FREDERICK W. HAMILTON, _Education Director_.




CONTRIBUTORS


For Composition and Electrotypes

    ISAAC H. BLANCHARD COMPANY, New York, N. Y.
    S. H. BURBANK & CO., Philadelphia, Pa.
    J. S. CUSHING & CO., Norwood, Mass.
    THE DEVINNE PRESS, New York, N. Y.
    R. R. DONNELLEY & SONS CO., Chicago, Ill.
    GEO. H. ELLIS CO., Boston, Mass.
    EVANS-WINTER-HEBB, Detroit, Mich.
    FRANKLIN PRINTING COMPANY, Philadelphia, Pa.
    F. H. GILSON COMPANY, Boston, Mass.
    STEPHEN GREENE & CO., Philadelphia, Pa.
    W. F. HALL PRINTING CO., Chicago, Ill.
    J. B. LIPPINCOTT CO., Philadelphia, Pa.
    MCCALLA & CO. INC., Philadelphia, Pa.
    THE PATTESON PRESS, New York, New York
    THE PLIMPTON PRESS, Norwood, Mass.
    POOLE BROS., Chicago, Ill.
    EDWARD STERN & CO., Philadelphia, Pa.
    THE STONE PRINTING & MFG. CO., Roanoke, Va.
    C. D. TRAPHAGEN, Lincoln, Neb.
    THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, Cambridge, Mass.


For Composition

    BOSTON TYPOTHETAE SCHOOL OF PRINTING, Boston, Mass.
    WILLIAM F. FELL CO., Philadelphia, Pa.
    THE KALKHOFF COMPANY, New York, N. Y.
    OXFORD-PRINT, Boston, Mass.
    TOBY RUBOVITS, Chicago, Ill.


For Electrotypes

    BLOMGREN BROTHERS CO., Chicago, Ill.
    FLOWER STEEL ELECTROTYPING CO., New York, N. Y.
    C. J. PETERS & SON CO., Boston, Mass.
    ROYAL ELECTROTYPE CO., Philadelphia, Pa.
    H. C. WHITCOMB & CO., Boston, Mass.


For Engravings

    AMERICAN TYPE FOUNDERS CO., Boston, Mass.
    C. B. COTTRELL & SONS CO., Westerly, R. I.
    GOLDING MANUFACTURING CO., Franklin, Mass.
    HARVARD UNIVERSITY, Cambridge, Mass.
    INLAND PRINTER CO., Chicago, Ill.
    LANSTON MONOTYPE MACHINE COMPANY, Philadelphia, Pa.
    MERGENTHALER LINOTYPE COMPANY, New York, N. Y.
    GEO. H. MORRILL CO., Norwood, Mass.
    OSWALD PUBLISHING CO., New York, N. Y.
    THE PRINTING ART, Cambridge, Mass.
    B. D. RISING PAPER COMPANY, Housatonic, Mass.
    THE VANDERCOOK PRESS, Chicago, Ill.


For Book Paper

    AMERICAN WRITING PAPER CO., Holyoke, Mass.
    WEST VIRGINIA PULP & PAPER CO., Mechanicville, N. Y.