[Illustration: _By courtesy of The New York Times_

NEW YORK'S BETTER BABY

Little Hiss Johanna Wiggers, who won the first prize in New York's
Better Babies Contest by scoring 100 points, is the type of little girl
that will make the best mothers, and the better race tomorrow. Her score
card showed; age, 28 months; weight, 33 lbs. 14 ozs.; height, 35-1/2
inches; circumference of head, 19-1/2 inches: circumference of chest, 20
inches; lateral diameter of chest, 6 inches; diameter of chest from
front to back, 4-1/2 inches; length of arm to tip of middle finger,
14-1/2 inches; length of leg to the sole of the foot, 16-1/2 inches;
total, 100 points.]




The Eugenic Marriage

A Personal Guide to the New Science of Better Living and Better Babies

By W. GRANT HAGUE, M. D.

_College of Physicians and Surgeons (Columbia University), New York;
Member of County Medical Society, and of the American Medical
Association_

In Four Volumes

VOLUME II

New York

THE REVIEW OF REVIEWS COMPANY

1914

     Copyright, 1913, by
     W. GRANT HAGUE

     Copyright, 1914, by
     W. GRANT HAGUE




TABLE OF CONTENTS



SEX HYGIENE FOR THE BOY

CHAPTER XII

BUILDING OUR BOYS

PAGE

A word to parents--Interest in sex hygiene--The "Social Evil"--Ten
millions suffering with venereal diseases in the United
States--Immorality not confined to large cities--Venereal diseases
common in country places--What are the consequences of venereal disease
to the boy?--Gonorrhea, or clap--Symptoms of gonorrhea in the
male--Complications of gonorrhea--Syphilis, or the "pox"--How syphilis
is acquired--Syphilis attacks every organ in the body--Not possible to
tell when cured--The chancre--Systematic, or constitutional
symptoms--Mucous patches and ulcers--Syphilis of the blood vessels and
lymphatic glands--The interior organs--Brain and spinal cord--The nose,
eye, ear, throat--Hair and nails--What the boy with venereal disease may
cause in others--The infected wife--A girl's fate when she
marries--Young wife rendered sterile--Young wife made to miscarry--Is
the husband to blame--Building the man--Age of puberty--"Internal
Secretion" ... PAGE 139


CHAPTER XIII

THE PARENTS AND THE BOY

Abuse of the procreative function--The continent life--Provide the
environment necessary to the clean life--The period of procreative
power--Self-abuse--Masturbation--Treatment of masturbation--Night losses
or wet dreams--Causes of night emissions--Sexual excesses--Treatment of
sexual excesses--What parents should know about the so-called "social
evil" before speaking with authority to the boy--The need of
enlightenment in sexual matters--"No one told me, I did not know"--Fake
medical treatment of venereal diseases--Sowing wild oats--Should
circumcision be advised ... PAGE 153


SEX HYGIENE FOR THE GIRL

CHAPTER XIV

A MOTHER'S DUTY TO HER DAUGHTER

What a mother should tell her little girl--Where do babies come
from--How baby birds and fish come from eggs--How other animals have
little nests of their own--The duty of mothers to instruct and
direct--What a mother should tell her daughter--Every mother should
regard this duty as sacred--Every female child is a possible future
mother--Motherhood the highest function of the sex--Health the one
necessary essential--Symptoms of the first, or beginning
menstruation--The period of puberty in the female--Changes in the
reproductive organs at puberty--The female generative organs--The
function of the reproductive organs--The age of puberty in the
female--The function of the ovary--The function of the womb--Why
menstruation occurs every twenty-eight days--The male or papa egg--The
function of the spermatozoa--"Tell the whole story"--"How do these
spermatozoa get there"--The union of the species--"How can a baby live
in there for such a long time"--How the baby gets its nourishment in the
womb--Girls must not become mothers ... PAGE 173


CHAPTER XV

PREPARING FOR MOTHERHOOD

Menstruation--Irregular menstruation--Changes in the quantity
of the flow--How the womb is held in place--Symptoms of
menstruation--Menstruation should not be accompanied with pain--Don't
give your daughters patent medicines, or "Female Regulators"--Take your
daughter to the doctor--Leucorrhea in girls--Bathing when
menstruating--Constipation and displaced wombs--Dress and
menstruation--Absence of menstruation, or amenorrhea--Treatment of
amenorrhea--Painful menstruation, or dysmenorrhea--Causes of
dysmenorrhea--Treatment of dysmenorrhea--Sterility in the
female--Conditions which affect the fertility of women--Climate, station
in life, season of the year, age, the tendency to miscarry--Causes of
sterility in the female--Displacement of womb--Diseases of womb,
ovaries, or tubes--Malformations--Lacerations--Tumors--Leucorrhea--Physical
debility--Obesity--Special poisons--"Knack of miscarrying"--Miscarriage--Cause
of miscarriage--The course and symptoms of miscarriage--What to do
when a miscarriage is threatened--Treatment of threatened
miscarriage--Treatment of inevitable miscarriage--After
treatment of miscarriage--The tendency to miscarriage ... PAGE 187


THE BABY

CHAPTER XVI

HYGIENE AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE BABY

What to prepare for the coming baby--Care of the newly-born baby--The
first bath--Dressing the cord--Treatment after the cord falls off--A
pouting navel--Bathing baby--Clothing the baby--Baby's night
clothes--Care of the eyes--Care of the mouth and first teeth--Care of
the skin--Care of the genital organs--Amusing baby--Temperature
in children--The teeth--The permanent teeth--Care of the
teeth--Dentition--Treatment of teething--How to weigh the baby--Average
weight of a male baby--Average weight of a female baby--Average height
of a male child--The rate of growth of a child--Pulse rate in
children--Infant records, why they should be kept--"Growing
pains" ... PAGE 209


CHAPTER XVII

BABY'S FEEDING HABITS

Overfeeding baby--Intervals of feeding--How long should a baby stay at
the breast--Vomiting between feedings--Regularity of feeding--Why is
regularity of feeding important--A baby never vomits--What is the
significance of so-called vomiting after feedings--Mother's milk that is
unfit for baby--Fresh air for baby--Air baths for baby ... PAGE 223


CHAPTER XVIII

BABY'S GOOD AND BAD HABITS--FOOD FORMULAS

Baby's bed--The proper way to lay baby in bed--Baby should sleep by
itself--How long should a baby sleep--Why a baby cries--The habitual
crier--The habit of feeding baby every time it cries--The habit of
walking the floor with baby every time it cries--Jouncing, or hobbling
baby--Baby needs water to drink--The evil habit of kissing
baby--Establishing toilet habits--Baby's comforter--What can be done to
lessen the evil effects of the comforter habit--Beef juice--Beef juice
by the cold process--Mutton broth--Mutton broth with cornstarch or
arrowroot--Chicken, veal, and beef broths--Scraped beef or meat
pulp--Junket or curds and whey--Whey--Barley water--Barley water gruel
or barley jelly--Rice, wheat or oat water--Imperial Granum--Albumen
water--Dried bread--Coddled egg ... PAGE 235


ARTIFICIAL FEEDING

CHAPTER XIX

ARTIFICIAL FEEDING

Elementary principles of milk modification--The secret of the efficiency
of mothers' milk--Two important factors in successful artificial
feeding--Every child is a problem in itself--Proprietary foods of little
value as infant foods--Their value is in the milk added to them--The
credit belongs to the cow--Difference between human and cow's milk--What
"top-milk" feeding means--Utensils necessary for home modification of
milk--Artificial feeding from birth to the twelfth month--How to
measure "top-milk"--Easy bottle-feeding method--Condensed milk
feeding--Objections to condensed milk feeding ... PAGE 249


CHAPTER XX

ARTIFICIAL FEEDING (_continued_)

How to prepare milk mixtures--Sterilizing the food for the day's
feeding--How to test the temperature of the food for baby--When to
increase the quality or quantity of food--Food allowable during the
first year in addition to milk--Beef-juice--White of egg--Orange
juice--Peptonized milk--The hot or immediate process--The cold
process--Partially peptonized milk--Completely peptonized milk--Uses of
peptonized milk--Objections to peptonized milk--What a mother should
know about baby's feeding bottle and nipple--Should a mother put her
baby on artificial food if her supply of milk during the first two weeks
is not quite enough to satisfy it--Certain conditions justify the
adoption of artificial feeding from the beginning--Mothers' mistakes in
the preparation of artificial food--Feeding during the second
year--Sample meals for a child three years of age--The diet of older
children--Meats, vegetables, cereals, bread, desserts, fruits ... PAGE 259


WHAT MOTHERS SHOULD KNOW

CHAPTER XXI

THE EDUCATION OF THE MOTHER

What mothers should know about the care of children during illness--A
sick child should be in bed--The diet of the sick child--A child is the
most helpless living thing--The delicate child--How to feed the delicate
child--How to bathe the delicate child--Airing the delicate
child--Habits of the delicate child--Indiscriminate feeding--Poor
appetite--Loss of appetite--Treatment of loss of appetite--Overeating in
infancy--What correct eating means--Bran as a food--Breakfast for a
child at school--Lunch for a child at school--Bran muffins for school
children--Bran muffins in constipation--Hysterical children--What a
mother should know about cathartics and how to give a dose of castor
oil--Castor oil--Calomel--Citrate of Magnesium--When to use castor
oil--When to use calomel--Vaccination--Time for vaccination--Methods of
vaccination--Symptoms of successful vaccination ... PAGE 277


CHAPTER XXII

CONSTIPATION IN INFANTS AND CHILDREN

Constipation--Regularity of bowel function--The function of the
stomach--Fermentation--Incomplete constipation--Importance of a clean
bowel--A daily movement of the bowel necessary--Constipation in
breast-fed infants--Treatment of constipation in breast-fed
infants--Constipation in bottle-fed infants--Treatment of constipation
in bottle-fed infants--Constipation in children over two years of
age--Diet list for constipation in children--Bran muffins in
constipation--Treatment of obstinate constipation--Oil injections in
constipation ... PAGE 303


CHAPTER XXIII

CONSTIPATION IN WOMEN

Chief cause of constipation in women--Constipation a cause of domestic
unhappiness--The requirements of good health--The cost of
constipation--Constipation and social exigencies--One of the important
duties of mothers--Constipation and diseases of women--Constipation is
always harmful--Constipation and pregnancy--Explanation of incomplete
constipation--Causes of constipation--Negligence--Lack of exercise--Lack
of water--Lack of bulk in the food taken--Abuse of cathartic drugs and
aperient waters--Overeating--Treatment of constipation in
women ... PAGE 315




SEX HYGIENE FOR THE BOY




CHAPTER XII

     "The evil that men do lives after them. The good is often
     interred with them."

     "The pleasure in living is to meet temptation and not yield to
     it." Elmer Lee, M. D.

BUILDING OUR BOYS

     A Word to Parents--Interest in Sex Hygiene--The "Social
     Evil"--Ten Millions Suffering with Venereal Diseases in the
     United States--Immorality not Confined to Large
     Cities--Venereal Diseases Common in Country Places--What Are
     the Consequences of Venereal Disease to the Boy?--Gonorrhea, or
     Clap--Symptoms of Gonorrhea in the Male--Complications of
     Gonorrhea--Syphilis, or the "Pox"--How Syphilis is
     Acquired--Syphilis Attacks Every Organ in the Body--Not
     Possible to Tell When Cured--The Chancre--Systematic or
     Constitutional Symptoms--Mucous Patches and Ulcers--Syphilis of
     the Blood Vessels and Lymphatic Glands--The Interior
     Organs--Brain and Spinal Cord--The Nose, Eye, Ear, Throat--Hair
     and Nails--What the Boy with Venereal Disease May Cause in
     Others--The Infected Wife--A Girl's Fate When She
     Marries--Young Wife Rendered Sterile--Young Wife Made to
     Miscarry--Is the Husband to Blame?--Building the Man--Age of
     Puberty--"Internal Secretion."


A WORD TO PARENTS.--Within recent times the subject of sex hygiene has
been freely discussed by members of the medical profession and through
them the general public has been made more or less acquainted with the
problem. It has therefore acquired a degree of genuine interest which
speaks well for the future of the eugenic ideal. Eugenics is based to a
very large extent upon the principles underlying sex hygiene.

As a result of this widespread interest and investigation, we have
discovered that the only method that promises actual progress, is to
talk plainly and to tell the actual truth. The day of the prude has
passed. To attempt to achieve results in the education of youth in sex
problems, without giving, facts, is wasted effort. To give facts we must
explain each problem so that its principles may be clearly understood
and its meaning grasped. To point out the duty of youth is not
sufficient. They must be shown why it is to their best interest to live
the clean life. In every department of education we are beginning to
appreciate that to achieve results it must be based upon the individual
equation. This is why we have found it necessary to assert that it is
the duty of parents to make sex hygiene a personal matter and to
acquaint their children with the facts relating to this problem. It has
been discovered, however, that a very large percentage of parents are
inadequately informed on these subjects, in fact they know practically
nothing about the actual facts which they are supposed to teach. I shall
try to tell the story in a way which every parent will understand.

When a boy reaches the age of puberty he is susceptible to sexual
desire. If he has not been told the story of his growth from boyhood to
man's estate he will either begin to abuse himself, or he will be later
enticed to commit himself to intercourse with some unclean female and he
will acquire a disease as a result.

Inasmuch as it has been asserted that practically every boy has been
addicted to self-abuse at some time, and that eighty per cent. of all
males, between the ages of sixteen and thirty years, are victims of
venereal disease, it would seem justifiable to assume that the boys who
are informed of the facts in time are the boys who constitute the
percentage who escape. This, of course, may not be literally true, but
it is a reasonable assumption.

While self-abuse is a pernicious habit and may be attended with serious
consequences, it is not a disease and, as will be explained later, it
can be cured. It is therefore a menace to the individual, not to the
race, and consequently need not concern us at the present time. On the
other hand the venereal diseases are not to be considered as individual
problems since they affect the welfare of the race. The venereal
diseases which we will consider are gonorrhea and syphilis.

THE SOCIAL EVIL.--It has been estimated that there are more than _ten
millions_ of people in this country to-day suffering from the effects of
venereal diseases. In New York city alone, there are _two million_
victims suffering from the direct or indirect consequences of these
diseases. It has been authoritatively asserted that, out of every ten
men between the ages of sixteen and thirty, eight have, or have had, one
or other of these diseases. When it is remembered that these diseases
are not merely temporary incidents, but that they may be regarded as
practically incurable in the vast majority, because of antagonistic
social conditions and ignorance, and that they are highly infectious, we
may begin to realize how important they are from the standpoint of race
regeneration.

Statistics of these conditions are never reliable because much of the
evil is hidden and lied about. It is quite probable,--if the estimates
were based upon absolute knowledge--that the extent of the prevalency of
these diseases would be greatly increased rather than reduced. It is
however a fact, that the combined ravages of the Great White Plague,
leprosy, yellow fever, and small-pox, are merely incidents compared to
the effects which the venereal diseases have had upon mankind. It is
useless to think that these diseases can be driven out of the land. Any
hope of this nature is the impression of the dreamer. By a propaganda of
education, by the spread of the eugenic idea and ideal, we may, however,
reasonably hope to minimize the evil and, at least, to protect the
innocent.

THE SOURCES OF IMMORALITY.--It is a fallacious idea to assume that the
sources of immorality are confined to the large cities. This is far from
the truth. In smaller towns and country places the diseases are quite
common and conditions there tend to the spread of the contagion in a
more intimate and a more harmful way. The individuals who are most
likely to become affected are those most liable to succumb to temptation
and whose home ties are of the best. There are many instances on record
where one or two loose women spread the infection all over the country
communities, infecting boys and men alike. No one can estimate what the
final effect of such an epidemic may mean or how many innocent
individuals may have their lives wrecked as a direct consequence. It is
because these consequences are the product of ignorance in a very large
percentage of the cases that there is such urgent need for
enlightenment. It is at least our plain duty to tell the boy the actual
facts--to post him with reference to consequences. The more thoroughly
we instruct him in the elementary facts relative to the venereal
diseases, the safer he will be from temptation, and if he possesses this
knowledge and acquires disease, he will be more likely to immediately
seek competent aid and advice.


WHAT ARE THE CONSEQUENCES OF VENEREAL DISEASE TO THE BOY HIMSELF?

GONORRHEA OR "CLAP."--This is the most frequent of the venereal
diseases. It is also the most serious. It is an unfortunate fact, that
in the past,--and even to-day--boys have been told that gonorrhea is no
worse than "a bad cold." This lie has been responsible for much evil and
a great amount of unnecessary suffering and misery.

Gonorrhea is caused by a germ, obtained, as a rule, during intercourse
with an infected person. This germ is called gonococcus. It thrives on
any mucous membrane; it is not, therefore, limited to the sexual organs.
For this reason it may attack any part of the body where mucous membrane
is. It is particularly liable to damage, sometimes seriously and
permanently, the eye. It may be spread from one person to another, or
from any infected article to a person in numerous ways. The innocent may
thus suffer as a result of the carelessness of the vicious.

THE SYMPTOMS OF GONORRHEA IN THE MALE are slight itching and burning of
the mouth of the urethra. This is noticeable at any time from the third
to the fourteenth day after exposure. These symptoms become more
pronounced and a slight discharge appears. The patient is compelled to
urinate frequently and it is painful and difficult. The discharge
increases, it becomes thicker and looks like ordinary yellow pus. If the
case is a severe one, the discharge may be blood stained, and if this
symptom is present urination is more painful and more frequent.

In about ten days the disease reaches its height; it remains stationary
for a number of weeks and then slowly, seemingly, gets better. The
discharge grows thinner, less in quantity and lighter in color. It may
refuse, despite the most careful and efficient treatment, to stop
altogether; it is then known as "gleet." If the discharge stops
completely the patient is apparently cured, as far as any external
manifestation of the disease is concerned. _In seventy-five per cent. of
the cases, however, this apparent cure is no cure at all, as will be
seen later._

Certain complications are likely to arise in the course of gonorrhea.
The infection itself may be of such an acute or virulent type, that it
invades the deeper structures of its own accord and despite the most
careful, competent treatment; or if the treatment is not adequate or
skillful it may be forced backward; or through neglect in not beginning
the right kind of treatment in times, a simple infection may grow in
degree into a serious disease, and invade the more important structures.
In this way are produced disease of the bladder, prostate gland, seminal
vesicles, testicles, and of the kidneys. Gonorrheal rheumatism may
follow, and even disease of the lining membrane of the heart, and death.

When disease of the deeper parts occur the patient is frequently
incapacitated and compelled to go to bed. He may have chills, fever and
sweats, intense pain and the passage of bloody urine. He may have to be
operated upon, and his general health may be permanently wrecked. So
long as the germs are present there is danger despite the most
scientific treatment. It is not the quality of the treatment that is at
fault, it is the presence of the germs; and since it is impossible to
pursue any certain method of eradication, we must continue treatment--as
long as the germs are present--and hope for favorable results. The
infection may last for many years. The germs having found entrance into
the small tubes in the interior organs they can only be dislodged with
difficulty, if at all. These pockets of germs may be excited to renewed
activity by sexual intercourse, or by injury to the parts, and may
reinfect the patient at any times. In a very considerable number of
these cases where the deeper structures are involved, the patient may
recover from the acute or painful period of the disease, only to find
that he is sterile. There are many such cases, and the most vindictive
individual who may believe that every who sins should be punished will
admit that sterility, as the price of a moment's forgetfulness, is a
terrible fee to pay.

SYPHILIS, OR THE "POX," is an infectious, germ blood disease. It is most
frequently acquired through sexual intercourse.

It may be acquired by direct contact with a diseased person. In order to
render such contact effective, it is essential that the skin of the
healthy person be abraded, or the contact may be directly on a mucous
membrane, as the mouth in the act of kissing.

It may be acquired by using any article which has been used by a
syphilitic, as a drinking cup, or towel.

It may be acquired through hereditary transmission.

Surgeons frequently contract syphilis while operating on, or examining
patients who have the disease. Dentists may convey it by means of
instruments which have not been rendered aseptic, or thoroughly clean.
Using a towel which has been used by a syphilitic has many times
conveyed the infection to an innocent party. For this reason the roller
towel has been done away with, and some states have legislated against
its use in hotels and other public places. To use dishes, spoons,
tobacco pipe, beer glasses, etc., which have been used by one having the
disease is an absolutely certain way of being infected. Cigars which may
have been made by a syphilitic will infect whoever smokes them with the
virus of the disease. Syphilis has been known to have been caught from
using the church communion cup. The public drinking-cup has been a
prolific source of syphilitic dissemination to innocents. Legislators
are just waking up to the danger that lurks in this institution and it
will no doubt be done away with, not only in public places, but on all
railroad and steamboat lines.

An infected mother can transmit syphilis to her child. If the father is
affected, but not the wife, the child may escape.

Syphilis attacks every organ in the human body. The actual degree of
infection has no relation to the size or character of the external
manifestations. The external evidence may be minute and insignificant,
while the internal extent and ravages of the disease may be tremendous
and of large proportions. Many men when asked regarding incidents of the
long ago, may state, "Oh, yes, I had a chancre twenty-five years ago,
but it was a very small affair and soon healed up and was cured." Yet
that same little chancre, that made only a mild impression on the man's
mind, may, and most probably will, be the direct cause of that man's
death.

It is not possible to tell with absolute certainty that an individual is
suffering with syphilis by any known test. The most recent one--the
Wassermann test--is not absolute by any means.

The first symptoms, or what is known as the initial lesion of syphilis,
is the chancre.

THE CHANCRE is a small, hard tumor, or it may be a small ulcer with a
hard base, or it may simply appear as a thin small patch on any mucous
membrane. It is not painful, it can be moved if taken between the
fingers, showing it is not attached to the deep structures, and when it
is so moved it is not tender or sore. Any little lump which ulcerates
located on the genitals must be regarded with suspicion. Boys and men
should not be satisfied with any offhand statement that, "it is
nothing." It may be a chancre, and it may be exceedingly serious if not
properly diagnosed.

Systemic, or constitutional symptoms, begin to show themselves any time
from the sixth to the tenth week after the appearance of the chancre.

ERUPTIONS OF THE SKIN characterize every case of syphilis. They occur in
all degrees from the mild rash to the foul ulcer. The ulcerative process
is very often extensive and loathsome.

MUCOUS PATCHES AND ULCERS affect the mucous membranes. The mouth and
throat are favorite locations for these lesions. They occur in the anus
and rectum, and may be mistaken in that region for other serious
conditions. Men who drink and smoke suffer as a rule severely from
mucous patches in the mouth and throat.

Syphilis attacks the blood vessels and the lymphatic glands. These cases
may have been unrecognized, and may have existed for many years. A man
may die from a rupture of a blood vessel in the brain during middle life
as a consequence of a forgotten, supposedly cured case of syphilis many
years before.

THE INTERIOR ORGANS may be attacked by syphilis. As a result we get
disease of the liver, heart, stomach, kidneys, lungs, and other parts.
It has been suggested that many diseases affecting these organs, for
which treatment proves unsatisfactory, may have had their origin in a
former syphilis.

THE BRAIN AND SPINAL CORD are quite often the seat of syphilitic
affections. A tumor, known by the name of "gumma," is the result. The
blood vessels of the entire nervous system may be affected and, as a
consequence, we often see cases of paralysis, apoplexy, epilepsy,
locomotor ataxia and death.

THE NOSE, EYE, EAR, THROAT, are frequently very seriously compromised as
a result of the syphilitic poison. Deformity, caused by rotting of the
bones of these parts is not infrequent. Loss of voice, or smell, or
hearing, or sight, may result.

THE HAIR AND NAILS may fall out. The bones may ulcerate and rot. The
organs of procreation usually participate in the degenerative process.
Virility is destroyed, and impotence is quite common after a severe
attack.


WHAT THE BOY WITH VENEREAL DISEASE MAY CAUSE IN OTHERS

GONORRHEA.--When the average boy acquires gonorrhea he frequently does
not know, for many weeks, that he is the victim of a dangerous,
infectious disease. He appreciates probably, that it relates to the
sexual indiscretion he was guilty of, and feels that it is something to
be ashamed of. He therefore hides his condition, confides in no one, and
blindly hopes it will get better somehow or at some time. Meantime the
disease, which may have been mild at the beginning, is gradually gaining
ground and strength, and his neglect may eventuate in lifelong misery.
No means are taken to guard against spreading the infection, the
discharge may lodge on his fingers and he may infect his eyes and may
lose his sight because he did not know that the discharge is one of the
most dangerous fluids known. It may get on water-closet seats and infect
others. Eventually he is compelled to seek aid, and he may, after a long
period, be freed from the immediate consequences of his folly. At a
later date he marries, and as previously explained, he infects his wife.
This is the beginning of much of the domestic infelicity that is so
prevalent to-day, and, inasmuch as it is a subject that should be
thoroughly understood by every woman and mother, I shall carefully and
clearly explain its significance and its consequences.

Let us first, however, briefly consider what may occur to others if the
boy is unfortunate enough to acquire syphilis. Again the boy fails to
comprehend the nature of his affliction. There is imminent danger of the
members of his household becoming infected. He uses the same dishes,
spoons, towels, and utensils, any one of which may convey the disease to
his father, mother, sister, or brother. He may use the common drinking
glass in school, college, or office, and spread the disease in this way.
He may kiss any member of his family, or a baby, and infect them. He may
have his hair cut, or be shaved, and the virus may be spread around in
this way if the barber does not sterilize the article used,--which he
never does. He may drink at a soda fountain, or at a saloon, and the
next individual to use the same glass may acquire the disease. He is a
menace to the individual, to the community, and to the race. Wives often
acquire syphilis from their husbands.

THE INFECTED WIFE.--It has been previously stated that eight out of
every ten males between the ages of sixteen and thirty, have had or
have, gonorrhea or syphilis. Seventy-five per cent. of these cases have
not been cured. About thirty-five per cent. of these are destined to
infect wife, or wife and children, and in all probability many others.

If a young wife acquires infection from her husband, she is exactly in
the same condition as the diseased boy,--she does not know what ails
her, so she wastes precious time in unprofitable worry. Why should she
know what the trouble is? She came to the marriage bed pure, and clean,
and healthy. Her previous education did not include instruction which
would even help her to guess what the trouble might be. She is simply
conscious of new distressing conditions which she does not understand.
She may try to believe that these conditions are incidental to the
change in her life. Shortly, however, the discharge, which she has had
for a number of weeks, and which she thought was only a leucorrhea, or
"the whites," becomes so profuse and nasty that she begins douching.
This procedure simply blinds her to the true nature of the affection,
and in the end she is driven, ashamed and reluctant, to consult a
physician. She may be informed that her condition is bad, and that it
will be necessary that she submit to a course of treatment. After a time
the physician may succeed in tiding her over the immediate consequences
of the gonorrheal infection she innocently acquired. She may soon after
become pregnant, and she may miscarry as a result of the old trouble, or
she may carry the child the full period. When the child is born it may
be blind and this defect is a consequence of the old infection to the
mother from the father. If the mother is syphilitic the child most
likely will inherit all the horrible possibilities of transmitted
blood-poison.

Pregnancy frequently "lights up" any old, gonorrheal infection in the
female, so this young wife fails to completely recover after the
confinement. She is able to be about, but her strength refuses to be
restored. It may be months later when she begins to suffer pain and to
realize that she is quite sick. She develops a fever and may have a
chill. The physician discovers that she has pus in her tubes and there
is danger of peritonitis or general blood poisoning. The old germs have
been roused and are active. Unfortunately they are located where it is
impossible to dislodge them without resorting to a serious operation. It
is now a problem of saving her life. She is taken to the hospital and
her womb, tubes, and ovaries, are removed--she is unsexed.

Young wives are being operated on every day, in every city in the
civilized world for just such causes. It is a notorious fact, that, in
every city in the world, the number of operations that are daily being
performed on women, is increasing appallingly. Every surgeon knows that
eighty per cent. of these operations are caused, directly or indirectly,
by these diseases, and in almost every case in married women, they are
obtained innocently from their own husbands. It is rare to find a
married woman who is not suffering from some ovarian or uterine trouble,
or some obscure nervous condition, which is not amenable to the ordinary
remedies, and a very large percentage of these cases are primarily
caused by infection obtained in the same way.

When a girl marries she does not know what fate has in store for her,
nor is there any possible way of knowing, under the present marriage
system. If she begets a sickly, puny child,--assuming she herself has
providentially escaped immediate disease,--she devotes all her mother
love and devotion to her child, but she is fighting a hopeless fight as
I previously explained when I stated that one-half of the total effort
of one-third of the race, is expended in combating conditions against
which no successful effort is possible. Even her prayers are futile,
because the wrong is implanted in the constitution of the child and the
remedy is beyond her power to find. These are the tragedies of life,
which no words may adequately describe, and compared to which the
incidental troubles of the world at large are as nothing.

If the conditions are not as bad as those depicted above, the original
infection may have rendered her sterile. If the germs reached the womb
and tubes, the inflammatory process may close these tubes, with the
result that conception is impossible. In these cases the woman has to
bear the stigma and disgrace of a childless union, though she is not
the guilty party. Many husbands are sterile, however, as a result of
venereal disease. It is claimed that eighty per cent. of childless
marriages are caused by sterility of the male partner. Curiously and
unfortunately these men never suspect themselves. The wife is the
delinquent member, in their estimation. She is the victim of jest and
suspicion, and later of jibes and insults. Many women have had their
lives rendered miserable and unhappy because of this suspicion. They are
compelled by their husbands to submit to examination and unpleasant and
painful treatment and operations with the intention of rectifying a
defective condition that does not exist. Many conscientious physicians
refuse to treat women patients against whom the charge of sterility is
made, before subjecting the husbands to thorough examination, and, since
eighty per cent. of childless marriages are due to sterility in the
male, this is a just and reasonable course to pursue.

During the course of all this domestic trouble and tragedy, the young
wife's health has suffered--she scarcely enjoys one day of good health.
Her mental condition is even worse. She submits to innuendo and insult
under the impression that she is the unwitting cause of all the domestic
wretchedness and often wishes she had never entered the marriage state.
We must remember that these conditions wreck ideals and homes, and that
they frequently render inefficient both husband and wife. The economic
business of marriage becomes a failure, ambition is crushed and hope
dies in the heart.

If the mother has been inoculated with the virus of syphilis her
existence is equally wretched; her health is ruined; her efficiency is
forever mortgaged. If she becomes pregnant she will most likely abort
and she will go on aborting for years, in the effort to bring children
into the home, accusing herself meantime and submitting to the
reflections which are heaped upon her, while the real culprit is the
husband. He assumes an injured and innocent attitude and behaves as if
he had been imposed upon by marriage with a woman who cannot carry out
her marital contract.

If she gives birth to a child or children, they are syphilitic. They
may be deformed, or they may be feeble-minded or idiots. They may live
at home for years, always ailing, always sick. They may develop
epilepsy, St. Vitus' dance, skin disease, or mental vagaries, and they
may have to be put into institutions for the feeble-minded, or they may
die by inches at home.

IS THE HUSBAND TO BLAME?--If a boy had gonorrhea a number of years
before entering the marriage state, was treated for it by a physician,
until all symptoms had disappeared and had enjoyed apparent good health
in the interim, and had never been told any of the facts regarding
probable consequences, is it just to blame him if he infects his wife?
It is certain no man would willingly subject his bride to the risk of
infection, with all its horrible consequences. These conditions exist as
a result of the prudish attitude of society in the past toward all
questions affecting sex hygiene. We have not told all the truth to the
boy. Whatever knowledge he may have had was gained from companions, or
from individuals who knew the garbled facts only. There is of course no
excuse for the man who acquires disease after marriage and conveys it to
his wife or children. This is a very different situation and one which
should merit the severest condemnation and punishment. We are, however,
only interested in the boy at present and will not take up the reader's
time with a discussion of the "social evil" from this standpoint.

BUILDING A MAN.--When the boy is about fifteen years of age certain
changes begin to manifest themselves. He grows more rapidly, a growth in
which his whole system participates. His bones grow bigger and stronger,
his muscles increase in size, even his heart, and lungs, and liver, and
his digestive system accommodate themselves to this transformation; the
voice changes and hair begins to grow on his face. The mental process
also keeps pace with the new order of things. He thinks differently and
he sees from a new viewpoint. Nature is making a man out of a boy.

These changes were not understood in the past, but we are beginning to
appreciate the reason for this evolutionary process. We have discovered
that the cause depends upon certain active changes which take place in
the sex organs. About this time the testicles begin to be active. For
years these glands have been preparing themselves for this work, so they
first grow rapidly, increasing in size until they are about eight times
bigger than they were before this time, then they begin to pour into the
circulation a secretion which stimulates changes in all other parts of
the body and is directly responsible for the wonderful change that is
evident in the stature of the boy's body.

This substance or "internal secretion" must not be confused with the
semen. The internal secretion is simply the substance which nature
employs in the developing process and is responsible for the degree of
growth and quality of manhood which the boy manifests. The semen, on the
other hand, is the procreative or fertilizing fluid which enables a man
to beget offspring. When a boy understands this process it aids him in
appreciating the importance of his sex organs and a little thought
enables him to understand that if he abuses these organs he will
seriously interfere with his own development. This process goes on for a
number of years, until the boy reaches maturity. Any act or habit which
weakens the quality of this secretion will deplete his powers and render
him physically and mentally inefficient. To make a man, nature must be
permitted to work in her own way. You cannot improve on her methods nor
can you break her laws with impunity.




CHAPTER XIII

THE PARENTS AND THE BOY

     Abuse of the Procreative Function--The Continent Life--Provide
     the Environment Necessary to the Clean Life--The Period of
     Procreative Power--Self-abuse--Masturbation--Treatment of
     Masturbation--Night Losses or Wet Dreams--Causes of Night
     Emissions--Sexual Excesses--Treatment of Sexual Excesses--What
     Parents Should Know About the So-called "Social Evil," Before
     Speaking with Authority to the Boy--The Need of Enlightenment
     in Sexual Matters--"No One Told Me, I Did Not Know"--Fake
     Medical Treatment of Venereal Diseases--Sowing Wild
     Oats--Should Circumcision be Advised?


ABUSE OF THE PROCREATIVE FUNCTION.--Breeders of animals have discovered
that to breed from very young stock is not good. The quality and stamina
of the progeny is lowered and the vitality of the parent stock is
reduced. It is not a good economic proposition.

Boys should therefore be taught that any form of sexual indulgence is
harmful before the period of full growth.

Nature did not intend that the procreative function should be exercised
by individuals who were not fully developed. The perpetuation of the
species must not depend upon the license of immaturity. The instinct of
sex-attraction must not be debased to serve a puerile, rather than a
holy purpose.

Sexual indulgence in any form, and in any degree, at any age prior to
full maturity is a perversion of the primal instinct of race
perpetuation. The practice has a more intimate and a more personal
association with growing boys, however, than a merely altruistic
reference. Any indulgence of this character at this time is physically
and mentally injurious. No boy can hope ever to acquire the full measure
of his possible development as an efficient working or thinking machine
if he wastes his vital forces in unnatural liberties. He should be
taught this truth in an emphatic manner by those responsible for his
education.

There is a false idea prevalent that a continent life is harmful. So far
as continence relates to immaturity, it may be strongly and justly
asserted that it is probably the most important factor in the
conservation of health and strength. The retention of the procreative
fluids, at a time when nature is opposed to their loss, enables the
growing economy to utilize them in the conservation of nervous energy
and virility. If a boy dissipates these energizing fluids, he deprives
his body of the richest products which he is capable of manufacturing at
a time when he needs every aid in the building up of a physically and
mentally sound and vigorous constitution. There cannot exist a normal
development if the body is deprived of the essential ingredients
necessary to growth and mental vigor.

There was a time when young men were actually taught that sexual
intercourse was necessary to develop full manhood. This was followed by
a period of silence, which has practically extended to recent times.
Both of these systems are pernicious. We know that sexual intercourse is
not necessary to the development of mature normal manhood or womanhood.
On the contrary, we know that continence, not incontinence, is an
absolute essential to the growth of full sexual, virile maturity, as
well as to the growth of efficient and healthy manhood and womanhood.

We must appeal to a boy's reason and show him the personal side of clean
living. When he understands that to attain success in every department
of human effort,--on the baseball and football fields, in the ring, in
gymnastic contents, in examinations, in social intercourse, in trades
and professions,--a continent life is the only means possible that
promises success, he will give the appeal consideration.

We must employ all the safety devices possible to guard against the
inclination of youth to wander. Regular exercise is one of the very best
institutions in this respect. If we can instill into our boys a love of
manly sports and encourage every effort in this direction, we will be
doing much to minimize the growth of any tendency toward incontinence.
We must provide the environment necessary to right living. The home
should be attractive and we should permit the boy to have privileges
even at the expense of the housekeeping decorum. His companions should
be made welcome if they are the right kind of intimates, and the parents
should enter into the life of the boy and try to look at "things" from
his standpoint.

THE PERIOD OF PROCREATIVE POWER.--The procreative ability begins at
puberty. There is no fixed period at which it may be said to end. From
puberty until the period of physical maturity, it grows in vigor and it
remains stationary until middle life, when it gradually declines. The
standard of virility is unquestionably an individual problem. It depends
upon the various factors that contribute to good health and longevity.
It may be stated that the boy who abused his procreative function,
during the period of immaturity, will not enjoy, during the mature
period of his sexual life, a normal standard of vigor, nor will he carry
the ability into old age, to the same relative degree, as he would, and
as he had the innate promise to do--if he had led a normal continent
existence. It may also be stated here that there is no effective
remedial measures known, that will "bring back" the procreative ability
if it is lost as a result of disobeying natural laws. Drugs and
treatments by quacks to cure impotence are impositions and fakes. Money
and time spent in the pursuit of this dream is money and time wasted.

SELF-ABUSE OR MASTURBATION.--By self-abuse is meant the production of
the venereal orgasm, with or without emission, by any means other than
the natural union of the sexes.

It is a fact that the large majority of boys acquire the habit of
self-abuse at some time. This is a very serious reflection upon parent,
teacher, and physician, because it is through ignorance of the
elementary principles of sex hygiene that this condition continues to
exist. If they were warned against the possibility of self-abuse
arising in innocent ways, as well as in more reprehensible ways, they
would exert their influence against its acquirement. If however a boy
discovers accidentally a condition of which he was innocent, and of
which he does not know the significance, it is human nature that he
should investigate the phenomenon and in the end suffer as a
consequence. In the effort to relieve some local irritation he may
handle himself and be led into a dangerous practice. He does not know
that the practice may have serious results--in fact he does not know he
is doing anything wrong. Many boys have practically ruined their
physical health and become morally irresponsible because no one--neither
parent, teacher, physician, nor friend--told them of their danger. This
is unjust, but great strides are being made in this direction and we may
reasonably hope, that in the not far distant future, every boy will be
plainly told the true facts about himself.

Most boys acquire this habit from other boys, but as we have intimated
it is possible to acquire it in what are termed innocent ways. Sometimes
the sensation which leads to it is discovered by sliding down banisters;
or it may be that climbing trees or poles first awakens the feeling.
Very young children are sometimes taught the vice by depraved nurses.
Local irritation, as has been stated, may necessitate itching and
handling the parts and in this way the vice is begun. The results are
the same, no matter how the habit may have originated.

If the habit is persisted in, the muscular system suffers,--the muscles
become weak and flabby; the patient develops weariness and languor and
loses his mental and physical vigor. He is no longer forceful or
energetic, his efficiency is impaired and as a consequence his nervous
system begins to show signs of depleted strength. He cannot concentrate
his thoughts, he falls behind in his studies, his mental effort is
sluggish, he becomes diffident and shy, shuns society, loses confidence
in himself, is morbid and emotional and may even think of suicide.

It is astonishing how indulgence in this habit may affect the moral
nature of a boy. First of all, he is no longer frank and open. He
becomes shifty and suspicious and will not look you squarely in the
face. A boy cannot become a slave to this habit without it affecting his
mind. He invites debasing thoughts,--the old pure and clean method of
thought and living no longer satisfy. His imagination even becomes
corrupt and his moral nature and moral sense is perverted until he no
longer seems to be able to tell the difference between right and wrong.
He has little regard for the truth and if occasion demands it he will
lie without appreciating the dishonorable part he is playing. In the end
his will power is lost--even the effort to save himself is too feeble to
succeed--he is a slave to the habit, his health and strength ruined.

If every boy could realize the possible end of this evil habit he would
make an effort to rid himself of it before he becomes its victim and its
slave. It may be easy to abandon the practice in the beginning. The
longer he continues it, however, the less chance he has of finally
mastering it, until, if he persists beyond a certain point, it is a
matter of serious question whether he will ever be able to free himself
from its grip. If the boy has lost the will power to carry out his
resolves, no number of good desires or resolutions will avail. And it is
just this will power that the wasting of the semen saps little by little
away.

TREATMENT.--What can we do for these boys? Most of them can do much for
themselves by simply stopping the practice. There are, of course, others
who need careful management before the habit may be controlled and
health restored. It is well to always remember to be tactful and patient
and kind to these boys. Many of them are standing on the brink of
despair, weak in body and weak in mind. They do not know where to turn
to look for a friend--the right kind of a friend. It is a terrible
thought that your own boy may be abjectly miserable in his own home
because he is harboring a secret that is wrecking his health, and,
though he may long for sympathy and a helping hand, neither his father
nor mother have invited his confidence or spoken to him about these
things. A watchful mother can usually tell when her boy becomes addicted
to this habit. He will show it in his manner, he will not be free and
open, he will want to be by himself. Later he will show the effects of
the abusive treatment he is subjecting himself to in his appearance. He
will be sunken-eyed, pimply-faced, pasty-skinned, shiftless, sneaking,
silent, unmanly. No mother can fail to note these signs and she should
suspect the cause and take steps to tactfully reach him before he has
ruined his health absolutely.

We would advise regular exercise of a vigorous kind. Tire out the body
so that sleep may be sound. Cold baths, followed by brisk rub-downs; no
intoxicants, light meals, plenty of drinking water morning and night.
The bowels should be regular every day. He should sleep alone on a hard
bed in a well-aired room with light covering. He should keep busy every
minute of the day and he should not think of himself at all.

The boy must realize that his salvation rests with himself. After he
knows the real danger which the habit carries with it, he must be on his
guard every moment to abstain. If he does not he may rest assured that
the practice will ruin his health, render him, a business failure and
deprive him of all happiness during the rest of his life.

NIGHT LOSSES OR "WET-DREAMS."--A so-called wet-dream is an unconscious
emission of semen during sleep. The discharge may or may not be
accompanied with an erotic dream.

After a certain age--which may be from the twelfth or fourteenth year--a
boy may discover that he has discharged some substance during his sleep.
He finds the discharge on his night clothes and it naturally puzzles him
greatly. He may be entirely unconscious of the whole proceeding, having
slept soundly during the night, or he may wake up to find the fluid
actually discharging.

If a boy has not been told of this phenomenon he may regard it as a form
of self-abuse of which he may have heard and as a consequence he may
worry himself sick, as the night emissions continue to occur from time
to time. Many pure-minded boys have been rendered miserable, and their
efficiency and health have suffered as a result of just such an
experience. It is, therefore, proper that they should fully understand
the true significance of these occurrences.

CAUSES OF NIGHT EMISSIONS.--I have explained how nature makes a man out
of a boy. During this maturing process the testicles are very active
organs--their function is to manufacture or secrete the fertilizing
fluid or semen. This maturing process begins actively, as I stated,
about the age of fifteen, though in some boys it frequently occurs
earlier, sometimes as early as the twelfth year. When the testicle
begins to grow at this time they manufacture more semen than the little
pockets can hold, so nature adopts the method of permitting the surplus
to escape during sleep. These night emissions, therefore, are perfectly
natural losses, and need cause absolutely no distress of mind whatever.
The frequency with which they may occur depends altogether upon the
temperament of the boy. If the boy is a strong, active, athletic boy,
they may not be so frequent in him as they may be in a quiet, studious
boy. The system of the athletic boy seems to utilize more of this
surplus than the quieter existence of the studious boy calls for. If the
discharge does not occur oftener than once every two weeks, it may be
regarded as normal and natural. Should they become more frequent than
this, the boy should inform his mother or father and the family
physician should be consulted. It may be that he is in need of a tonic,
or special instructions regarding his method of living and his mode of
exercising. Whatever the cause may be, it can be corrected, and the best
plan is to give it attention as soon as it is noted that the losses are
too frequent.

SEXUAL EXCESSES.--It is well known to the medical profession that the
marital relation is frequently practiced to excess. The same indictment
may be passed on what may be termed extra-marital relations. No one has
ever formulated a general sexual standard which could be safely regarded
as normal. Too many individual conditions of temperament and health
enter into the proposition to permit of a standard being formulated. It
must, therefore, be regarded as an individual question to be adjusted,
if necessary, by the family physician. What may safely be regarded as
normal and harmless in one, constitutes, for many reasons, excess in
another. When a man performs hard physical or mental labor, his sexual
aptitude or capacity is limited, and this limitation cannot be exceeded
without risk. Such a limitation may not constitute an excess in a man
whose occupation does not call for a great expenditure of physical or
mental energy. Any indulgence which produces exhaustion is excessive.

The age of the individual has undoubtedly much to do with his sexual
endurance. A young, virile adult will tolerate a sexual expenditure
which would seriously affect the health and vigor of an older man.

Environment and inclination are factors in determining the standard of
some people. If the marital relations are participated in simply to
preserve peace and harmony in the home, they are productive of harm even
if indulged in moderately.

The symptoms of sexual excess are much the same as those of self-abuse.
To a certain extent, however, they are favorably influenced, because the
conditions under which the relationship is practiced are natural,
because the participants are matured physically, and because there is no
element of worry over the probable effects.

Sexual excess defeats its own purpose, because it engenders a lack of
desire and consequently it is to a certain extent a self-limiting
process. We must also remember that excess entails consequences just as
the breaking of any natural law is followed by retribution of some kind.
In these cases we find that discomfort follows excess. The parts become
irritated and congested and disease of the prostate gland always
follows.

TREATMENT.--Stop the excess by self-control and self-restraint. Employ
all the aids dictated by an intelligent perusal of the laws of sex
hygiene. Preserve the general health. It may be necessary to resort to
local treatment, because, if the parts have been abused by excessive
indulgence, there is always more or less irritation and congestion
present. This condition affects the nerves, suggestive reflex sensations
are produced by a congested prostate and the patient becomes morbid. It
is essential for such patients to consult a physician whose local
treatment will stop the sensitiveness in the parts and relieve him so
that he may carry out his programme of restoration unhampered by
conditions which are only amenable to local treatment.

WHAT PARENTS SHOULD KNOW ABOUT THE SO-CALLED "SOCIAL EVIL" BEFORE
SPEAKING WITH AUTHORITY TO "THE BOY."--To be qualified to speak with
authority, or convincingly, to a boy upon sex hygiene, the parents must
be familiar with, and well versed in the subject. The facts related in
the preceding pages must be thoroughly understood. No parent can study
these facts intelligently without being impressed with the importance of
the subject; without realizing that it is absolutely essential that the
fundamental principles of sex hygiene should be taught to the rising
generation; without acknowledging the tremendous part for evil which
prudery and ignorance play in the education of youth; and without being
convinced that most of the evil is the product of ignorance on the part
of the boy, and that parents are in a large sense to blame if they fail
to impart the necessary knowledge in time.

The need for enlightenment in sexual matters is a product of existing
conditions. Civilization and the social environment are developing along
a plane which subjects the youth to temptations that practically did not
exist in the past. There is a broader and looser code of ethics.
Business monopolizes the entire time of the father, and social and
political unrest and misdirected ambition distracts the mother. The son
or daughter has a wider latitude and a freer reign than they once had.
The opportunities for promiscuous intimacies are easier, and the public
conveniences and utilities lend themselves to the designs of
evil-intentioned and loose-moraled women. The ease of travel, the laxity
of laws, the theater, with its unchaste and indecent plays, the moving
picture snows, the vaudeville resorts, whose highest priced "talent" is
some voluptuous female, who has cultivated the art of draping nudity
with suggestiveness and singing immoral songs, all tend to give youth a
false impression of the reality of life and to make the path of the
degenerate easy and profitable. The rich are growing richer, and their
children are pampered and overfed and underrestrained. Time hangs
heavily on their hands and their only mental effort is to devise new
methods and new ways of satisfying the lust of liberty and
overstimulated desire. The poor are growing poorer, and to "keep in the
ring," to live and dress beyond their means as many do, it is necessary
to have an unexacting standard of morals. In this way the promiscuous
libertine is evolved,--the most insidious and dangerous product of
present day civilization, and the most pernicious factor in the spread
of immoral impulses and indecent diseases.

Parents must accept these institutions and agencies as necessary
instruments of evil and adopt measures to nullify their attractiveness.
Eternal vigilance is the price of success, but the quality of the
vigilance must be dictated by love, not by suspicion and distrust.

When the parent can convince the boy that the knowledge is imparted, not
with the intention of depriving him of what he may construe as his
natural liberties and rights, but with the single intention of adding to
the sum total of his pleasure and success, he will look more kindly upon
any proposition that suggests a course of conduct that leads to clean
living. Sex hygiene will eventually find a natural place in the scheme
of education. It will be taught to male and female alike. In the
meantime, however, we must begin by educating the educators--the
parents. In the beginning, their task will not be easy. There will be
much to overcome, much ignorance, prudery, false modesty, hypocrisy;
there will be much vicious teaching and evil example to live down. But
we cannot hope to achieve results in the noblest cause, save by patient,
intelligent, and persistent effort and by self-sacrifice and a constant
enthusiasm. The aim is to tell all,--all the truth,--so that we may
never be assailed by the cry, "No one told me, I did not know," from the
loved lips of son or daughter gone astray.

THE FATHER AND THE BOY.--The right kind of father can always find the
time and the way to awaken in the heart of the boy the spirit of
companionship. No boy living will resent the fellowship of the right
kind of father. It depends upon the father! If the spirit of chumminess
does not exist between you and your boy, you are at fault, you have made
a mistake, you have missed your opportunity, you "did not go about it in
the right way and in the right spirit." Try again--it may not be too
late.

The father who adopts the habit of taking his boys (and his girls too)
out for long walks, at least every Sunday, and who spends an hour with
them every evening--is the right kind of father. One who has never
tested the merit of walks with children cannot possibly appreciate the
enjoyment and benefit that can accrue from them. It is not only the
physical good that results, nor the inspiration which one may draw from
nature, but the concrete advantages that come from the fellowship with
the children are a new and a real experience--this is what counts. You
will have opportunities of sewing seeds in their minds that will grow
into a harvest that will astonish you. Children in the right mood--and
they are in the right mood when they are happy, and they are happy out
in the open with an interesting companion--are alert, and responsive,
and eager to be told "things," and this mood can be put to marvelous use
by the "right kind of father." The father who wanders forth with the
fixed purpose of thinking out some business problem during the walk and
permits the children to find their own amusement is the wrong kind of
father. He must choose to be a child again, he must desire to please
them, he must make an effort to be in harmony with them, he must draw on
his experience to interest them, he must talk to them entertainingly of
every interesting problem which the walk itself suggests or he must
formulate a plan and select a subject with a definite educational scheme
in view. We can, in a most effective way, begin to build their
characters, and, by the right kind of talk and enthusiasm, he can
determine their resolves to be honest, truthful, just, clean,
sympathetic. He can instill into them, in a thousand different ways, the
determination and inspiration to succeed. It is a wonderful and a
precious chance, and it will make the "right kind of father" more just,
more sympathetic, more optimistic, and it will make him young again and
more successful. Try it.

Implant in the hearts of your children a love of home, make the evening
meal and hour by the fireside a period of congenial fellowship, when all
the little irritable ruffles of the day may be ironed out and swept
away. The secret is to be intimate. Tell them the secret of success from
your standpoint, how happiness is gained only by being efficient and
successful, and that, to be efficient, one must be energetic and
healthy. Drum into their ears the truth that life is a battle, and only
the brave "win out," and health is the one essential necessity. It is
astonishing how such talks will impress young minds. They will remind
you of things you said, that made a lasting impression on them, long
after you have forgotten the incident.

A father can, in this way, by talking of the future to his boy, convey
to him the high hopes he entertains of the great success the boy is
going to achieve--you establish a standard in the boy's mind, and he
unconsciously hopes to attain that standard. If you have impressed him
with the necessity of preserving his health and strength, as an
essential to success, he will be slow to yield to any temptation that
may interfere with his plans. This reasoning may sound quixotic to some
people, but it is the truth. Many a boy has been inspired to success by
the knowledge that his mother or father believed in him, and was
confident he would be a leader. He strove to justify the pride and
confidence of those who held him dear, and he won out.

To retain his health, therefore, is the first impulse to be conveyed to
the boy. When he recognizes this truth, it is an easy task to instill a
love of exercise, gymnastics, swimming, fresh air, cleanliness and
temperance in him. If these are attained, you will have tided him over
the tendency to self-abuse, and you will have rendered him less likely
to yield to evil suggestion or temptation. His confidence in you will be
whole-hearted and implicit. You can do anything with him at the
psychological moment. It is now time to talk of more intimate matters.
Carefully and tactfully, the father approaches the fundamental truths of
sex hygiene.

The selection of a subject for a text as a means from which to advance
toward the real facts is sometimes of importance. It must not appear as
though the subject was designedly chosen. If it follows in a natural way
it will more thoroughly interest the boy and he will have swallowed a
large dose of truth before he is impressed with the personal viewpoint.
A passing trotting horse has served me a number of times for intimate
talks with boys on heredity and kindred subjects. I invite the boy to
watch how the horse uses his legs, and how rhythmically and beautifully
he places his feet, and how his whole attitude serves the end for which
he is exerting himself--to gain speed. Tell the boy the story of how
professional breeders have achieved such marvelous results; how for
generations the "strain" has been kept clean and pure, how any
descendant of a great sire, who showed any habit detrimental to the
development of the highest racing qualities--no matter how trivial the
disability might be--was cast aside, experience having taught that it
does not pay to waste effort and time on any horse whose physical or
mental characteristics are not up to the highest standard. Such a horse
will not win, and it is only "wins" that count.

Change the subject to human beings. Tell him how the race maintains its
standard; but show him the difference between the methods employed. How
the horse has his mate selected because of the female's good qualities,
so that the offspring may possess like qualities, if not better, and
that the selection is made by men who know their business, and have had
long experience in the work. How, on the other hand, a young man with no
experience is permitted to choose any woman he may fancy irrespective of
her qualifications. As a consequence, we have all kinds of children,
good and bad, feeble and strong, honest and dishonest, some degenerates
from birth, some criminal, and many diseased and inefficient, few of
them "winners." It is an easy matter to preach a little sermon from this
text. Show him how essential it is to select the mother of one's
children wisely, to know if there is disease in the future wife's blood,
if her family history is good, if her temperament is suited to his, if
her domestic qualities are satisfactory, if her principles are moral
and normal, and if she understands and appreciates the true object and
function of marriage. Show him also the element of justice involved in
the marriage contract; that he must give what he exacts, that if he
expects a healthy and normal wife, he must be healthy and normal
himself; if he expects purity and cleanliness he must give purity and
cleanliness; if he expects to mate with a fit female he must be an
efficient and fit male. Remember that every act, deed, thought, and
aspiration is regulated by laws which one cannot fool with, or disobey,
without reaping a harvest which will conquer, crush and ruin you, no
matter how clever or smart you may think yourself.

Show him the wisdom of the breeders' habit of never permitting sexual
liberties in a too young stallion. For the same reason the boy must
conserve his strength and virility for the marriage state and for the
function of procreation.

In a further talk, the father may extend this subject and gradually lead
up to the "consequences" of the unclean life. The boy will be ready for
this talk and will evince an interest in it that will be encouraging and
promising.

The talk about the science of mating the horses he will understand
readily and thoroughly, and he will not fail to see the point when you
switch to man and apply the same principles. Then when you show how
mismating is responsible for poor children quality and how disease
accounts for feeble-minded and degenerate offspring, he will be fairly
well posted, and he will be ready to imbibe more details, and you will
have done much of your duty. His curiosity will be quickened and his
interest is awakened. It depends upon the father. If your boy is honest
and clean, open and decent, he will not fall without a fight, and while
he is fighting he is maturing. If your picture of the consequences of
the venereal diseases has been effective and vivid, he will grow up with
a healthy horror of them. If your conduct as a father has been wise and
exemplary, and if your home has the right kind of environment, and the
right kind of mother in it, you have done all a father can do to help
the boy over the rough spots. The proper kind of encouragement and the
right kind of vigilance, and books which will satisfy the boy's craving
for more knowledge along this line is all that is needed to help the boy
to "win out."

FAKE MEDICAL TREATMENT FOR VENEREAL DISEASES.--Parents should in every
possible way discourage the use of patent medicines and fake medical
methods of curing these diseases. Untold harm has been done to boys and
to women by these nostrums.

In every instance the motive underlying the methods of people selling
these things is to frighten the patients into the belief that their
condition is more serious than it is in order to justify a long and
expensive course of treatment.

Their work is carelessly performed, and frequently they are directly
responsible for the development of complication and dangerous sequelæ.
The promises of speedy cures are false, and, not infrequently, methods
of black-mailing have been known to follow an expensive and unsuccessful
course of treatment.

There is no class of disease in which the help and honesty of the
legitimate medical profession is needed more than in the treatment of
the venereal diseases. Parents should see to it that the family
physician is prescribing any strange medicine that may appear in the
boy's room, and not some unknown individual who may be an impostor and a
blackmailer.

SOWING WILD OATS.--Writers of fiction and others of a more serious trend
of thought have recognized the sowing of wild oats as an institution
which, if it does not merit the full approval of society's moral code,
is, at least, tolerated. No serious consequences befall the offender. On
the contrary, the libertine is the type of hero who receives the
commendatory quips of erotic dames and the questionable interest of
hysterical maidens.

Women of easy morals are always willing to espouse the cause of the
"black sheep," and to further the matrimonial success of the penitent
_roué_. Many mothers are willing to marry their daughters to the
polished villain of society, who is known as a rake and debauchee, if
his family connections are desirable. It has been even held that a
youth who did not "sow his wild oats" was of doubtful stamina.

That many able men have sown wild oats is indisputable, and that many
men who are respectful husbands, have also gone "through the mill" is
also true, but this need not blind us to the fact that thousands upon
thousands, who could have been successful men of affairs and creditable
husbands and fathers, have been utterly ruined, as a result of having
sown wild oats. No man is a better man because of a past record of
licentious habits. The man who sows and escapes the harvest is lucky.
The man who reaps, reaps in abundance. Most men regret the lapses of
youth. Most of these lapses would never have occurred if the impulse
could have been governed by the reasoning of maturity. These acts are
the promptings of an impetuosity which may be entirely foreign to the
individual's innate character, but brought out by promiscuous
circumstances and the ignorance and license of youth. If we can protect
youth, by an adequate knowledge of the consequences, we will furnish the
means to tide over the impressionable period. Until a healthy maturity
of judgment will assume the task unaided.

The effects of the wild oats' theory are too tragically evident to need
any argumentative refutation. The statistics of the prevalency of
venereal diseases alone is sufficient; the results of these diseases are
more than enough.

Study the records of the jails and prisons, courts and asylums,
hospitals and health resorts, think of the hundreds of thousands of
diseased and deformed and mentally inferior children, of the multitude
of paretics, melancholies, ataxics, maniacs, syphilitics,--all the
products of "wild oats,"--and ask if the wild oats' theory is
justifiable.

Think of the ruined homes, the wretched lives of fallen women, the
hopeless prayers of abandoned wives, the loneliness and misery of
parents neglected and forgotten, the "bastards" and fatherless children,
the drunkards and criminals and tramps--all weeds of the wild oats'
harvest.

Then reflect upon the tragedies, the suicides of the betrayed and of the
diseased, the bank thief, the broken hearts of deserted and hungry
children, the army of inefficients--around whose necks hang wild oats'
medals, the men of big business, who constantly fight the effects of
early incontinence and abuse, and the thousands who go to early graves,
and then ask, in all justice, if the sowing of wild oats needs
justification.

Who supports the thousands of prostitutes? Who made them? Wherever you
find pauperism, crime, drunkenness, insanity, idleness, immorality, vice
and disease, you will find that the sower of wild oats has traveled the
path and left his stain and his footprints there.

SHOULD CIRCUMCISION BE ADVISED?--The answer to the above question is
"Yes," in every instance. If circumcision is done early,--during the
first two weeks of life,--the operation is without danger and
practically without pain. In quite a considerable percentage of all
males, circumcision is an absolute necessity. For excellent medical
reasons, about which your family physician can inform you, every boy
should be circumcised.




CHAPTER XIV

A MOTHER'S DUTY TO HER DAUGHTER

     What a Mother Should Tell Her Little Girl--Where Do Babies Come
     From--How Baby Birds and Fish Come from Eggs--How Other Animals
     Have Little Nests of Their Own--The Duty of Mothers to Instruct
     and Direct--What a Mother Should Tell Her Daughter--Every
     Mother Should Regard This Duty as Sacred--Every Female Child is
     a Possible Future Mother--Motherhood the Highest Function of
     the Sex--Health the One Necessary Essential--Symptoms of the
     First, or Beginning Menstruation--The Period of Puberty in the
     Female--Changes in the Reproductive Organs at Puberty--The
     Female Generative Organs--The Function of the Reproductive
     Organs--The Age of Puberty in the Female--The Function of the
     Ovary--The Function of the Womb--Why Menstruation Occurs Every
     Twenty-eight Days--The Male or Papa Egg--The Function of the
     Spermatozoa--"Tell the Whole Story"--"How do These Spermatozoa
     Get There"--The Union of the Species--"How Can a Baby Live in
     There for Such a Long Time"--How the Baby Gets its Nourishment
     in the Womb--Girls Must Not Become Mothers.


WHAT A MOTHER SHOULD TELL HER LITTLE GIRL.--Every little girl should be
told the Story of Life by her mother. It should be told in simple
language, so that the little girl will understand. Very early in life
the little girl will be prompted to inquire of her mother "Where do
babies come from?" It is wrong to give an evasive reply to this natural
inquiry or to postpone telling the story, because they will be told it
by playmates and will receive very wrong and very crude impressions of
this wonderful subject.

Every mother knows enough of life to tell her little girl its story in a
way that will impress her with the sacredness of God's beautiful
reproductive plan. She should begin by telling her a story about how the
birds live. How at a certain season of the year they choose a mate and
go housekeeping. They build a nest, and when it is all nicely finished,
the mother bird lays her eggs. Then the papa and mamma bird take turns
and sit on the eggs to keep them warm, and after a time the egg breaks
and a little bird is born into the world. They feed the little baby
birds until their feathers grow, and when they are old enough they fly
away from their home and begin life by themselves.

Many questions will be asked as the mother tells the story in her own
words, and the correct answers to these questions will fill in all the
difficult-to-understand points. The story of how the fish lay eggs in
shallow water so that the sun may keep them warm and hatch them out will
interest also. Be careful to impress upon them that there is always a
mamma and a papa, a male and a female bird and fish,--that this is
necessary because God made it so, and we must obey His wish. When the
little girl fully understands the story of the egg bird, and egg fish,
the mother can tell how the Creator thought out a different plan for
other animals like the dog, horse, lion, elephant, and cow. He knew that
it would neither be safe nor possible for these animals to stay at home
long enough to sit on eggs and hatch their babies, so he made a nest for
them inside of their bodies. There they would be warm and would always
be with their mammas no matter what they were doing. So we come to the
answer to their question: "Where do babies come from?"

These interesting stories, according to the intelligence and sincerity
of the mother, can be taken advantage of, to impress the little girl
with the importance of many of the lessons of life. For example, her
attention can be drawn to the fact that man and woman are the highest
types of living things that God made. No other living thing, animal, or
fish, or bird, or tree, or flower, can talk, and think, and reason as
man and woman can. Because of this faculty--to think and reason--the
human family are always trying to find out what can be done with all the
other things God made. We try to find out what the different rocks are
good for; what the different trees are good for, and the different kinds
of earth, and animals, and birds, and fishes, and everything in the
world. We study these, and we learn much, and we are made happier and
more comfortable by what we learn. For example, by studying horses, and
feeding and breeding them carefully, and training them, and caring for
them, we can make stronger horses and better and faster horses; by
studying trees, and planting them in soil best suited to them, and
giving them plenty of water to drink, we can compel these trees to grow
better apples and pears and peaches. In the same way we can produce
better strawberries, and oranges, and grapes, and we can grow flowers
with sweeter smells and prettier colors. We do all this by training
these animals and trees to grow a certain way, to eat certain food, to
drink pure water, and we protect them from the cold and sometimes from
the sun if it is too hot. Our faculty to think and reason has taught us
just what is good for them, and we compel them to obey our laws. As a
result they become strong and more healthy. Now show the little girl how
important she is; how much more precious she is than a tree, or animal,
or flower, and how much more necessary it is that we, mammas and papas,
should use our ability to think and reason in her interest. Show her how
we have found out all about babies and little girls and how we know just
what to do to make strong and healthy, and pure, and good, and clean men
and women of all the little boys and girls in the world. Tell her that
this is what mother is doing now, training her and compelling her to do
the things that will make her a strong and a good mother when she grows
older. Let her distinctly understand that it is the duty of mothers to
instruct and to correct their little daughters when they do any wrong.
Mothers know, because they have had experience in these matters, and
they know just how a little girl must live, and dress, and eat, and
behave, in order to be strong and pure, and good. So when mother
reproves and corrects, it is because she knows that what you are doing
to merit a correction is not for your ultimate good. Show them that all
young things, and young animals, and young babies, and young girls, must
be compelled to obey certain rules and laws, otherwise they would not
grow up to be strong and healthy. Sometimes a rose bush grows up among
stones and weeds, but it never thrives, it is always more or less sick.
It does not grow strong, its flowers are poor little sickly things
compared to the roses on a bush that is planted in proper soil, and
carefully tended and pruned, and watered. So would the little girl turn
out if she grew up in bad company and did not have a mother to guard and
guide her,--to prune her when she was growing careless. Everything in
this world has a meaning, and when mother tells you that you must not do
a certain thing you very much want to do, she has a very good reason for
telling you not to do it. You may not know the reason, but you should
have confidence in your mother, you should believe that she knows what
is best, and that she would not inflict pain or cause you suffering
unless she knew it was for your good. The young horse does not
understand why a halter is put around its neck and is made to run around
in a circle until it is tired. It would much rather enjoy itself in its
own care-free, and happy way. And when finally a full set of harness is
put on, and it is put into the shafts of a wagon and tied there, and
made to pull it and its driver many weary miles the horse does not like
it, and he rebels strenuously. He is, however, compelled to obey in the
end, and he finally consents to become a useful horse.

It is exactly the same way with every little boy and girl. We are put
into this world for a certain purpose, and we must all work. Now parents
know this, and they know just how to prepare little girls and boys for
this work. They therefore ask them to do many things that are not
pleasant or agreeable but which must be done in order to prepare them
for the work ahead.


WHAT A MOTHER SHOULD TELL HER DAUGHTER

Your daughter is now about fourteen years of age. She is about to pass
from girlhood to womanhood and she should know more of life's story. The
mother will now tell her the complete story in the form of little talks,
based upon the following facts as texts. Each mother will doubtless add
to the story as conditions justify and as the education of the mother
and daughter may dictate. A multitude of little side talks can be wisely
indulged in to make clear any uncertain or doubtful explanation, and
every one of these incidental excursions can be made exceedingly
interesting if wisely and opportunely chosen. Always remember, however,
to emphasize the sacredness of the story. Do not permit your daughter to
get the impression that you are telling her something that simply has to
be told, just as you told her the correct way to boil an egg. Let her
realize and get the impression that this is the most serious and most
wonderfully interesting story in existence, the most important story she
will ever hear. Let her understand that motherhood, for which she is now
preparing, is the duty God assigned her in this world: that that duty
must be carried out, and that she must do nothing, nor leave anything
undone, to interfere with its accomplishment. Do not only impress her
with the story itself, but let your own explanation be so emphatically
serious, that she will deeply appreciate its momentous significance--an
occasion to be remembered all her life.

If she gets the proper impression from you at this time she will never
treat the subject lightly, or permit it to be promiscuously discussed
within her hearing.

Begin by telling her that she is about to enter the most important
period of her life. Explain why this is so in the following way, in your
own words. If we admit every female child to be a future mother, and
motherhood the highest function possible to the sex, then the awakening
of the sex organs and the mother instinct, must be the most important
developmental episode in the life story of every woman. If this is so,
then it follows that every girl should enter this period in the very
best physical health possible, in order to reap the best results
incident to this evolutionary period. We impress and warn her,
therefore, that, as her system is about to undergo important changes,
she must be particularly careful of her health. A little mistake at this
time may be followed by more serious consequences than if made at any
other time in her life. If a girl is to become a mother, certain changes
must occur in her body before the nest, of which we previously wrote,
can be made ready. God did not overlook anything when He peopled the
earth; He therefore wisely planned that these changes in the female
should occur at a time when the girl is strong and healthy.

THE PERIOD OF PUBERTY IN THE FEMALE. SYMPTOMS OF BEGINNING
MENSTRUATION.--At about the age of fourteen these changes begin to give
evidence of existence. They affect the girl's whole system and the
mother must be especially patient and sympathetic. Her disposition may
change, she may want to be alone, and she may be more or less
melancholy. She will be dissatisfied with the things that previously
interested her. She will tire easily, and she may have many spasmodic
pains from time to time. The wise mother will tactfully see that she
takes plenty of nourishing food and systematic exercise, and that she
gets enough sleep in a well-aired room. There are other physical changes
which are observable at this age. The girl grows taller, the figure
broadens out, the hips widen, the bust enlarges, and the waist line
increases in size. These are all part of the great change from girlhood
to womanhood.

CHANGES IN THE REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS.--The principal change takes place in
the reproductive organs themselves, and it is very essential that she
should have a clear mental picture of just what is meant by
"reproductive" organs and their location in her body. We mean by this
term the group of organs which are concerned in creating and nourishing
a child until it is old enough to be born into the world.

THE FEMALE GENERATIVE ORGANS.--These organs are the womb or uterus, two
ovaries, two fallopian tubes and the vagina. The womb or uterus is the
"nest." It is about the size of and is shaped like a pear. It is hollow,
however, though its walls are quite thick. The ovaries are about the
size of a peach stone and lie at the side of the womb,--one on either
side. The fallopian tubes connect the ovaries with the womb. The vagina
connects the womb with the outside world,--it is sometimes known as the
birth canal. In the very lowest part of the abdomen, or belly, in front,
is the bladder, which collects the urine until it is necessary to pass
it out. In the back part of this region is the rectum; it collects all
the undigested food, etc., from the intestinal canal. Between these
two,--the bladder and rectum,--we find the reproductive organs, the
womb, ovaries and vagina, described above.

THE FUNCTION OF THE REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS.--It will be difficult, even for
mothers, to acquire a clear understanding of the function of the
reproductive or generative organs. It is an exceedingly interesting
process, however, and it is well worth a patient, attentive study to
clearly understand the brief description we give of it. If you acquire a
distinct mental picture of the problem you will be able to tell your
daughter a story that will be of intense interest to her, and a tale
that is interesting is impressive and is productive of thought and
reflection. That is the condition of mind we want daughters to be in
when they hear this story.

The human ovaries begin to prepare themselves for their life work when
the girl is about eight years of age. When they are ripe, or ready to
perform this duty, the girl menstruates for the first time. This is
known as the age of "puberty," which implies that she has developed,
passed from girlhood into womanhood. After having reached the age of
puberty it is possible to become a mother.

THE AGE OF PUBERTY.--There is no fixed age at which the first
menstruation takes place. Some girls develop quicker than others,--a
condition that depends upon the health and type of girl. A strong,
robust, full-blooded girl will menstruate at an earlier age, than will a
sickly anemic girl. The average age is fourteen years, though there is
no reason to worry if a girl does not menstruate for a number of years
later. In warm climates the age of puberty is from two to four years
earlier than in more temperate climates.

THE FUNCTION OF THE OVARY.--Just what takes place in each ovary when it
is ripe is best explained by likening an ovary to an orange,--though of
course the ovary is very much smaller than an orange, as was previously
noted. If you make a cut in an orange and squeeze it, you express some
of its juice and most likely you will also express one or more seeds.
The seeds of the ovaries are called "ovules," and the process by which
it expresses them is called "ovulation." Of course there is no actual
squeezing of the ovary,--the ovules grow in the ovary, and as they ripen
they come to the surface, and when actually ripe, the part of the
surface of the ovary to which they come, opens up (like a flower
unfolding when in bloom), and they fall out. The ovule we may regard as
the human female egg, and one ripens and falls out every twenty-eight
days.

When the egg falls out of the ovary it falls into the tube which carries
it into the womb. This tube you will remember is called the fallopian
tube. The ovule or egg is now in the cavity of the womb where we will
leave it for the present.

THE FUNCTION OF THE WOMB.--While these changes are going on in the
ovary, the womb is also preparing itself for its share of the work. The
lining or internal surface of the womb is composed of mucous membrane,
much the same as the interior lining of the mouth and throat. This
lining becomes congested with blood, and is so intensely swollen at the
time when the ovule or egg reaches the womb, that it is ready to rupture
and bleed all over its surface. Just whether it will rupture and bleed,
depends upon whether the egg is going to grow into a child or not. If it
is not going to grow into a child, it immediately bleeds freely, and
continues to bleed, until the whole lining of the womb and egg is passed
out into the outer world. This takes four or five days and constitutes
"menstruation." After menstruation is over, the womb begins again to
prepare itself for the coming of the next ovule or egg, and as this
occurs every twenty-eight days, menstruation is commonly termed the
"monthly periods."

WHY MENSTRUATION OCCURS EVERY TWENTY-EIGHT DAYS.--The reason why the
womb does this every twenty-eight days is because it is impossible to
tell just when the womb will be called upon to nourish and support a
child. If it did not get rid of the old blood, it would not be in a
healthy condition to nourish and take care of a baby, nor would its
interior be ready to supply new fresh blood for the growth of the
infant. Hence nature constructs and builds a new "nest" in the interior
of the womb each month. It very much resembles the new home into which
the bride and groom, go to begin housekeeping.

When you told your little girl the story of life, you particularly drew
her attention to the important fact that every living thing is created
by the union of a male and female principle, and, therefore, has a mamma
and papa. This applies to trees, flowers, vegetables, fish, animals,
birds, insects,--every living thing, including human beings. We have
seen that the ovule from the ovary is the female egg, or principle. It
is the part the female contributes toward the future child. Before a
child is possible, however, the ovule must meet the egg from the male.

THE MALE OR PAPA EGG.--The male or papa egg is called a "spermatozoa."
It reaches the interior of the womb through the lower opening, which you
will remember opens into the vagina. Emphasize to your daughter that the
female ovule or egg, and the male egg, or spermatozoa, are minute
objects, so microscopically small that a hundred million of them could
comfortably lie upon a ten-cent piece.

THE FUNCTION OF THE SPERMATOZOA.--God gave the male spermatozoa the
power to move. To watch them under the microscope you would imagine you
were looking into a bowl of water, in which there were hundreds of
little fish all squirming around. But the most wonderful thing about
them is, they can only move in an upward direction,--they seemingly
cannot move downward, or sideways. If you think for a moment you will
understand why God gave them this marvelous property. When the male
semen is deposited in the female vagina, there are thousands of these
minute, living, moving spermatozoa in it. The womb is above the vagina,
and the female egg is in the womb, consequently, to reach this egg, the
spermatozoa must travel upward. To travel in any other direction would
be fruitless energy. There is only one female egg, but there are
thousands of male eggs, or spermatozoa; it is easy, therefore, to
comprehend how one of these spermatozoa should exactly be in line with
the female egg in its upward path, since there are so many of them. It
is only necessary that one should meet the female egg in order to
impregnate it.

The shape of the male principle, or spermatozoa, is exactly like a
little tadpole, and you no doubt recall that a tadpole has a minute
tail, the movement of which enables it to swim around. So has the
spermatozoa, and by the incessant movement of this microscopic tail they
all move upward as soon as discharged by the male. I told you that God
gave the male-germ life. It is necessary now to explain the character of
this life. It is very brief; it is estimated that they are active for
two hours, and then become inactive, or die. The best way to explain the
brief activity to your daughter, is to liken the spermatozoa, to a
mechanical toy, which is wound up to go for a certain time. After it
runs out it becomes inactive; this is exactly what happens to the little
human tadpole. If during this brief life none of them has happened to
reach the female egg, pregnancy does not take place and menstruation
occurs. On the other hand, if this were not so,--if these spermatozoa
were active for a longer period, pregnancy would almost be certain to
take place every time the womb was not already occupied with a
pregnancy.

TELL THE WHOLE STORY.--When a mother reaches this stage of the wondrous
tale she will be asked by an innocent girl,--"How do these spermatozoa
get there?" or, "You have not told me where these tadpoles came from"
or, "I don't understand how these spermatozoa got into the vagina" or,
"I don't know why you call these the male egg when they are in mamma."
It does not matter how it is expressed, the intent is plain enough. I
have said, that an innocent girl will ask this question, the implication
being that one who is not innocent will refrain from asking this
question. A girl who knows the answer will not ask, because, if she is
familiar with this subject before her mother thinks it wise and proper
to tell her, she obtained her information from a source which, most
likely, insinuated a suggestive, or evil, meaning into the explanation,
consequently she would be afraid, or ashamed, to ask the question. An
innocent girl, on the other hand, would rightly ask for information
which is obviously kept back, and which she has a right to know, since
a complete, and intelligent understanding of the story depends upon the
elucidation asked. If it is proper to tell part of the story, it is
essential to tell all of it. Tell it in your own words in this way:

When God conceived the human race He ensured its perpetuation by
designing a method whereby this would be rendered possible: He did more;
He wisely decided that the function, involving the very existence of the
human race, should be attended with a sentient gratification. He further
instilled into the fundamental economy of mankind, sex attraction, which
is involuntary, undeniable, and unquenchable. If God conceived the means
and the method, no human mind in possession of its faculties should see
evil where it does not exist. It was by Him designed that the male organ
of reproduction should deposit its germinating fluid in the vagina of
the female, and this is accomplished by a union of species.

The one set of reproductive organs is a complement of the other, and
essential to the other. It is by this act that the male spermatozoa is
enabled to complete the function of fecundation.

If now we assume the male and female element to have met and united,
menstruation does not take place. The egg or embryo (the future child)
begins to grow, and it remains in the womb for two hundred and eighty
days from the day when the male and female egg met. It is quite natural
for an intelligent girl to ask her mother to explain, "How a baby can
live in there for such a long time," or "What makes it grow if it does
not get anything to eat or drink."

HOW THE BABY GETS ITS NOURISHMENT IN THE WOMB.--These questions can be
answered in this way. While the baby is in its little comfortable home
it gets everything it needs. You are in your home now. If you wanted a
drink, what would you do? Wouldn't you go to the water faucet and draw a
glass of water? The water comes to you through a pipe, right into your
home, you don't have to go out of the house to get it. And if you wanted
light when it is dark you would turn on the gas and light it. It, too,
comes into your home through a pipe. Now baby gets its air; and food,
and all it needs to drink in just that way. There are two little pipes
which go into its nest or home, and then into the baby's body at the
navel, and through these pipes fresh blood runs in and out. When mother
breathes, her blood sucks up oxygen from the air in her lungs, and the
blood carries oxygen to every part of her body. In this way, all parts
are supplied with the proper quantity of air. Now the baby is simply a
new part of mamma as long as it is in its nest in her body, so it too
gets air in this way. When mother eats, the food is taken into her
stomach and it is there changed into liquid and so prepared, that when
it passes into the intestines, the part of the food that is good for
her, is sucked up into the blood, and the blood carries it to every part
of her body. It distributes whatever is needed to all parts, and as the
baby is a part, it gets its share. The other pipe carries the blood back
again, out of the baby for new supplies, and as this is going on all the
time, there is no danger of the baby starving in any way, or at any
time.

When your daughter understands this, show her how important it is that
mothers should be in good health, otherwise the baby will not get good
food, it will not be properly nourished and will be born a poor, little
sickly child. Little girls, consequently, should try to eat properly,
exercise regularly, and do everything their mothers tell them, so that
when they become mothers, they will be able to nourish their babies and
not bring into the world poor little starved infants.

GIRLS MUST NOT BECOME MOTHERS.--We have previously stated that girls can
become mothers when they have reached the age of puberty. God did not
intend, however, that girls at the age of twelve or fourteen should
become mothers, because their bodies are not strong enough, nor are they
fully grown, nor have they the experience, to undertake the physical
task and responsibility of bringing a baby into the world. We know this
from experience, because we have seen the sickly babies such girls have,
and we have seen how much these girl mothers suffer, and how they ruin
their health, by trying to do what God did not intend they should do.
Even the trees teach us this lesson. An orange tree will bring out buds,
which would develop into oranges, when it is two years old. The
experienced farmer, however, will pluck these buds off, and will do so
every year, till the tree is five years old. If he allowed the tree to
bear fruit during its young years, the oranges would not be good, or
sweet, or large; so he waits until the tree has grown and is strong and
healthy, when its fruit will be large and sweet. An orange tree of this
type will have better fruit, and will continue to produce this good
variety for many years. A tree allowed to bear fruit when two years old
will never have first class oranges, nor will it continue to have, even
poor oranges, as long as the other.




CHAPTER XV

PREPARING FOR MOTHERHOOD

     Menstruation--Irregular Menstruation--Changes in the Quantity
     of the Flow--How the Womb is Held in Place--Symptoms of
     Menstruation--Menstruation Should Not be Accompanied with
     Pain--Don't Give Your Daughters Patent Medicines or "Female
     Regulators"--Take Your Daughter to the Doctor--Leucorrhea in
     Girls--Bathing when Menstruating--Constipation and Displaced
     Wombs--Dress and Menstruation--Absence of Menstruation, or
     Amenorrhea--Treatment of Amenorrhea--Painful Menstruation, or
     Dysmenorrhea--Causes of Dysmenorrhea--Treatment of
     Dysmenorrhea--Sterility in the Female--Conditions Which Affect
     the Fertility of Women--Climate--Station in Life--Season of the
     Year--Age--The Tendency to Miscarry--Causes of Sterility in the
     Female--Displacement of Womb--Diseases of Womb, Ovaries, or
     Tubes--Malformations--Lacerations--Tumors--Leucorrhea--Physical
     Debility--Obesity--Special Poisons--"Knack of
     Miscarrying"--Miscarriage--Cause of Miscarriage--The Course and
     Symptoms of Miscarriage--What to do when a Miscarriage is
     Threatened--Treatment of Threatened Miscarriage--Treatment of
     Inevitable Miscarriage--After Treatment of Miscarriage--The
     Tendency to Miscarriage.


MENSTRUATION

We have explained in the previous chapter what menstruation is, its
frequency, its significance and its origin. There are a number of its
common characteristics with which the mother and daughter should be
acquainted.

IRREGULAR MENSTRUATION.--Menstruation may occur once (the first time)
and fail to recur the following month or for a number of months. This
need cause no alarm as long as the general health remains good. It will
come again in its own time. Nervousness may cause a suspension of
menstruation. This is quite common in school girls who are driven too
hard at school, whose sleep is interfered with, whose appetite is poor
and who are allowed too many social indiscretions, as parties, dances,
etc., where late hours are observed, all of which should be put aside
until school life is over. Sometimes menstruation will temporarily stop
if the girl goes away from home on a visit.

Sometimes the quantity will be greater than at other times, and a very
scant flow, after it has been free and regular may cause apprehension.
Various causes may be responsible for a decrease, catching cold, sitting
on cold steps or cold ground, wearing damp clothes, nervousness, mental
worry, physical exhaustion, insufficient food and exercise, and anemia,
may cause it. For these reasons a girl should be exceedingly careful of
her health, she should guard against catching cold. Do not change the
underwear until certain that the weather is far enough advanced in
season to justify such a change. She should not become exhausted or
worry. In all cases of suppression, or of increased flow, a physician
should be consulted at once, and girls should be instructed to tell
their mothers of any change in the character of the "periods," as soon
as it occurs. Mothers should instruct their daughters to rest the first
day of their monthly flow, and all during the menstruation they should
refrain from any unusual activity. Even play should be moderated and
abstained from entirely if there is any pain. In order that the girl
fully appreciates why these rules are laid down, it is advisable to
explain just how the womb is held in place in her body.

This appears to the writer as being a particular important point. A girl
must not be expected to give these matters the serious consideration
they merit unless she thoroughly understands the reasons why. An
explanation, in the form of even an intelligent talk, will soon be
forgotten. If, however, a definite, concrete picture, is impressed upon
her; if she actually sees in her mind the process that is going on, she
will understand why it is necessary to do as she is told. If the mother
will therefore assure herself that the daughter actually knows what is
being accomplished in her womb at the menstrual period, she will carry
out the instructions more faithfully.

HOW THE WOMB IS HELD IN PLACE.--The human uterus, or womb, is held in
its proper place in much the same way as a clothes pin sits on a clothes
line. The heavier part is the upper part, and that part is held in place
partly by resting on the rectum behind, and the bladder in front. When
menstruation occurs, the body of the womb becomes much heavier because
of the increased amount of blood in its interior. This added weight
increases its liability to tip over, and if any extra strain or effort
is made at this time it will become tipped, or as the physician calls
it, displaced. If a womb becomes displaced, every menstruation afterward
will be painful and prolonged,--sometimes excessively so. A displaced
womb becomes congested and unhealthy. It causes leucorrhea or a chronic
discharge, makes a nervous wreck of the woman, results in sterility and
frequently in a dangerous operation. There are, therefore, ample reasons
for watchfulness and care on the part of the growing girl.

SYMPTOMS OF MENSTRUATION.--After menstruation is established there
should be no actual pain at each period. There are, however, certain
undefined feelings,--premonitory symptoms,--which may be explained in
the following terms:--A day or two before the date on which the
menstruation is expected, the girl will appreciate that "her sickness"
is coming. She will not, or should not, complain of pain, but will state
that she has a bearing down feeling, is a little more nervous than
usual, has no desire to go into company, and wants to be more or less
her own entertainer. The "sick" period usually lasts four or five days.
The second day is the most important.

MENSTRUATION SHOULD NOT BE ACCOMPANIED WITH PAIN.--If any actual pain
accompanies menstruation, either before or after it is established, the
mother should at once take the daughter to the family physician.
Menstruation is a natural, physiological act and should not be
accompanied with actual distress or pain. It is astonishing how many
mothers will allow their daughters to suffer needlessly, for months and
years, because of the mistaken idea that "since the pain is there, it
must be," or because she--the mother--suffered, so also must the
daughter suffer. There is no more unfortunate mistake, and many a girl's
health and happiness has been blasted because of this misbelief. The
cause of the pain is, in a vast majority of the cases, a very simple
one, and can be removed in a very brief time.

Should the menstrual period last too long, be too frequent, or be in any
way not what it should be, consult your physician. If you are not sure
of "what it should be," or if you have any doubt, ask your doctor. Don't
let any false pride or feeling of modesty on your part, or on the part
of your daughter, dictate your policy under such circumstances. Don't
take the advice of your friends or neighbors in a matter so vital. It is
too important, and they are not qualified to "guess" any more than you
are. Don't, if you have any respect for yourself, or love for your
child, begin dosing her with the advertised patent medicines and "Female
Regulators" for which so much is claimed, and which seem to "just suit"
your daughter's case at this particular time. Take her to the doctor,
whose advice you value (or you should not have him as a family
physician), who has no interest at stake except to help you and your
child, and whose fee is no more than the price of one of these bottles
of advertised poison. He is the only one qualified to speak with
authority on such a momentous subject, and you will never spend a dollar
to better advantage. Warn your daughter not to speak about "her
sickness" to other girls.

Especial attention should be paid to cleanliness during this period. The
mistaken idea that bathing of any kind at this time may have disastrous
consequences is responsible for much of this neglect. If proper care is
taken warm sponge baths, in a warm room, will not cause any trouble.
Unpleasant odors can be avoided by sponging the parts with a warm
solution, into which a mild antiseptic is put, upon changing the cloths.

LEUCORRHEA IN GIRLS.--It has been stated above that a displaced womb may
cause leucorrhea or a discharge. It must be remembered that leucorrhea,
or "whites," may occur in girls as well as in married women. It can also
result from catching cold during the menstrual period. Another mistaken
idea is that girls should not take douches for fear of injuring the
hymen. This is erroneous, and while they are entirely unnecessary in a
vast majority of cases it is sometimes absolutely essential to douche in
order to cure leucorrhea. When they are given, it is advisable to use
the small nozzle that comes with every douche bag set.

CONSTIPATION AND DISPLACED WOMBS.--When the picture is fresh in the mind
of the girl, of how the womb is held upright in her body, the mother
should speak to her about the serious results that may occur from
constipation. If the rectum is full of hardened feces the womb will be
pushed out of place, and if under these circumstances straining is
necessary to empty the bowel, and if this condition is habitual,
constipation may be the actual cause of displacement of the womb.

DRESS AND MENSTRUATION.--It is also an opportune time to demonstrate to
what extent serious results may follow mistakes in dressing. The habit
of permitting growing girls to constrict the waist, to bind and pull the
abdomen by too tight garters, or too tight corset, is wrong, and no
mother should permit it. In another part of the book, this matter is
taken up more fully, but if it is explained to the girl while she is
considering the subject of menstruation, she may more quickly and more
fully appreciate its significance.

ABSENCE OF MENSTRUATION--AMENORRHEA.--The absence of menstruation after
it has been established, does not, as a rule, indicate any disease of
the womb or female sexual organs. It is to be regarded merely as a
symptom and can be, as previously stated, safely ignored if the general
health is good. If the general condition is poor, and the quantity and
quality of the blood deficient, it is a provision of nature to suppress
menstruation in the interest of the general health. For this reason it
is safe to disregard the amenorrhea and build up the bodily strength.
This explains why some girls pass the usual age of puberty and show no
signs of menstruating. They are poorly developed sexually, through
deficiency of blood. If, on the other hand, a girl should have all the
symptoms of menstruation every month, but no flow, she should be
examined by a physician to determine if there is any obstruction to the
escape of blood. Total absence of any symptoms of menstruation extending
into adult life, may indicate an absence of the sexual organs. During
the first year after puberty it is quite natural for menstruation to be
irregular; after the function is thoroughly established there are many
causes that may be responsible for its temporary absence.

CAUSES OF AMENORRHEA.--Any condition or circumstance which reduces the
general health or impoverishes the quality or quantity of the blood and
weakens the nervous system, will result in a stoppage of the monthly
periods. Among these are insufficient food and exercise, overwork,
overstudy, exposure to cold, sitting on cold steps or gold ground,
wearing damp clothes, bathing in cold water at the beginning of
menstruation, powerful emotions, as great fright, anger, anxiety; acute
diseases, such as typhoid fever, cholera, the infectious skin diseases;
chronic diseases such as Bright's disease, heart disease, consumption;
anemia and chlorosis are very common causes. Obesity or an overfat
condition will cause an early suppression of the menses which may result
in a fruitless marriage. Displacement of the womb and other local
disorders frequently result in scanty or delayed menstruation. Anxiety
lest pregnancy may occur in the newly married may cause a delay in the
periods. A radical change of climate or sometimes a visit to the
country, or changed circumstances may stop the flow for the time being.

TREATMENT.--The treatment of amenorrhea, or absence of menstruation,
will depend on the underlying cause. A careful investigation should be
made into the mode of life and the hygienic surroundings of the patient.
Her general health and her mental condition should be inquired into. If
the patient is not in good health, or is not obtaining exercise in the
open air, or if she is a victim of mental worry or of domestic
unhappiness, or if any sufficient cause exists for the amenorrhea it
must be removed before any treatment may be expected to relieve the
condition. If the patient is a married woman the possibility of
pregnancy should always be borne in mind, and no radical treatment
instituted until this has been excluded. If the absence of menstruation
is dependent upon defective development of the sexual organs we cannot
expect much from any treatment. The amenorrhea from exhaustive diseases
will usually correct itself with, or soon after, the establishment of
convalescence. In diseases which tend to death, as in consumption, heart
disease, etc., the function is never reestablished. A very common habit
of most people is to regard the absence of the monthly periods as the
cause of their ill health. It is not, it is the result of the ill
health. Get rid of the bad health and the menses will take care of
themselves. That form of amenorrhea which is the result of change of
climate or surroundings will regulate itself as soon as the victim
becomes acclimated or reconciled to the change, or returns home if the
visit is of brief duration.

As a general routine treatment, good wholesome food, regular hours,
fresh air, sunlight, and judicious exercise, with such other measures as
may be suggested by the condition of the blood and nervous system, are
the indications in the way of treatment. Anemia and chlorosis (poor
blood) should be treated by the administration of iron in some form.
Obesity should be reduced by diet, exercise, and such other treatment as
may be found efficient and not detrimental to health. Overwork, mental
and physical, should be stopped, and sedentary habits changed to a more
active out-door life. The acute suppression from exposure to cold,
wearing of damp clothes, sitting on cold stones or cold or damp ground,
sea bathing in very cold water, is very often associated with an acute
inflammation of the womb itself and calls for rest in bed, laxatives to
open the bowel, hot application to the lower part of the abdomen and a
teaspoonful of Hayden's Viburnum in a glass of hot water every four
hours until relieved. The use of the sitz bath is frequently successful
if taken at night followed by a laxative and a hot drink.

PAINFUL MENSTRUATION--DYSMENORRHEA.--Most, if not all, victims of
painful menstruation are of a nervous temperament. Dysmenorrhea is
simply one symptom of the general nervous condition. The nervousness may
be acquired or it may be the result of heredity. In girls it has been
found to be an accompaniment of the overwork and worry of school and
student life. Girls who suffer greatly from it while in school are
entirely free during vacation from school.

There is a type of painful menstruation known as neuralgic dysmenorrhea.
This is simply a local expression of a general neuralgic tendency. It
comes under conditions which favor neuralgias in other parts of the
body. Girls and women affected with this type of dysmenorrhea are often
anemic, hysterical, and not infrequently the victims of malaria,
rheumatism, or other diseases which tend to impoverish the blood and
reduce nerve vitality. The pain resembles neuralgia elsewhere. It comes
and goes, it may last a brief time or a long time, it may be very mild
or very severe. The pain bears no fixed relation to the flow, it may
proceed, accompany or follow it.

Mechanical dysmenorrhea is that form in which a mechanical impediment
exists to the escape of the menstrual fluid. The internal canal may be
too small, displacement, growths, either inside or out of the womb,
faulty development, or frequently simple congestion will act as an
obstruction and cause pain from tension. The pain accompanying
mechanical dysmenorrhea is very different from the neuralgic type. It
comes on gradually, increases slowly until it is very severe and stops
suddenly. A gush of blood from the womb announces the fact that the
obstruction has been overcome and the womb has emptied itself; as soon
as this occurs the pain ceases.

In the mechanical variety there are frequently clots in the menstrual
flow. Inasmuch as this type may be caused by imperfect development of
the womb, it is common to find that pain has characterized the monthly
periods from the time of the first menstruation. It may, however, as
stated above, be caused by growths which had their beginning at a later
period.

TREATMENT.--For the neuralgic variety the treatment should be general.
The whole object is to build up the general health. Fresh air, sunlight,
out-door exercise, plain, substantial food, regular hours, pleasant
surroundings, and such medication as may be indicated, should be the
course to follow. The bowels should be kept regular and digestion aided
in every way possible, if necessary by rest from school, or work, or by
a change of air and scene. If the patient is inclined to malaria she
must take quinine and live in a locality free from that tendency. If
rheumatic she should take the remedies advised in that disease and avoid
colds, wet clothes, or sitting in cold, badly ventilated rooms, churches
or theatres. If there are no distinct evidences of special tendencies,
general tonics may be given to advantage. These should consist chiefly
of iron, arsenic, phosphous, nux vomica, cod liver oil, etc.

The treatment of mechanical dysmenorrhea of course implies removal of
the cause. As this necessitates operative procedure, or at least an
examination by a physician, it is best left in his hands.


STERILITY

Sterility means the inability to become a parent. A woman who is sterile
cannot become a mother. She is for some reason unable to have a baby.

A childless union is frequently the cause of much unhappiness. There is
something lacking in the expression "a childless home." It seems a
paradox, as home is inherently associated with children and happiness.
It has been stated that one out of every eight marriages is barren. The
average time which elapses after marriage and the birth of the first
child is seventeen months. Physicians agree that if a woman goes over
three years after marriage without having a baby her chances of having
one are small. If children are desired, and they usually are by
childless parents, every effort should be made within the first three
years to ascertain the cause of the sterility, and if it can be
rectified. The barrenness may be dependent upon some physical defect
which will quickly respond to the proper medical treatment. It is well
to remember, however, that the defect is not always the woman's. In
every six childless marriages about one is due to sterility in the
husband. The age of the greatest fertility in women is between twenty
and twenty-four years. It is rare to find a barren woman between these
years. Nature evidently intended that the duties of maternity should be
assumed between the twenty and twenty-fourth year. If married before the
age of twenty the statistics prove that barrenness exists in one woman
in every twelve. If married after the twenty-fourth year the chances of
having children decreases with the age of the woman.

If a mother goes for three consecutive years without becoming pregnant
the chances are that she will have no more children. Consequently if
other children are desired it is unsafe to rest upon the assumption that
a woman will again be a mother simply because she has been one in the
past. Many conditions could, and may, have occurred since the last
pregnancy (and may be as a result of that pregnancy) to change her
natural fertility into a condition of temporary sterility. An
examination should therefore be made before too long an interval elapses
and the facts learned. It will usually be found in such cases that a
displacement or laceration, or at most, some cause easily remedied is
immediately responsible for the apparent barrenness.


CONDITIONS WHICH AFFECT THE FERTILITY OF WOMEN

CLIMATE.--It is a well-known fact that more children are born in
southern regions than in northern countries. It may be asserted,
therefore, that climate affects the fertility of the race.

STATION IN LIFE.--Children are more numerous among the poor than among
those who are wealthy and enjoy the luxury of riches. This condition
cannot, however, be construed as a true expression of fertile
efficiency. It is more a comparison of ethics, and when we express it
thus we are giving it its most charitable name.

SEASON OF THE YEAR.--The spring of the year, being more favorable to
fecundity, exerts an influence over the increase of population. Nursing
mothers are as a rule sterile until after weaning time. This is not
always so however, and the possibility of pregnancy taking place while
nursing a baby, and before menstruation is reestablished must be
reckoned with as it occurs quite frequently.

AGE.--Age may be said to affect the fertility of women inasmuch as
sterility is the natural and proper condition before menstruation is
established and after menstruation ceases.

THE TENDENCY TO MISCARRY.--Because a woman has never given birth to a
living child is no proof that she is sterile. Many women have the
ability to conceive but for some reason they have acquired the
misfortune, or the "knack," of miscarrying. This is a condition of the
gravest significance and will be considered at length in its proper
place.

The influence of a temporary separation has had excellent results in a
great many historical cases. Where the married couple seem to be lacking
in some one or other of the emotional or temperamental qualifications,
it is advisable to suggest a temporary separation. When this period has
expired and they resume marital relationship the element of novelty,
acting as a stimulus, quite frequently reestablishes a fertility that
was seemingly suspended, or awakens it if conception has never
previously taken place.

There are a great many cases on record where, conditions having remained
the same, women have become fertile after years of seeming barrenness.
It is impossible to explain, or to satisfactorily understand these
cases. It is quite common to note cases in which women have never become
pregnant until a number of years after marriage, even when the desire to
have children existed. There is one case on record of a woman married at
eighteen, but although both herself and her husband enjoyed habitual
good health, conception did not take place until she was forty-eight
years of age when she bore a healthy child. Women should not, therefore,
become easily discouraged in the hope of having a baby, especially when
they have a clean history, and a healthy body. The conditions may change
and may become favorable when hope is about to die.


CAUSES OF STERILITY IN WOMEN

Inasmuch as it is necessary to consult a competent physician in all
cases of sterility, it is not necessary to go into detail regarding each
possible cause, other than to explain how each may produce barrenness.
It will be observed that a competent physician is specified and advised
in these cases. This is very important because many advertising, or
"quack" doctors, particularly solicit these kind of cases. They are not
competent to be trusted with such cases and will likely effect more harm
than good. A woman should not hesitate to consult the best available
medical authority if she is a victim of sterility. There is nothing to
be ashamed of. It is a perfectly proper medical situation and should
receive the best medical advice and investigation. The following are the
more frequent causes of absolute sterility.

(A) Displacement of womb.

(B) Diseases of womb, ovaries or fallopian tubes.

(C) Malformations.

(D) Lacerations or tears of mouth of womb.

(E) Tumor.

(F) Leucorrhea.

(G) Physical debility.

(H) Special blood poisons.

(I) Great obesity.

(J) Anemia.

(K) Self-abuse.

(L) Habitual alcoholism.

(M) Lack of moderation in the marital relations.

(N) Certain diseases may be associated with barrenness: cancer,
diabetes, consumption, Bright's disease, etc.

(O) Certain temperamental conditions may be associated with barrenness:
lack of affinity, frigidity.


THE KNACK OF MISCARRYING

DISPLACEMENT OF WOMB.--In many instances the primary cause of the
displaced womb was some energetic, muscular effort, made while the
victim was yet a girl,--probably before menstruation began. Whatever act
first caused a slight tilting of the womb, must necessarily have been
an unusual physical effort, and as girls are getting more and more
strenuous we may look for more trouble in this direction in the future.
Inasmuch as a slight tilting of the womb gradually gets worse it is a
reasonable expectation to believe that sterility is a natural sequence
to displacement. The girl may have been the victim of painful
menstruation which was neglected, because not quite painful enough to
compel medical relief, which is sought for only as a last resource
unfortunately under the circumstances. Intercourse may also have been
more or less painful,--a condition which again is mistakenly and
imprudently borne in silence and left to take care of itself. But when
persistent sterility faces her, the woman seeks medical assistance and
her trouble is discovered. As the displacement is found to be the cause
of her sterility, its correction, which is a comparatively easy medical
problem, not only cures the barrenness but happily relieves her of the
menstrual distress and all other pain.

The treatment for displacement consist of placing medicated pieces of
wool or cotton, called tampons, in the vagina in such a position as to
hold the womb, _as_ nearly in its proper place as is possible. After a
time nature will so strengthen the ligaments that they will hold the
womb and a cure is, therefore, affected. The length of time necessary to
cure depends upon the length of time the displacement has existed. It
may take, from two to four months. When the displacement is of long
standing and is accompanied with more or less inflammation, adhesions
sometimes grow between the womb and the adjacent organs. It is necessary
to resort to surgery in such cases, but the result is always good and
the danger practically nothing.

DISEASE OF THE WOMB, OVARIES OR FALLOPIAN TUBES.--Disease of the womb,
ovaries, and fallopian tubes, which renders the victim sterile, is as a
rule the direct result of infection. Such infection is conveyed by the
husband to the wife. This is quite a common condition. The simple fact
that such conditions exist leads us to hope that the time is not far
distant when it will be compulsory for all participants in the marriage
ceremony to submit to a thorough physical examination. By this means,
and by this means only, will the innocent be protected. No one can
conceive, unless he has been identified, as a physician, with one of the
large metropolitan hospital clinics, of the extent of this class of
disease, and of the frightful suffering caused, and innocent lives
ruined, by infection conveyed in this way. It is a tragic corollary to
the marriage vow "for better or for worse."

If a woman is fortunate enough to fall into the hands of an honorable
physician, who will tactfully explain to her the serious significance of
her condition and obtain her consent to treat her until she is cured,
which in all probability will include a surgical operation, and will do
so with diligence, without regard to the size of the bill, she will
indeed be a lucky woman. It is from women who are suffering with such
diseases,--most of them without the slightest idea of what ails
them,--that the venders of advertised nostrums reap their fortunes, and
it is from the same victims that most of the advertised medical "quacks"
look for their blood-money. The great difficulty, however, lies in the
failure of the woman to appreciate the seriousness of her condition, and
as a consequence she fails to understands why it should take so long to
cure her. She loses confidence in her physician, she buys certain
"cures" recommended to her by Mrs. Busybody and later tries other
physicians and ends by losing faith in herself. Meantime she grows worse
and worse. There are thousands such. It may be here stated without fear
of contradiction that if the public in general would repose more
confidence in the medical profession, there would be much less
suffering, much less sorrow, fewer regrets, fewer irresponsible "isms,"
and cults, because there would be fewer disappointed individuals to
support them. If the medical profession would condescend to employ the
tactics and devices of those questionable, fashionable agencies that
claim the power to cure human suffering, it could quickly reap the
profit and the laudation that it now escapes because it keeps the faith.

The way to be cured of any disease, if it is curable, is to engage a
reputable physician and follow his instructions implicitly. Let him
understand you expect him to see you through your trouble and let him
know you have confidence in him. There isn't one physician in a thousand
who will cheat you under these circumstances.

MALFORMATION.--Under this heading are all those cases of sterility
resulting from imperfect generative organs. These are products of a
failure on the part of nature to furnish or develop the structures
participating in the propagation of the species. The entire generative
organs are sometimes wanting. The womb may have failed for some reason
to grow with the rest of the body, it remains (as it is known) as an
"infantile womb." Occasionally the womb grows together, that is, it is
solid instead of being a hollow organ. The mouth of the womb may be too
small, representing what is called "a pin head opening." The natural
opening is large enough to admit a lead pencil, a "pin head opening"
would not be larger than the lead in the pencil. The latter condition is
quite a common cause of sterility and is readily amenable to treatment.
Most of the malformations which produce sterility are impossible to
cure.

LACERATIONS OR TEARS IN MOUTH OF WOMB.--This subject is fully discussed
on another page of this volume.

TUMOR.--A tumor may be so situated as to prevent conception, or it may
involve the body of the womb constituting a reason in itself for
sterility.

LEUCORRHEA.--Leucorrhea or "the whites" may be of such an acid character
as to kill the spermatozoa in the vagina, or it may be of such volume as
to render impregnation impossible. The treatment of this condition is
discussed elsewhere.

PHYSICAL DEBILITY.--When the general health is bad, no matter from what
cause, sterility usually exists. This lack of vitality may be due to
chronic disease, or it may have been caused by a very severe acute
illness, such as typhoid fever. One's mode of living, if unhygienic, may
be responsible for continued bad health and a consequent sterility.

OBESITY.--Very fat women are usually barren. If a woman rapidly
accumulates fat after marriage she as a rule does not have more than one
or two children. Women often become stout immediately after the child
bearing age ceases.

SPECIAL POISONS.--Certain special poisons in the blood cause sterility
by producing miscarriage.


MISCARRIAGE

By the term "miscarriage" we mean that for some reason the progress of
pregnancy has been interrupted and the fetus is expelled from the womb.
A miscarriage or abortion (both terms meaning the same--the difference
between the two terms is a technical one and need not concern us here)
can occur any time after conception up to approximately the seventh
month, when, if labor takes place, the child may be born alive. The
condition would then be termed a premature labor. A miscarriage or
abortion is an immature labor and implies an immature or dead child.

The condition is a serious one no matter whether it is attended with
grave symptoms or apparently no symptoms. If it occurs shortly after
conception, during the first few months of married life it is serious,
if not in its physical consequences, it is in its significance, because
it establishes the tendency to miscarry,--a tendency that may result in
great mental distress because of the worry and fear it engenders, and of
sorrow and heartache because it may blast the hope of parentage. Such a
miscarriage may take place at once after conception. If so, the
following menstruation may be delayed for a week or so and is then a
little more profuse than is customary. This will be the only indication
that a life has been sacrificed that the young wife may have, and
frequently the significance of such an occurrence is never understood,
yet the tendency to miscarry is nevertheless established, and a seeming
sterility is apparently the fate of the woman. It is, therefore, of the
greatest importance that extreme care should be taken to bring the first
pregnancy to a successful consummation. A young wife should realize that
she is apt to become pregnant at any time. Her conduct therefore should
be such at least as not to harm the life principle with which she has
been entrusted. To this end any excessive sexual activity should be
strictly avoided.

CAUSES OF MISCARRIAGE.--Any strenuous physical effort must be guarded
against. Included in such efforts may be the following: dancing,
running, jumping, surf-bathing, sewing on a machine, sweeping, washing,
house-cleaning, moving furniture, etc. Sometimes the primary cause of a
miscarriage is to be found in some hygienic act, such as a hot bath, too
prolonged or too many hot douches near the menstrual periods. A blow or
a fall, even a fright or shock may cause a miscarriage. Anything that
violently shakes or agitates the womb, which may at this time be
irritable because of its condition, will be sufficient to excite it to
contract and miscarry. Hence violent coughing or vomiting should be
avoided if possible; horseback riding, jolting in a carriage,
convulsions, hysterical crying, may also be the causative factors.
Displacement of the womb by limiting its tendency to grow when pregnant,
may cause it to miscarry. Very severe general diseases such as
small-pox, pneumonia, etc., will cause the womb to empty itself. Disease
of the fetus or the presence of syphilis in either of the parents will
also have the same result.

THE COURSE AND SYMPTOMS OF MISCARRIAGE.--The cause of a miscarriage or
abortion is much the same as an ordinary labor at term. Whatever
interrupts the pregnancy causes the death of the fetus. The dead fetus
acts as a foreign body and excites the womb to contract as it does
during an ordinary confinement. The contractions open up the mouth of
the womb and the fetus is expelled together with its membranes and
after-birth. The significant and the most important symptom of a
miscarriage or abortion is hemorrhage or bleeding from the privates. The
flow of blood may not amount to much or it may be excessive and
alarming; it may not be constant, it may come from time to time in the
form of clots.

The next significant and important symptom of miscarriage or abortion is
pain. The pain, like the flow of blood, may be only slight or it may be
very severe, sometimes it is absent in very early miscarriage. As a rule
the pain is severe when the miscarriage occurs after pregnancy has
lasted for a number of months.

A miscarriage or abortion is said to be "complete" when the fetus with
its membranes and after-birth is expelled clean and whole, or in other
words when the womb empties itself completely. A miscarriage or abortion
is said to be "incomplete" when some part of the embryo is left in the
womb.

WHAT TO DO WHEN A MISCARRIAGE IS THREATENED.--When a woman, who is
pregnant, begins to flow she should at once go to bed and keep perfectly
quiet and send for a physician. A miscarriage is a treacherous condition
and is so regarded by all medical men. It may not amount to much or it
may, on the other hand, develop into a serious situation. The immediate
danger is from hemorrhage; the ultimate or remote danger is sepsis or
blood poisoning. The condition is one that can only be taken in charge
by a qualified physician in whose hands we can safely leave the conduct
of the case.

As a general rule it is quite safe to assert that a woman will not bleed
enough at the beginning of a miscarriage to do any permanent harm.
Consequently there is no occasion for unnecessary alarm. She must,
however, as stated above, heed the warning and go to bed, keep perfectly
quiet and send for a physician. If she fails to follow this advice it is
quite possible that she may have a hemorrhage during the course of the
miscarriage of a sufficiently serious character to endanger her life or
from the effects of which she may suffer for the remainder of her life.

There is practically no danger during the course of or after a
"complete" miscarriage. The danger which may ensue from an "incomplete"
miscarriage is hemorrhage and a form of poisoning caused by the
absorption into the system of putrifying products of the part of the
dead embryo left in the womb.

There are a large number of cases of criminal abortion in which septic
poisoning occurs caused by the utensils or instruments used in inducing
the abortion. All of these cases are operative cases which must be
attended to promptly to save life.

TREATMENT OF THREATENED MISCARRIAGE.--Not all of the cases of beginning
miscarriage end in miscarriage. If the physician is sent for in time he
can very frequently give directions that will, if carried out
faithfully, avert the disaster. Success is more likely to attend those
cases in which the trouble has been caused by some accidental injury, as
a fall, or blow, or extra exertion. This is more especially the case if
the woman has previously borne children, is healthy and in good
condition and whose womb is known not to be diseased. In these cases
there is a partial separation of the fetus from the wall of the womb,
which causes the bleeding. The physician will direct that the woman be
put to bed, in a quiet, darkened room. He will instruct the nurse to
sterilize the external genital region: a sterile gauze dressing is then
left in place. Some form of prescription will be given to diminish the
patient's nervous fear and to allay any tendency on the part of the womb
to contract. It is always essential and very important to save
everything that passes from the womb during the course of a threatened
miscarriage in order that the physician may know exactly just what the
condition is. Each cloth, each clot of blood will have to be examined
before the proper treatment can be pursued in safety.

When the miscarriage cannot be prevented it is called an "Inevitable
miscarriage."

TREATMENT OF AN INEVITABLE MISCARRIAGE.--In these cases every precaution
is taken, just as in a normal confinement, to avert blood poisoning. The
hands, instruments, dressings, etc., are carefully rendered sterile and
the whole field must be surgically clean. The physician will conduct the
case as conditions justify and as the situation develops.

AFTER TREATMENT OF A MISCARRIAGE.--It is one of the many thankless tasks
of a physician's life to insist on each patient staying in bed at least
ten days after a miscarriage. The average woman and frequently the
intelligent woman fails to appreciate the absolute necessity for this
procedure. It is necessary and it is the physician's duty to insist on
it being done in the interest of the woman. Many of the multitude of
diseases of women are caused by disregarding advice on such occasions.

THE TENDENCY TO MISCARRY.--If a woman, for any reason, has had a
miscarriage, her womb will tend to miscarry at the same period during a
subsequent pregnancy. If the miscarriage should occur during her first
pregnancy the tendency to miscarry will be greater than if acquired
after she has had a baby.

This is one of the reasons why young wives often fail to have children.
They "get rid" of the first one or two, because they are not ready to
have children, or because they want some enjoyment themselves before
they are tied down with a family. Having established the habit their
womb has been educated to abort, and it will keep this habit up, much to
their astonishment and chagrin.

Young wives should therefore faithfully follow out all the rules of the
Hygiene of Pregnancy laid down by their physician, and which are given
in detail in this book.

[Illustration: _Courtesy of New York World_

AT WORK WITH THE CALIPERS

Watching carefully the physical development of the child month by month
is one of those many little things which may result in disaster if
neglected.

Abnormal development, or lack of development, should be promptly
reported to the physician, as it may be a warning of serious trouble.

For the table of standards, mental and physical, adopted by the American
Medical Society see page 271.]




THE BABY




CHAPTER XVI

HYGIENE AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE BABY

     What to Prepare for the Coming Baby--Care of the Newly-born
     Baby--The First Bath--Dressing the Cord--Treatment After the
     Cord Falls off--A Pouting Navel--Bathing Baby--Clothing the
     Baby--Baby's Night Clothes--Care of the Eyes--Care of the Mouth
     and First Teeth--Care of the Skin--Care of the Genital
     Organs--Amusing Baby--Temperature in Children--The Teeth--The
     Permanent Teeth--Care of the Teeth--Dentition--Treatment of
     Teething--How to Weigh the Baby--Average Weight of a Male
     Baby--Average Weight of a Female Baby--Average Height of a Male
     Child--The Rate of Growth of a Child--Pulse Rate in
     Children--Infant Records, Why They Should be Kept--"Growing
     Pains."


WHAT TO PREPARE FOR THE COMING BABY.--The physician should instruct the
young wife just what to provide for the coming baby. The following list
will be found useful as a general guide.

     An ordinary clothes basket, padded and lined, is quite
     sufficient for the first month; or, a baby crib, which may be
     cheap or expensive as the individual taste dictates. The Taylor
     crib is probably the handiest and best one on the market.

     Pin cushion;

     Puff-box and puff;

     Soap box containing pure castile soap;

     Hair brush and fine comb;

     Two wash cloths;

     Four ounces of crystal boracic acid, a saturated solution of
     which is used for cleansing baby's eyes and mouth;

     One pound of good absorbent cotton;

     A flexible tube of white vaseline;

     A bath thermometer;

     A package of sterile gauze;

     A half dozen baby towels, good quality;

     A soft, white, good blanket,--one and one-half yards square;

     One pair small blunt pointed scissors;

     A package of the best safety pins;

     Three or four dozen bird's-eye cotton diapers. First size,
     eighteen inches square. Second size, twenty-five inches square;

     One yard of soft white flannel for belly bands; each band
     should be five inches wide, by twenty-four inches long.

     Two silk and wool shirts;

     Three flannel shirts (all shirts should be high necked, long
     sleeved, and open down the front);

     Three Eiderdown wrappers;

     Three Cashmere sacques;

     Three pads for crib;

     Six dresses;

     Six petticoats (they should be thirty-three inches long from
     neck to hem; they should be turned up at the bottom for about
     four inches and should button there to keep the feet warm; if
     it is desired to use pinning blankets for the first two months
     in place of the petticoats, they should be made of soft white
     flannel with cotton bands);

     Six night slips;

     Six pair socks;

     Two cloaks;

     Two hoods;

     One dozen bibs.

Simplicity, warmth, and freedom are the essentials in latter-day baby
clothes. It is cheaper to make the clothes than to buy them. Excellent
and accurate paper patterns can be obtained, giving the quantity of
material necessary and suggesting the kind and quality best suited for
the purpose. These patterns may be obtained from the Butterick
Publishing Company in New York City.

CARE OF THE NEWLY-BORN BABY.--After the nurse has completed her duties
with the mother after the confinement, she will prepare to give baby its
first bath.

The bath should be given in a warm room. This is a matter that should
receive more consideration than has been given it. Nurses do not as a
rule attach much importance to this duty, while in reality it is a most
important one. I have seen trained nurses make ready to give baby its
first bath in rooms, during the night, that were not heated adequately.
I am convinced that many babies have been victims of this careless habit
to the extent of grafting on them the tendency to catarrhal colds and
bronchitis because of undue exposure at this critical period. If one
will remember that a baby has just been removed from an environment
where the temperature was suitable and constant, to one in which it
needs a large degree of artificial heat until such time as it may become
accustomed to the change, one may appreciate the risk taken in exposing
the child for even a short time. The mother should therefore warn the
nurse not to undertake the baby's first bath until the temperature and
other conditions are favorable. Many nurses and other individuals have
the impression, without knowing why, that the baby should be cleansed
and bathed immediately after birth. This is not at all necessary. If the
conditions are not favorable, it would be far better to wrap the baby
snugly in a warm blanket--first having put a diaper on--and place it in
its crib with a hot water bottle near it and defer the bathing until the
following forenoon. By that time the baby will be adapted to its new
surroundings; its lungs will have become accustomed to the air which it
is breathing for the first time; the mother will have been rendered
comfortable; in other words, the conditions and the environment will be
favorable for the baby and for a better performance of the duty.

The next important feature of the first bath is that it should be done
in the quickest time consistent with efficient service. Only the
necessary exposure should be indulged in. It is not necessary that the
baby should be exposed to the admiring inspection of every member of the
household--there will be plenty of time for that without risking the
health of the child. A pan of water at a temperature of 100° F. should
be placed on a stool in front of the nurse. The nurse should have on a
rubber apron, and on top of this, an ordinary apron and a warm bath
towel laid over her knees. The child should be gently rubbed with warm
sweet oil to remove the _vernix caseosa_ (the greasy substance which is
on all babies when born to a lesser or greater extent). Particular
attention is to be given to all folds of the skin, as under the arms, in
the fold of the neck, in the groin, behind the ears, etc., because in
these parts the substance is thickest and if not carefully removed it
will cake, and cause painful eruptions and sores, which may bleed and
render the infant extremely uncomfortable. It is not necessary to
expose the whole body at one time while applying the oil. The lower half
may be covered with a warm soft towel while the nurse is oiling the
upper part, and vice versa. After the body has been thoroughly oiled it
should be cleansed with water at the proper temperature, in which pure
castile soap has been dissolved. Absorbent cotton only should be used to
wash the baby. All the washing is done with the baby on the nurse's
knee; it is not put into the water.

The baby should be mopped dry with sterile gauze, or with a soft sterile
towel, the cord dressed and the flannel band adjusted. It should then be
completely dressed and put to the nipple and later to sleep.

DRESSING THE CORD.--The cord should be covered with powder and sterile
gauze. The powder to use should be plain subnitrate of bismuth. If there
is any reason to use another powder the physician will write a
prescription for it according to indications. The subnitrate of bismuth
will be found much better than any ordinary talcum or toilet powder,
many of which do not make good dressing powders.

Very few nurses know how to dress the cord. It seems to be impossible to
impress them with the need of frequent attention to the cord. Fresh
powder should be put on every time the diaper is removed, every time the
infant urinates, and at other times during the day. The cord should be
kept absolutely dry. Putting on powder twice daily will not keep the
cord dry and many nurses are too lazy to bother to do it oftener. You
cannot make a mistake in putting on too much powder, you can make a
serious mistake by not putting on enough. Every time the cord is
powdered it should be lifted up, away from the skin of the abdomen, and
the powder put below it. The cord should be slightly drawn out and the
powder applied round its base where it meets the skin. Many nurses are
afraid to touch or handle the cord--they find it easier to neglect it.
The mother should see that the nurse dresses the cord at least five
times every day.

APPLYING THE STERILE GAUZE TO THE CORD.--A piece of gauze, six inches
square is taken, a hole is cut the size of a ten-cent piece out of the
center, the cord is drawn through the hole, the gauze folded lengthwise
over the cord and then sidewise, and this is held in place by the
binder. This piece of gauze will adhere to the cord and will most likely
be removed with the cord on the fifth day. If it should fall off,
another piece may be put on in the same way.

If the cord does not fall off until very late it is because it has not
been attended to rightly or because it was a very thick cord.

TREATMENT AFTER THE CORD FALLS OFF.--The stump of the cord should be
powdered with the same powder used on the cord; a pad two inches square
of sterile gauze and quite thick should be held over the stump for a
number of days by the abdominal binder. This is used to prevent a
possible rupture. After a week the size of the pad may be reduced, but a
small pad should be used over the stump of the cord for a month or more.

A POUTING NAVEL.--If the stump of the cord should protrude, a piece of
strong pasteboard, the size of a fifty-cent piece, should be wrapped in
soft gauze and placed over the navel, over this a gauze pad, and if
necessary this should be held in place by a strip of adhesive plaster,
though the binder is usually sufficient if it is put on carefully. If
this pad is held properly and worn for a month the tendency to
protrusion or rupture will have passed away. These pads may of course,
be removed when the baby is being bathed and put back again before the
binder is applied.

BATHING BABY.--A baby should not be put into water for a bath until
after the cord has been off for forty-eight hours.

During the first few months the temperature of the water should be 98°
F. The temperature of the water should be taken with a bath thermometer;
it should not be guessed at. A bath thermometer is an inexpensive
commodity and it will be in daily use in many ways in a home where there
is a baby--it should therefore be procured wherever possible. The room
should be warm; there should be no draughts. The mother or nurse should
cultivate the habit of bathing baby quickly and with system. Everything
should be ready and at hand. A little salt in the water will tend to
strengthen the skin; it will also relieve any superficial rashes or
excoriations which may be on the skin. Four tablespoonfuls to a gallon
of water will be sufficient. The sea salt sold in the stores may be used
in lesser quantities.

By the end of the fifth month the temperature of the water may be
reduced to 95° F., and by the end of the first year to 90° F. After the
first year the mother should accustom the child to a quick sponge with
cool water on the chest and spine immediately after the bath. This
simple means, if kept up, will often prevent the development of colds
and bronchial troubles so common to children in temperate latitudes.

The best time to give the warm bath is at night. In the morning a cold
sponge bath is desirable. This should be given as described in the
chapter on cold sponge or shower baths.

In certain children bathing seems to depress their entire system. They
do not react well even to a warm bath. They remain blue or pale around
the mouth and eyes; bathing should therefore be carefully undertaken
with these children until such time as they acquire strength.

CLOTHING OF BABY.--The baby should wear a woolen shirt, with a high neck
and long sleeves. The abdominal binder may be worn for the first three
months. It is not necessary after that time. If worn longer the habit is
acquired and chronic indigestion may ensue when it is ultimately taken
off. If the baby is very thin it may be wise to leave it on, simply for
its warming effect, for a few months longer. If the child is normal and
healthy the binder should be left off permanently after three months.
The band for the first four weeks should be made of plain flannel; after
this period a knitted band with shoulder straps is the better article.
All petticoats and skirts should be supported from the shoulders.
Stockinet is a good material for diapers; it is soft, warm, and pliable.

Baby's feet should be warm always. Cold feet are frequently responsible
for colic and gastro-intestinal troubles. A hot water bottle should be
placed in the carriage if the weather is cold, but care should be taken
to see that it does not touch the feet, otherwise it may burn them. The
same measure may be adopted in the baby's crib if the feet are cold.

During the summer the outer clothing should be made of the thinnest
quality of material possible, and the underclothing of the finest
flannel or gauze. Body heat may be maintained during changes of
temperature by extra outer wraps--not by dressing the baby in clothes
that keep it too hot and uncomfortable all the time.

The main object to be attained in clothing the baby is to ensure a
sufficient protection, but the clothing must be light, warm, loose, and
non-irritating. Don't bundle up the arms and legs so that they cannot be
moved; don't pin them so tight that the child cannot breathe properly
and don't put the band on so that the child is in torture all the time
from inability to move the abdomen.

BABY'S NIGHT CLOTHES.--The night clothing should be the same as that
worn during the day, but it should be loose and of the lightest flannel
material. For older children a thin woolen shirt (not the one worn
during the day) and a suit of union clothing with feet is best.

The mistake must not be made to cover children too warmly at night. They
can do with relatively less than adults. Too much covering will render
the sleep restless, will encourage nightmare, and in older children will
engender bad habits. Delicate children especially must not be
over-covered at night.

For the first few months children should sleep in a darkened room.

CARE OF THE EYES.--The eyes should be cleansed for the first few days
with a saturated solution of boracic acid. They should be protected from
the direct light for two or three weeks after birth.

CARE OF THE MOUTH AND FIRST TEETH.--Boiled cooled water should be used
to cleanse the mouth every morning after the bath. A soft piece of
sterile gauze should used for this purpose. The mother must guard
against using too much force in cleaning the mouth of an infant.

The milk teeth should receive attention. If they are allowed to become
dirty they will become carious and cause bad breath and neuralgia.
Teeth of this character are a menace to health because they harbor germs
and in this way infect the mouth and cause stomach troubles. Teeth that
are carious should be filled or removed.

CARE OF THE SKIN.--The skin of a baby, because of its delicate
character, is susceptible to the slightest changes in the weather or to
the condition of the digestive organs. Babies are frequently subject to
rashes, intertrigo, excoriations, eczema, and other skin affections. It
is much easier to prevent these conditions than to cure them.
Cleanliness, not only in giving a daily efficient bath, but in every
other respect, is essential. Castile soap only should be used, and no
rubbing indulged in, simply mopping the parts with gauze well saturated
with soapy water. All napkins should be removed as soon as soiled. If
the skin is easily chafed the child should be bathed in salt water or
water in which bran is mixed as explained in the chapter on bran baths.

The baby should be well powdered with a good quality of toilet powder.
Ordinary starch, or talcum, or the stearate of zinc is suitable. Fat
infants should be powdered in all the skin folds; otherwise they are
sure to chafe.

CARE OF THE GENITAL ORGANS.--The mother should make it a habit to remove
any dirt from the genitals of the baby during the morning bath. Fecal
matter sometimes gets into the folds of the female baby; this should be
removed promptly. In older female children, dirt and dust get into the
genitals which often has to be removed carefully with a soft piece of
cloth. An exceedingly chronic form of inflammation is often seen in poor
children because of neglect of these parts.

In male babies the mother must daily push back the foreskin and clean
under it. If this is not done the natural secretion will gather there
and cause much trouble. If the foreskin is long, the child should be
circumcised; if it is not long it must be pushed back daily for a number
of weeks; otherwise it will contract and it may be necessary to operate
on it at a later date. If this is not faithfully attended to the prepuce
will become adherent, the child becomes nervous and irritable, and it
may become addicted to self-abuse at a very early date--simply because
the mother is derelict in the performance of her duty. If you are afraid
to do your duty, don't neglect it, ask the doctor to show you just what
has to be done and just how it should be done. You will find it to be a
simple matter when you know how, as most things are.

AMUSING BABY.--Mothers should understand that it is not necessary to
amuse a baby under one year of age. Their nervous systems are not ready
for any such sport. To excite a baby to laughter is to subject it to a
shock which may injure it. The healthy development of the brain of a
child demands quiet and restful surroundings. It should sleep, eat, and
be allowed to amuse itself in a natural way.

TEMPERATURE IN CHILDREN.--The normal temperature in a child varies more
than it does in an adult. The rectal range may be between 98° and 99.5°
F. and may be normal to that particular child. A rectal temperature of
97.5° F. or of 100.5° F. is of no importance unless it continues.

The best place to take the temperature in a child is the rectum and the
next best place is in the groin. The temperature will always be from a
half to a full degree higher in the rectum than in the groin. The
thermometer should be left in the rectum for two minutes, and in the
groin for five minutes.

The temperature in a child is a very fair guide as to the severity of
the disease. It must be remembered, however, that a child will develop a
temperature of two or three degrees from a very slight cause. It is not
the height of the fever that is significant, but rather the duration of
the fever that is important. A fever of 102° F. in a child may only mean
a slight indigestion which will wholly disappear after a laxative is
given, while the same degree of temperature in an adult usually means
something much more serious. The degree of the temperature therefore
should not occasion unnecessary worry; if, however, it continues and if
the child shows other signs of illness, it may be regarded as indicating
an abnormal condition which should be immediately found out. A
temperature of 100° F. to 102° F. usually means a mild illness, and one
of 104° F. or over, a serious sickness.

It is not advisable that the ordinary mother should possess a clinical
thermometer. There are many occasions when a child will have a fever
which should not cause any worry; if the mother gets the thermometer
habit, she will many times occasion unnecessary calls of the physician
only to learn that they are false fears.

THE TEETH.--There is no definite time at which the first teeth appear.
They usually come between the sixth and eighth months. They may not,
however, come until much later; or they may come earlier than the sixth
month; and yet the child may be perfectly healthy. They come as a rule
in the following order:

    1. The two lower middle teeth,                           6 to 8 months.
    2. The four upper middle teeth,                          8 to 10 months.
    3. One on each side of two lower middle teeth,           8 to 12 months.

    4. One on each side, above and below, back of
       above teeth (four in all),                           12 to 15 months.

    5. The next one on each side, above and below, back of
       those already in (four in all),                      18 to 24 months.

    6. The four back teeth on each side, above and below,   24 to 30 months.


    At 1 year a child should have                  6 teeth

    At 1-1-2 years a child should have            12 teeth

    At 2 years a child should have                16 teeth

    At 2-1-2 years a child should have            20 teeth

They may not come in the above regular order even in well children. The
upper front teeth may come first. If the child is sickly there may be
marked irregularity in the order in which they appear. Twenty teeth
comprise the first set.

THE PERMANENT TEETH.--This set consists of thirty-two teeth. They begin
about the sixth year and they are usually not complete until the
twentieth year. They appear in the following order:

    First molars                6 years
    Incisors               7 to 8 years
    Bicuspids             9 to 10 years
    Canines              12 to 14 years
    Second molars        12 to 15 years
    Third molars         17 to 25 years

CARE OF THE TEETH.--The teeth should be given attention as soon as they
appear. It is an excellent custom to wash the teeth and gums twice daily
with a piece of clean absorbent cotton rolled round the finger of the
mother and dipped in a saturated solution of boracic acid. This should
be done up to the second year. After the second year a soft brush should
be used and the teeth thoroughly cleaned morning and night with pure
castile soap or a powder. The teeth of every child should be examined by
a dentist every six months. All cavities should be filled with a soft
filling. The milk teeth should not decay, but should fall out, or be
forced out by the second set. A child should be taught to gargle early
and a mouth wash should be used morning and night.

DENTITION.--As a general rule the process of teething is accompanied by
some symptoms. There may be fever, restlessness, and loss of appetite;
though in many cases there are absolutely no symptoms. Some children
seem to teethe hard, others easily. The same child may have some teeth
without pain, and with others it may suffer severely. The condition of
the child at the time, its age, and the season of the year undoubtedly
have an influence. Children who are sickly and puny may have much
difficulty while teething.

The degree of sickness varies quite considerably. There may only be, as
stated above, slight fever, restlessness, with loss of appetite; or
there may be, in addition to these symptoms, a pronounced fermentative
diarrhea, which may lead to serious intestinal diseases; frequently
there is a cough. This is more apt to be the case if the child is
teething during the hot season.

TREATMENT.--When dentition affects the child's disposition it is a good
plan to reduce the feeding in quantity and quality for the time being.
If the child is bottle-fed, two ounces can be taken out of each bottle
and one ounce of boiled water added. If the child is breast-fed, he
should be given two ounces of warm, boiled water before each feeding,
and the actual feeding time at the breast shortened.

Rubbing the gum over the erupting tooth with a clean cloth may aid in
helping it through. If the child is very restless and has lost sleep,
the cloth may be moistened with brandy and water. Lancing the gum,
though it is seldom done now-a-days, is justified in a few cases.
Teething is not the cause of actual disease as was once thought, but it
must be remembered that a child whose vitality is reduced by fever,
restlessness, loss of appetite, loss of sleep, and irregular bowels, is
more susceptible to disease than when enjoying robust health.

Sometimes a child will have a fever for one or two weeks during a hard
dentition. There is apt to be more or less intestinal indigestion and
fermentation at this time and as a consequence actual intestinal disease
may develop. To avoid such a possibility it is an excellent plan to give
an occasional dose of castor oil to clean thoroughly the whole
intestinal canal. This should be done irrespective of the condition of
the bowel, because frequently a diarrhea is caused by retained
fermenting products.

Mothers must not acquire the habit of attributing all symptoms to the
teething process simply because the child is teething. It must be
remembered that a child may get a disease, or an ailment, while
teething, that has nothing to do with teething. If this is neglected,
serious consequences may result. Many children have lost their lives by
a mother's carelessness in this way. Be on the safe side, consult your
doctor; let him assume the responsibility.

HOW TO WEIGH THE BABY.--The test of weight is one of the most
satisfactory we possess as an indication of physical progress and
health. It is not an absolute test, but it may safely be relied upon.
The fattest baby is not necessarily the healthiest. A gradual and a
uniform increase is a satisfactory growth. At birth a baby weighs, on an
average, from seven to eight pounds, though some babies weighing less
are equally healthy. The normal and customary gain is from four to six
ounces every week after birth.

The baby should be weighed about the same time of the day each week, and
before a meal.

The average weight of a male child at different ages is as follows:

    Birth                     7-1/2 lbs.
    3 weeks                       8 lbs.
    1 month                   8-1/2 lbs.
    3 months                     12 lbs.
    4 months                 13-1/2 lbs.
    5 months                     15 lbs.
    6 months                 15-1/2 lbs.
    7 months                     17 lbs.
    9 months                     19 lbs.
    1 year                       21 lbs.
    1-1/2 years                  23 lbs.
    2 years                  26-1/2 lbs.
    3 years                  31-1/2 lbs.
    4 years                  35-1/2 lbs.
    5 years                      40 lbs.
    6 years                      45 lbs.
    7 years                      49 lbs.
    8 years                      54 lbs.
    9 years                      59 lbs.
    10 years                 65-1/2 lbs.

A female child weighs about one-fifteenth less than a male child, as a
rule.

Table showing the average height of a male child, at different ages:

    At birth             20-1/2 in.
    6 months                 26 in.
    1 year                   29 in.
    2 years              32-1/2 in.
    3 years                  35 in.
    4 years                  38 in.
    5 years              41-1/2 in.
    6 years                  44 in.
    7 years                  46 in.
    8 years                  48 in.
    9 years                  50 in.
    10 years                 52 in.

THE RATE OF GROWTH OF A CHILD.--A child grows most rapidly during its
first year--six to seven inches; from fourth to sixteenth, about two
inches annually; thence to twentieth, one inch. Commonly, a child at two
and a half years has attained half of its ultimate adult stature. The
diseases of youth always accelerate growth.

PULSE RATE IN CHILDREN AND ADULTS.--Normal Pulse,--of new born, 130 to
140, per minute; first year, 105 to 115; second year, 106 to 115; third
year, 95 to 105; fifth to twelfth year, 80 to 90; thirteenth to
twenty-first year, 75 to 80; twenty-first to sixtieth year, 70 to 75; in
old age, 75 to 85.

INFANT RECORDS.--A record should be kept by the mother of every child
which would embrace exact data as to weight, diet, size, development of
mental power, teeth, ailments, sickness, pains, etc., with dates and any
information which would aid in recalling exact conditions. Such records
are of the utmost value in a number of ways. They help in giving
suggestions as to diet, general health, and mental qualities of the
child in question, and they aid in furnishing what physicians call "past
history," which past history has a very valuable significance in
estimating the character and importance of sickness during later years.

Such a record is also of importance in comparing a child's development
with what is regarded as standard development, and also with the growth
and development of other children in or out of the family.

If a child should thus be found to fall seriously below the standard and
yet not appear actually sick, a very thorough and routine investigation
should be instituted to discover if possible the cause. Some error might
thus be detected which might seriously affect the child's future growth
and well-being.

The date of the closing of the soft spot on the baby's head should be
noted, and if it is still open, when it should be closed, it might mean
that the child has a serious brain condition. The soft spot should close
between the eighteenth and twenty-fourth months. The family physician
should be notified if the soft spot is open later than the second year,
as he may want to investigate the cause.

Should the child be unusually backward in walking, and when it does so
should limp and feel pain in the knees, it should be examined for any
symptom of hip joint disease, of which these are the earliest signs.

If the child complains of so-called "growing pains," keep in mind that
these are rheumatic and may need attention. There are no such pains as
actual "growing pains," that is, pains caused by the child growing.




CHAPTER XVII

BABY'S FEEDING HABITS

     Overfeeding Baby--Intervals of Feeding--How Long Should a Baby
     Stay at the Breast--Vomiting Between Feedings--Regularity of
     Feeding--Why is Regularity of Feeding Important--"A Baby Never
     Vomits"--What is the Significance of So-called Vomiting After
     Feedings--Mothers Milk That is Unfit for Baby--Fresh Air for
     Baby--Air Baths for Baby.


OVERFEEDING BABY.--Every nursing mother should have printed and hung up,
so she may read it every time she nurses her child, the following motto:
"DON'T OVERFEED BABY." Few, if any, babies die of willful starvation:
many die as a result of overfeeding. Mistaken kindness and lack of
judgment are responsible for one-half of all the troubles of infancy.
Babies require much less than is constantly given them. The stomach of a
baby at birth will not hold more than one ounce, which is two
tablespoonfuls; and at two months it will not hold more than three
tablespoonfuls; and at six months, six or seven tablespoonfuls. Read
these quantities once again carefully and try to realize the
significance of the smallness of them. A baby is just like a little pig;
it will go on feeding as long as it is allowed. The baby does not
reason; it has no judgment; it depends upon its mother's judgment. If
the mother is false to the trust the baby overloads its stomach. A
swollen, distended, overloaded stomach causes indigestion. A baby with
indigestion is a colicky, fretty, sick baby. Overfeeding, therefore, is
the beginning of lots of trouble to the mother, and needless pain and
suffering and sickness to the baby. A simple matter, but it is one of
the most difficult lessons nursing mothers have to learn.

Overfeeding is most apt to occur at night. Many mothers put the child to
the nipple for its regular feeding and fall asleep; the child keeps on
nursing at intervals until twice the proper quantity is taken; or she
gives it the nipple or the bottle if it cries, without regard to whether
it is the proper feeding time or not. The habit of overfeeding is very
common in infants who are suffering from indigestion. They cry
frequently, and are irritable most of the time; nothing seems to satisfy
them but the nipple. Taking the warm milk into the stomach seems to
allay the distress for the time being, so mothers get into the habit of
quieting them in this way. The cry of the drinking man, whom we try to
sober up, is: "Just one more drink and I'll quit." You give the drink
and in a little while the demand is repeated. If the mother understood
the seriousness of this practice of giving the child the nipple or
bottle at irregular times, she would not do it.

Overfeeding an infant may lay the foundation for a lifelong ailment. The
excess of food remains in the stomach or bowels undigested. If you
remember that this mass of undigested matter is confined in a small
space which is both warm and damp, it will be easily understood that
putrefaction is the inevitable outcome. As a result of this putrefaction
there are produced certain ptomaines and leucomaines. These poisons are
carried through the body, causing "auto-intoxication" which upsets and
irritates the child's nervous system and may cause very serious
consequences, as it frequently produces sudden death from apoplexy and
"heart failure" in the adult. These children are always restless,
fretful, continually uncomfortable, sleepless and colicky. They lose
weight, the stomach becomes distended and a gastritis or inflammation of
the stomach results.

Frequently a mother with such a fretful baby, seeing her child getting
thinner and thinner, will think that it is not getting enough to eat,
and will proceed to add to the trouble by giving the child more to eat.

Mothers must therefore learn not to overfeed their infants; not to
imagine that a failure to gain weight means the need of more food (if
the quality of the food being given is wrong, will increasing the
quantity of bad food do any good?); not to feed irregularly, no matter
how insistent the child may be.

INTERVALS OF FEEDING.--The physician will give instructions regarding
the feeding of the newly born baby for the first few days. After the
first few days and up to the beginning of the third month, it should be
fed every two hours from 7 A. M. until 9 P. M., and twice during the
night between 9 P. M. and 7 A. M., when the regular two-hours' interval
again begins for the following day. The two night feedings should be
about 1 and 4:30 A. M.

After the third month, and up to the sixth month, feed every three hours
and once during the night. From the sixth month until weaned, every
three and one-half or four hours, and not at all during the night.

While it has been pointed out that regularity of feeding is absolutely
essential, the above schedule is not to be regarded as an absolute
guide. It is a general guide,--approximately it will be found correct in
a large majority of cases. Each baby is a rule unto itself. The quantity
of the mother's milk will dictate the interval after the first month and
for each month as the baby grows. If a mother with no milk to spare, is
nursing a big, strong, husky baby, the three-hour interval during the
day may have to be shortened to two and one-half hours. As a rule,
however, these exceptions are better regulated by attention to the time
the baby is given at each nursing to fill its stomach.

HOW LONG SHOULD A BABY STAY AT THE BREAST?--Babies differ as to their
method of feeding; some of them seem to like to nurse a moment or two
and then look around; others seem to regard nursing as a serious
business, and resent any effort to take the nipple away until they have
finished. A baby should be taught to nurse methodically; it should not
be allowed to play the nipple. Let it fill its stomach and put it down
as quickly as possible. A mother will very soon know just how long it
takes the baby to fill its little stomach, and when she finds this out
she should time it by the clock. When the supply of milk is sufficient,
and the child is strong, and nurses freely, eight to twelve minutes are
sufficient. After it is taken away from the breast it must be left quiet
till the next feeding.

Other babies, according to the ability they evince to nurse, even when
the milk runs freely, require a longer time,--from twelve to fifteen
minutes. The rule, however, is never to allow them to nurse so long that
when they are taken away the milk runs out of the mouth. If this occurs,
cut down the length of time they are at the breast, and always time the
length of feeding by the clock,--don't guess at it.

CHILDREN WHO "VOMIT" BETWEEN FEEDINGS.--When a child habitually brings
up food between feedings it is usually a symptom of gastric indigestion.
In these cases it is advisable to add lime-water to each feeding, and to
remove some of the fat in each feeding. If improvement does not follow
remove more of the fat by removing some of the cream from the top of the
bottle before shaking it.

Remove from the bottle four ounces of cream and shake before preparing
the food from what is left. If the child improves after a few days
remove only three ounces, then in a few days remove two ounces and later
one ounce. After a time, sufficiently long to permit the stomach to
become accustomed to the graded amounts of fat, the former diet of whole
milk can be again resumed.

Never decrease the interval of feeding of a baby who is bringing up
parts of its meal between feedings; it is frequently advisable to
increase the interval. If a child is colicky and is bringing up lots of
gas in addition to some food, one-half grain of benzoate of soda may be
added to each ounce of food given and continued for a number of weeks if
necessary. When the gas is located in the intestines and is not brought
up, it must be made to pass downward. Attention to the bowels is of
great importance in these cases and it may be necessary to peptonize the
milk for some time. A reduction of the sugar and starch in the feeding
frequently cures this condition. (See "Colic.")

There are children who continue to have symptoms of indigestion and who
do not thrive despite various changes in the quantity and quality of the
feedings. It may be necessary to obtain a wet nurse for them, as it is
with "the delicate child." If a wet nurse cannot be obtained, or if the
age will permit, a substitute may be tried. Borden's Eagle brand of
condensed milk, canned, is probably the best substitute under these
circumstances. Condensed milk should never be used as a continuous food;
as a substitute, however, for a few weeks it is often invaluable. With
an infant of three or four months it should be used at the beginning in
the proportion of one ounce of the milk to sixteen ounces of plain
boiled water or barley water. The proper quantity, whatever the child is
taking (four or six ounces according to the age) at the time, can be
taken from the sixteen ounces and fed to the child. As the symptoms
improve the milk should be diluted less and less, 1 to 14, 1 to 10, and
so on until the proper strength is reached. After the child has been on
the condensed milk for a month it should be changed back to cow's milk,
using of course a diluted formula until the child becomes accustomed to
the change. Condensed milk, if used as a permanent food, will fatten
babies, but their vitality is very deficient, the muscles flabby, and
the resistance to disease exceedingly poor. They are apt to develop
rickets and sometimes scurvy.

REGULARITY OF FEEDING.--One of the very first, and one of the most
important factors in contributing to the good health and the comfort of
a baby is absolute regularity in feeding. A regular interval of feeding
is particularly essential during the first month of a baby's life.

Despite the explicit way in which young mothers are instructed in this
respect, it is one of the disappointing incidents of the practice of
medicine to observe how many of these mothers fail to heed the advice.
We have personally tried to find an explanation for this astonishing
carelessness, and have come to the conclusion that it is not due to
intentional forgetfulness, but rather to an inexplicable failure to
appreciate that the physician means exactly what he says.

If, for example, specific instructions are given to feed, or nurse, the
child every two hours (and by "specific instructions" it is meant, that
the physician takes time to explain in detail the instructions he
gives--that the instructions are not incidental to the call, but part
of the call;--that the advice is given not as a choice of what is
desirable, but as an absolute rule to follow; and carefully explains why
it is imperative to do as he says; and is satisfied the mother
understands what he means) it would seem that there could be no possible
reason why the directions should not be faithfully carried out. Yet such
is not the case in many instances, and the excuses given by mothers for
failure are so trivial and annoying that they show a failure to
appreciate that they are dealing with a serious problem--a problem
affecting human life. They fail to understand that fatal consequences
may follow their negligence. They treat the baby problem exactly as they
would a household incident, and as they do not consider it important
whether the breakfast dishes are washed at 9 A. M. or at twelve noon,
neither do they consider it important whether the baby is fed at 9 A. M.
or an hour later. When mothers learn that the attention they must give
their babies is essentially different from the attention they give
ordinary household duties, the problem of raising children with success
and comfort will be greatly simplified.

If the instructions are to feed the baby at certain intervals, do so at
all hazards. To offer the foolish excuse that the baby was asleep when
feeding time came, is no excuse at all; as a matter of fact the baby
should be asleep at each feeding time, if it is healthy. Wake it and
feed it, for, as will be shown later, it is the constant regularity that
counts. It will be more difficult to institute regular feeding intervals
during the first month, because a healthy baby is very difficult to wake
up, even to be fed, during the first few weeks of life. It is absolutely
essential, however, that it should be wakened: otherwise the tendency to
overfill the stomach at the next feeding will lead to indigestion and
colic.

WHY IS REGULARITY OF FEEDING IMPORTANT?--Because a baby's stomach holds
a very small quantity, and experience has taught us that a baby will
thrive better on small quantities given frequently, rather than large
quantities at longer intervals. The smaller the baby, the smaller the
quantity to begin with. Some babies weigh from five to seven pounds at
birth, while others weigh from nine to twelve pounds. It would be
unreasonable to expect a very small baby to be able to hold and digest
as much as a very large baby. Considerable common sense and the exercise
of some judgment is therefore necessary on the part of the uninstructed
mother, as to just the right quantity to give. Fortunately, a little
experience will enable the observant mother quickly to solve this
important problem. Nature promptly furnishes the symptoms which will
correctly guide her. Before considering the significance of these
symptoms let us appreciate certain facts common to all babies, and we
will more easily interpret the meaning of the special symptoms the baby
will furnish.

First of all the baby never vomits. The ejection of food, therefore, is
dependent upon a condition, not a disease. If milk runs out of its mouth
immediately, or within a few moments, after a feeding, the explanation
is that it was fed too much; it does not vomit, the stomach simply
overflows. It is exactly like trying to put more milk into a cup after
it is full,--it will not hold more, it overflows.

The significance of this symptom, therefore, is that the quantity of the
feeding is wrong (it is not the baby's stomach that is at fault,--it is
the mother's judgment). Reduce the quantity of each feeding and you will
quickly cure it. If the milk does not overflow soon after a feeding, the
baby will appear satisfied and will go to sleep, and will sleep until it
is time for the next feeding. It may not do this, however. In half an
hour, or a little longer, after the feeding, it wakes, it begins to fret
and cry, and very soon it suddenly belches gas and ejects a mouthful of
milk, after which it will rest quietly for a few moments, when it will
begin fretting all over again. It may keep up this performance for an
hour, or until the next feeding, and if so it is exhausted and unfit to
carry on the digestive process. It is in these cases where most mothers
make serious mistakes. This is the beginning of real trouble, and the
family physician is the only one qualified to give advice under such
circumstances. Remember the warning given regarding heeding the advice
of every busybody just at this time. Your baby's health is at stake;
maybe its life depends upon what you choose to do.

WHAT IS THE SIGNIFICANCE OF "VOMITING" AFTER FEEDINGS IN BABIES?--Let us
examine the difference between the milk which overflowed immediately
after the feeding and the milk which the baby ejects one-half hour or so
later, and which is now being considered.

The first milk looks like ordinary milk (breast milk), or if the baby is
being fed from the bottle, it looks just like the mixture in the bottle.
It not only looks like what it took, but it smells just like it. Now
examine the other; we find it looks like curdled milk, it is lumpy, and
we immediately can tell that it is sour, because it smells sour and
looks sour.

The explanation of the first overflow (immediately after the feeding)
was the too great quantity; the explanation of the second overflow
(one-half hour or so after the feeding), is the wrong quality of milk.
The quantity was right because none overflowed right after the feeding,
but the quality was wrong. Again, it is not the baby's stomach that is
at fault,--it is the quality of the milk.

How do we know this? Because of what takes place in the baby's stomach
during the one-half hour between the feeding and the time of the
overflow of the sour milk. The quantity being right, why should the baby
have any trouble if the quality is correct? It should not. Therefore by
changing the quality (not the quantity as in the former case) we cure
the trouble, thus proving the quality of the milk to be at fault.

What took place in the baby's stomach in the intervening half hour? The
quality being wrong, the little stomach could not digest the mixture
quick enough. Fermentation set in, gas was evolved, and as the stomach
was full before the gas was manufactured (and as more and more gas is
manufactured when food ferments), the stomach overflowed and out of the
baby's mouth comes gas, and sour, fermenting, curdled milk. This process
goes on until fermentation stops, or until the little stomach has just
enough left to fill it and no more. But think what this is,--a sour mass
of rotting, indigestible, curdled milk,--and that is what this baby is
expected to live and thrive on.

Some babies seem to have trouble from the very first day of life. Either
they will not retain the food, or the food fails to agree with them. If
the baby is put upon artificial food at once, these troubles are, of
course, not unexpected (because the right artificial food may not be
first chosen for the particular baby), but it is not always the
artificially fed baby that gives us trouble, and it is sometimes
difficult to find the cause for such trouble in a baby who has had
nothing but its mother's milk since it was born.

The cause of stomach trouble in a baby a few days old, fed exclusively
on mother's milk, is invariably to be found in the quality of the milk.

The quality of the mother's milk may be affected in a number of ways
which will render it unfit for the baby. For example, if the mother for
any reason becomes sick, and has a high fever shortly after confinement,
it will affect her milk and render it unfit temporarily.

If the mother worries or becomes highly nervous during the first few
days of her baby's life, she will so affect her milk as to render it
unfit for baby. If a baby is fed for a number of days after its birth by
its mother, and it should prove afterward that she has not enough milk
to continue feeding it, and has finally to put it on artificial food,
the baby will most likely have acquired slight stomach ailments that may
be troublesome for some time, because in this case both the quality and
the quantity were no doubt wrong. Constipation in the mother will also
cause trouble. The child will develop colic and extreme irritability
until the mother's condition is relieved.

Each of these conditions affecting the milk of the nursing mother
usually demands a change of food for the baby, and the substitution of
the proper artificial food will invariably immediately correct the
trouble. In some cases, however, the quality of the mother's milk is not
dependent upon a temporary temperamental condition, but is caused by
errors in diet, or conduct, or both. The milk of a physically tired,
worn-out mother, is not good, no matter whether the exhaustion is caused
by actual physical labor or by the exactions of a strenuous social
programme. The milk of a mother who persists in eating irregularly, or
who willfully caters to an appetite which craves the rich, highly
seasoned articles of diet, or who attempts to satisfy a legitimate
hunger by drinking large quantities of stale tea or coffee and eating
bread, is unfit for her baby.

These cases are amenable to the proper treatment, which of course means,
that the mother must change her conduct if at fault, and live strictly
upon the diet prescribed elsewhere for nursing mothers.

If these troubles occur in babies who have been fed exclusively upon
artificial food, an entire change of food is frequently necessary.


FRESH AIR FOR BABY

Baby's first journey out of doors depends upon so many contingencies
that no specific age can be given when it would be perfectly safe to
take it.

First, the weather and season of the year should be considered. The baby
should not be taken out at all when it is wet, or foggy, or very humid;
nor when it is extremely cold.

Second, the vigor or vitality of the individual child must be
considered. Some children can safely be taken out if the weather is
propitious when two weeks old, others cannot be taken out without risk
until they are two months old, regardless of the weather conditions. If
a child is robust at birth, and nurses well, and increases in weight
from the beginning, he can be taken out when he is two weeks old while
the sun shines during the middle of the day. If a child is small and
puny when born, and begins to have nursing troubles from the beginning,
does not increase in weight, is fretting, and crying, and sleeps
spasmodically, it would be unsafe to take it out before the sixth week
unless it is at a season of the year which would justify exposure to the
sunshine.

The question of suitable clothing will be important, and will decide the
advisability as to when the baby should go out. Every baby should be
dressed in wool weather is not too distinctly bad. Remember always to