SKETCH OF THE HISTORY OF THE KNIGHTS TEMPLARS,

by

JAMES BURNES LL.D. F.R.S.

Knight of the Royal Hanoverian Guelphic Order

Second Edition.

Illustrated with Plates.







Wm. Blackwood & Sons, Edinburgh;
Payne & Foss, London;
John Cumming, Dublin.

Edinburgh, MDCCCXL.




[Illustration]

                               TO
                         HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS

                     Prince Augustus Frederick.

             DUKE OF SUSSEX, EARL OF INVERNESS, K.G. D.C.L.
                          &c. &c. &c. &c.

                        Grand Prior of England,

                  THE FOLLOWING PAGES ARE DEDICATED
                   With every sentiment of Respect,

                                 BY
           His faithful and obedient Servant and Brother,
                            JAMES BURNES.




NOTICE.

The very limited number of copies comprising the First Edition of this
Work were exhausted by presentations amongst the most Illustrious
Individuals,--leaving only a few copies for the Author's numerous
circle of friends and associates. To remove a disappointment very
generally expressed by many intimate friends of the Author in this
Country, he has been induced to print a Second Edition of the
Work, which is now offered to the Public, with many Additions and
Illustrations,--for one of which, in particular,--the plate of Sir
Sidney Smith,--the Publishers are indebted to the kindness of MR.
BENTLEY.

  EDINBURGH, AUGUST 1840.




                                 CONTENTS.

  CHAP.                                                           PAGE
    1. The Hospitallers,                                             1
    2. The Templars,                                                 9
    3. The Persecution of the Templars,                             25
    4. The Continuation of the Order,                               39
    5. The Knights Templars of Scotland,                            55

                                 APPENDIX.
    1. Bull of Pope Clement V,                                       i
    2. Charter of Transmission,                                    iii
    3. Vow of the Knights of St. John,                               x
    4. Vow of the Templars,                                         xi
    5. Le Tresor,                                                 xiii
    6. Manifesto by the late Regent on his Succession,            xvii
    7. Discours De L'Amiral Sir Sidney Smith au Convent General,   xxi
    8. Investiture as a Knight Commander of the Bath,            xxiii
    9. Death and Funeral of Sir Sidney Smith,                      xxx
   10. Funeral Oration by M. Jullien,                           xxxiii
   11. Do. by M. Caille,                                        xxxvii
   12. Sketch of the History, &c. of the Order in Ireland,        xlii
   13. Extract of Charter by King James IV. of Scotland,         xlvii
   14. Proclamation by the Freemasons of Europe,--dated at
        Cologne on the Rhine 1535,                                  li
   15. List of Chevaliers whose Arms are Emblazoned
        on Frontispiece.




[Illustration:

       P. D.      E. P.
          A. M. D. C.

         INSIG: ARMOR:
    FRATRVM:  SORORVMQVE:
  ORDIN:  ILLVSTR:  TEMPLI:
       MAGNO: INDIAE:

     SCOTIAEQVE: PRIORATV:
          ANNO: ORD:
              721.]




List of Chevaliers,

Whose Armorial Bearings are emblazoned upon the _Gothic Gateway_ at
the beginning of this Work, and to whom the Plate is affectionately
dedicated by their Friend and Brother,

  JAMES BURNES.

               SIR WILLIAM SIDNEY SMITH, G.C.B.
                      &c.     &c.     &c.    &c.
                 Late Regent and Prince Magistral of the
                          Order of the Temple.

    Outram.        Hair.   Gibson.  Erskine.  Burnes.     Le Geyt.

    Le Messurier.  Kennedy.                   Bogle.       Holmes.

    Chalmers.      Campbell.                  Campbell.    Lushington.

    Macan.         Shaw.          ARMS        Fitzgerald.  Bortoleme.
                                   OF
                                THE ORDER.
    Dunlop.        Le Geyt.                   Pearson.     Simson.

    Laurie.        Winchester.                Ramsay.      Pringle.

                            JAMES BURNES,
           Knight of Aquitaine, and of the Royal Guelphic Order,
                            Grand Prior of India.

  Bailiff of Berne.                                           Harris.




INTRODUCTION.


Having learned from some of those kind and esteemed Friends who lately
presented to me a magnificent piece of Plate, in the name of the Free
Masons of Scotland, on the occasion of my approaching departure for
India, that I could not more suitably evince my sense of gratitude,
than by leaving amongst them, as a token of remembrance, some Memoir of
the Order of the Temple, with which they seem to consider me in some
measure identified, I have, in compliance with their wish, devoted the
very few hours of leisure I have had during the last month, to the
preparation of the following Sketch;--and feel confident, that from an
individual almost constantly engaged in arrangements for quitting his
Native Country, and labouring under the most painful feelings, at the
prospect of parting from his family, and those with whom he has lived
in cordial terms of friendship during the last three years, nothing
very finished or original will be expected; and I offer no apology,
therefore, when I state, that a considerable portion of the following
pages consists merely of an abridgement or reprint of an admirable, but
not sufficiently known article, written by Mr. Keightly, on the History
of the Templars, down to the period of the Persecution, in the Foreign
Quarterly Review for 1828, followed by some Extracts from Laurie's
Free-Masonry, and Mill's History of Chivalry.

The account of the present state of the Order has been taken from the
official "Manuel des Chevaliers de l'Ordre du Temple," published both
at Paris and Liverpool; as well as from information gathered either in
foreign books, such as the "Acta Latamorum," in which all the Statutes,
&c. were given to the Public in 1815, or from conversations with which
I have been honoured by His Royal Highness the DUKE of SUSSEX, Admiral
SIR WILLIAM SIDNEY SMITH, General WRIGHT, and other distinguished
Templars, at home and abroad. For much of the information recorded in
the Chapter on the Scottish Templars, I am under great obligations to
ADAM PATERSON, and WILLIAM PRINGLE, Esquires, both of whom furnished
me with valuable Manuscripts. The latter of these gentlemen is the
author of various papers on the Templars, in that valuable periodical,
the Free-Masons' Review, nor was it until I had failed to induce him
to give, in a continuous form, the result of his own researches on the
subject, that I myself ventured to enter upon the present Work.

In conclusion, I have to express my warmest acknowledgments to my
friend, W. A. LAURIE, Esquire, Secretary to the Grand Lodge of
Scotland, for many valuable notes and additions,--to whose taste and
exertions this little Volume owes its appearance before the Public, and
to whom personally I am indebted for many favours, which he would not
wish me to particularise.

   UNITED SERVICE CLUB,
  _Edinburgh, 28th May 1837_.




[Illustration: THE HOSPITALLERS.]




[Illustration: A HOSPITALLER.]




[Illustration]

CHAP. I.

The Hospitallers.


The natural desire to visit places which have been the scene of
memorable actions, or the abode of distinguished personages, had from
a very early period drawn pious pilgrims from the east and the west to
view those spots which had been hallowed by the presence of the Son
of God. The toils and the dangers of the journey were unheeded, when
set in comparison with the bliss of pouring forth prayer on Calvary,
and bathing in the waves of Jordan, whose waters had consecrated the
Saviour to his holy office. And, accordingly, we find that, so early
as the ninth century, there was in the valley of Jehoshaphat, near the
church of the Holy Virgin, an Hospital composed of twelve dwellings,
for pilgrims from the west, which possessed corn lands, vineyards,
and gardens, and an excellent library, established by the bounty of
Charlemagne.

In the eleventh century, when the apprehension of the approaching end
of the world, and appearance of Christ to judge mankind, had once
more fanned the flame of pious pilgrimage which had been previously
dying away, and men were hastening to the land where they expected
to meet their Lord and Judge, there was built within the walls of
Jerusalem an Hospital for the reception of Catholic pilgrims. This
hospital stood within a very short distance of the church of the
Holy Sepulchre, and, by the favour of the Egyptian Khalif, a church,
dedicated to the Virgin, and afterwards called St. Maria de Latina, was
erected close by it; there an abbot and several monks, who followed
the rule of St. Benedict, received and entertained the pilgrims who
arrived each year from the west, and furnished such of them as were
poor or had been plundered by the roving Bedouins, with the means of
paying the tax exacted by the unbelievers. Decorum not permitting the
reception of female pilgrims, the brethren established without their
walls a convent, dedicated to Mary Magdalene, where a pious sisterhood
entertained the pilgrims of their own sex. The number of the pilgrims
still continuing to increase, the abbot and his monks erected a new
_Hospitium_ near their church, which they placed under the patronage
of St. John, the Patriarch of Alexandria, named Eleemon, or the
Compassionate. This last Hospital had no independent revenues, but
derived its income from the bounty of the abbot of the monastery of the
Holy Virgin, and the alms of the pious.[1]

When, in 1099, Jerusalem was invested by the Crusaders, the Hospital
of St. John was presided over by Gerhard, a native of Provence, a man
of exemplary piety, and of a spirit of mild and universal benevolence,
rarely to be found in that age; for while the city was pressed by the
arms of the faithful, who sought for future glory by the extermination
of those whom they deemed the enemies of God on earth, not merely the
orthodox Catholic, but the schismatic Greek, and even the unbelieving
Moslem, shared without distinction the alms of the good director of the
Hospital of St. John. When the city was taken, the sick and wounded of
the Crusaders received all due care and attention from Gerhard and his
monks. The general favour they enjoyed with Godfrey de Bouillon and
the other pilgrims now emboldened them to separate themselves from the
monastery of St. Mary de Latina; and to pursue their labour of love
alone and independent, they drew up a rule for themselves, to which
they bound themselves to obedience in the presence of the patriarch,
and assumed as their distinguishing dress, a black mantle, with a
white cross of eight points on the left breast.[2] They still remained
obedient to the abbot of St. Maria de Latina, and according to the law
of the church, they paid tythes to the patriarch.

This continued while the brotherhood was poor; but riches soon began
to flow in upon them. Godfrey, whose very name suggests the ideas
of virtue and piety, pure, if not always well-directed, struck with
their simple and unassuming charity, bestowed on them his domain of
Monboire, in Brabant, with all its appurtenances. His brother and
successor, Baldwin, gave them a portion of the booty gained from the
infidels; several pious princes and nobles followed these examples, and
the Hospital of St. John soon saw itself in possession of extensive
estates, both in Europe[3] and Asia, which were managed by members
of the society named Preceptors. Pope Pascall II, in 1113, relieved
the Hospitallers from the burden of paying tythes to the patriarch of
Jerusalem--confirmed by his Bull all donations made and to be made to
them--and gave them authority to appoint a successor on the death of
Gerhard, without the interference of any other secular or spiritual
authority. The society now counted among its members many gallant
knights who had come to the Holy Land to fight in the cause of their
Saviour; and there, actuated by a spirit more accordant to his, had
flung aside their swords, and devoted themselves to the attendance
on the sick and poor among the brethren of St. John. One of the most
distinguished of these was Raymond Dupuy, a knight of Dauphine, who,
on the death of the worthy Gerhard, was chosen to succeed him in his
office.

It was Raymond who organized the order of the Hospitallers, and
established the discipline of the order. His regulations afford a
specimen of the manners and modes of thinking of his time; and some
of them require to be noticed here, on account of their similarity
with those of the Templars, shortly to be mentioned. The usual monkish
duties of chastity and obedience were strictly enjoined; the brethren,
both lay and spiritual, were directed to wear at least a linen or
woollen shirt, but no expensive dress of any kind; above all, no furs;
when they went to collect alms, they were, for fear of temptation,
never to go alone, but always in parties of two or three; they were
not, however, to select their companions, but to take such as the
director should appoint them; wherever there was a house belonging to
their order, they were to turn in thither, and nowhere else, and to
take whatever was given them, and ask for nothing more; they were also
to carry their lights with them, and wherever they passed the night,
to set these burning before them, lest the enemy should bring on them
some deadly danger. When the brethren were in the church, or in a
private house, in the company of women, they were to take good heed to
themselves and avoid temptation; for the same reason, they were never
to suffer women to wash their head or feet, or to make their bed. If
a brother had fallen into carnal sin, and his offence was secret, a
silent penance was deemed sufficient; but if it had been public, and
he was fully convicted of it, he was on Sunday, after mass, when the
people were gone out of church, to be stript of his clothes, and there,
by the director himself, or such of the brethren as he appointed,
severely beaten with thongs or rods, and then expelled the order. Any
brother possessed of money or valuables, who concealed them from the
master, was severely punished, the money which he had secreted was hung
about the offender's neck, and he was scourged by one of the brethren,
in the presence of all those belonging to the house; he had then to do
penance for forty days, during which time, on Wednesdays and Fridays,
he had nothing but bread and water to support him. These regulations
were made by Raymond, in the year 1118; a circumstance to be attended
to, as some similar rules have been since made a ground of accusation
against the Templars.

It is uncertain whether Raymond had any ulterior design of making
the order of the Hospitallers a military one, but if such was his
intention, he was anticipated. The kingdom of Jerusalem, over which
Baldwin II. now ruled, had been in a very extraordinary state from the
date of its conquest. It lay between two enemies, the Egyptians on
the south, and the Turks on the north; and these Moslems, though of
opposite and hostile sects, agreed in hatred of the Christians, and a
desire to take Jerusalem--which was to them also the Holy City--out of
the hands of the western infidels; the independent Arabs of the desert
were also inimical to the Christians, and as fond of plunder as they
have been at all periods of their history. Hence, the Holy Land was
continually infested by predatory bands, who robbed and plundered all
who fell in their way; the pious pilgrim who disembarked at Joppa or
Acre, was fortunate if he reached the ultimate object of his journey
in safety; and when he had visited all the consecrated places within
the sacred walls, new perils awaited him on his way to bathe in the
purifying waters of the Jordan, or to pluck in the gardens of Jericho
the palm branch which he was to suspend in the church on his return.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: THE TEMPLARS.]




[Illustration]

    "And on his brest a bloodie crosse he bore,
    The deare remembrance of his dying Lord,
    For whose sweete sake that glorious badge he wore,
    And dead, as living, ever him ador'd;
    Upon his shield the like was also scor'd,
    For soveraine hope, which in his helpe he had.
    Right, faithfull, true he was in deede and word:
    But of his cheere did seeme too solemne sad;
    Yet nothing did he dread, but ever was ydrad."




[Illustration: JACQUES DE MOLAY. GRANDE MAITRE DE L'ORDRE DU TEMPLE.]




[Illustration]

CHAP. II.

THE KNIGHTS TEMPLARS.


It was in the year 1119, the twentieth of the Christian dominion in
Syria, that nine pious and valiant Knights, the greater part of whom
had been the companions of Godfrey de Bouillon, formed themselves into
an association, the object of which was to protect and defend Pilgrims
on their visits to the holy places. These Knights, of whom the two
chief were Hugo de Payens and Godfrey de St. Omer, vowed, in honour
of the _sweet Mother of God_, to unite Monkhood and Knighthood;[4]
their pious design met with the warm approbation of the King and the
Patriarch, and in the hands of the latter they made the three ordinary
vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience; and a fourth, of combating
without ceasing against the heathen, in defence of Pilgrims and of
the Holy Land; and bound themselves to live according to the rule of
the canons of St. Augustine, at Jerusalem. The King assigned them
for their abode a part of his palace, which stood close by where had
stood the Temple of the Lord. He and his barons contributed to their
support, and the abbot and canons of the Temple assigned them for the
keeping of their arms and magazines the street between it and the royal
palace, and hence they took the name of the soldiery of the Temple,
or Templars. When Fulk, Count of Anjou, in the year following the
formation of the society, made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, the Order
was even then in such repute that he joined it as a married brother,
and on his return home remitted them annually thirty pounds of silver
to aid them in their pious labours, and his example was followed by
several other Christian princes.

For the first nine years after their institution, the Templars lived
in poverty and humility, and no new members joined their society,
which was eclipsed by that of St. John. Their clothing consisted of
such garments as were bestowed on them by the charity of the faithful,
and so rigorously were the gifts of pious princes applied by them to
their destination--the benefit of pilgrims and of the Holy Land in
general--that in consequence of their poverty, Hugo de Payens and
Godfrey de St. Omer had but one war-horse between them. When the Order
had arrived at wealth and splendour, its seal, representing two Knights
mounted on one charger, commemorated this original poverty of its pious
founders.

During the reign of Baldwin II. the kingdom was hard pressed by the
Turks of Damascus, Mossul, and the neighbouring states, and the king
had been a captive in their hands. On his liberation he sought every
means of strengthening his kingdom, and as the Templars had displayed
such eminent valour and devotion wherever they had been engaged, he
resolved to gain them all the influence and consideration in his power.
Accordingly he dispatched two of their members as his envoys to the
Holy See, to lay before the Pope the state of the Holy Land, and also
furnished them with a strong letter of recommendation to the celebrated
Bernard of Clairvaux, the nephew of one of the envoys. Bernard approved
highly of the object and institution of the Order. Hugo de Payens and
five other brethren soon arrived in the west, and appeared before the
fathers, who were assembled in council at Troyes, to whom Hugo detailed
the maxims and the deeds of the Templars. The fathers expressed their
approbation of all he said, the Order was pronounced good and useful,
and same additions, taken from that of the Benedictines, were made to
their rule. By the direction of Pope Honorius, the council appointed
them a white mantle as their peculiar dress, to which Pope Eugenius
some years afterwards added a red cross on the breast--the symbol of
martyrdom. Their banner was of the black and white stripe, called, in
old French, _Bauseant_ (which word became their war-cry,) and bore the
pious inscription, _Non nobis, Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tua da
gloriam_.[5] St. Bernard, if he did not himself draw up the rule of
Order, had at least a considerable participation in it; throughout his
life he cherished the Templars; he rarely wrote a letter to the Holy
Land, in which he did not praise them, and recommend them to the favour
and protection of the great.

Owing to the influence of Bernard, and the sincere piety and noble
qualities of its founders, the Order rapidly increased in wealth and
consequence. Many Knights assumed its habit, and with Hugo de Payens
travelled through France and England, to excite the Christians
to the sacred war. With Henry I. of England they met the highest
consideration. Fulk, of Anjou, re-united himself to Hugo de Payens, and
on the invitation of King Baldwin, prepared, though advanced in years,
to set out for Palestine, to espouse the daughter of the king, and
succeed him on his throne. Gifts in abundance flowed in on the Order,
large possessions were bestowed on it in all countries of the west, and
Hugo de Payens, now its Grand Master, returned to the Holy Land in the
year 1129, at the head of three hundred Knights Templars of the noblest
families in Europe, ready to take the field against the Infidels.

The Templars soon became, in fact, the most distinguished of the
Christian warriors. By a rule of their Order, no brother could be
redeemed for a higher ransom than a girdle or a knife, or some such
trifle;[6] captivity was therefore equivalent to death, and they
always fought with Spartan desperation. The Bauseant was always in the
thick of the battle; the revenue they enjoyed enabled them to draw to
their standard valiant secular knights and stout and hardy footmen.
The chivalry of St. John vied with them, it is true, in prowess and
valour, but they do not occupy the same space in the History of the
Crusades. The Templars having been from the outset solely devoted to
arms,--the warm interest which St. Bernard, whose influence was so
great, took in their welfare,--and the circumstance that the fourth
King of Jerusalem was a member of their body,--all combined to throw
a splendour about them which the Knights of St. John could not claim,
but which also gave occasion to their more speedy corruption, and
augmented the number of their enemies. Most writers, however, of the
twelfth century speak respectfully of the Knights of the Temple, and
those unsparing satirists, the Troubadours, never mention them but with
honour. The history of the Order, as far as we can recollect, records
only one instance of a Templar abjuring his faith, and that was an
English Knight, Robert of Saint Albans, who deserted to Saladin, who
gave him his sister in marriage on his becoming a Moslem; and in 1185,
the ex-red-cross Knight led a Saracen army to the neighbourhood of
Jerusalem, wasting and destroying the country with fire and sword.[7]

By the Bull, _Omne datum optimum_, granted by Pope Alexander III.
in 1162, the Order of the Templars acquired great importance, and
from this time forth, it may be regarded as totally independent,
acknowledging no authority but that--before which the haughtiest
monarchs bowed--of the supreme pontiff, who protected and favoured
them as his champions against all who might dispute his will. It is
therefore of importance to look at its constitution, and what were its
revenues and possessions.

The Order of the Templars consisted of three distinct _classes_,
not _degrees_--knights, chaplains, and service-brethren, to which
may be added those who were attached to the Order under the name of
_affiliated_, _donates_, and _oblates_.[8] The strength and flower of
the Order were the Knights; all its dignities and superior offices
belonged to them. The candidate for admission among the Knights of the
Temple was required to produce proof of his being the lawful issue
of a Knight, or of one qualified to receive that distinction; and he
must himself have already received the honour-conferring blow from a
Secular Knight, for the Order was Spiritual, and, as members, could
not deign to accept honour from a layman. The only exception was in
the case of a bishop, who might draw his sword among the brethren of
the Temple, without having been a secular Knight. The aspirant must
moreover be free from debt, and, on admission, pay a considerable sum
into the hands of the society.[9] The most unlimited obedience to the
commands of his superiors in the house and in the field of battle;
the total abnegation of all interests but those of the society, (for
the Templar could hold no property, could receive no private letter);
the most unflinching valour, (for so long as a Christian banner waved
in the field, the Templar, however severely wounded, must not abandon
it),--were the duties of the Knights of the Temple. If he fled,
disgrace and punishment awaited him; if he surrendered, he had to
end his life amid the torments inflicted by the enraged Moslems, or
to languish in perpetual captivity, for the Order never redeemed its
members. Hence, then, the Templar was valiant as the fabled heroes of
romance; hence prodigies of prowess, such as almost surpass belief, so
frequently illustrate the name of the soldiers of the Temple. Every
motive that could stimulate to deeds of renown combined to actuate the
soldier-monk A Knight, he obeyed the call of honour and emulation; a
Monk, (but the Templar was not, as some erroneously fancy, a Priest),
he was, according to the ideas of the times, engaged in the service
most acceptable to God.

The mode of reception into the Order corresponded with the dignity and
importance of the character of a Knight Templar. Though a noviciate was
enjoined by the original canons, in practice it was dispensed with;
the candidate was, after all due inquiry had been made, received in
a chapter assembled in the chapel of the Order. All strangers, even
the relatives of the aspirant, were excluded. The preceptor (usually
one of the priors) opened the business with an address to those
present, calling on them to declare if they knew of any just cause and
impediment to the aspirant, whom the majority had agreed to receive,
becoming a member of their body.[10] If all were silent, the candidate
was led into an adjacent chamber, whither two or three of the Knights
came to him, and setting before him the rigour and strictness of the
Order, inquired if he still persisted in his desire to enter it. If he
did persist, they inquired if he was married or betrothed; had made a
vow in any other Order; if he owed more than he could pay; if he was
of sound body, without any secret infirmity, and free? If his answers
proved satisfactory, they left him and returned to the chapter, and
the preceptor again asked if any one had anything to say against his
being received. If all were silent, he asked if they were willing to
admit him. On their assenting, the candidate was led in by the Knights
who had questioned him, and who now instructed him in the mode of
asking admission. He advanced, kneeling, with folded hands, before
the preceptor, and said, "Sir, I am come before God, and before you
and the brethren; and I pray and beseech you, for the sake of God and
our sweet lady, to receive me into your society and the good works
of the Order, as one who, all his life long, will be the servant and
slave of the Order." The preceptor then questioned him, if he had well
considered all the toils and difficulties which awaited him in the
Order, adjured him on the Holy Evangelists to speak the truth, then put
to him the questions already asked by the Knights, farther inquiring
if he was a Knight, the son of a Knight and a gentlewoman, and if he
was a priest. He then asked if he would promise to God and Mary, our
dear lady, obedience, as long as he lived, to the Master of the Temple,
and the prior who should be set over him; chastity of his body;[11]
compliance with the laudable manners and customs of the Order then in
force, and such as the Master and Knights might hereafter add; fight
for and defend, with all his might, the holy land of Jerusalem; never
quit the Order but with consent of the Master and the Chapter; never
see a Christian unjustly deprived of his inheritance, or be aiding in
such deed. The preceptor then said--"In the name, then, of God and of
Mary, our dear lady, and in the name of St. Peter of Rome, and of our
father the Pope, and in the name of all the brethren of the Temple,
we receive you to all the good works of the Order, which have been
performed from the beginning, and will be performed to the end, you,
your father, your mother, and all those of your family whom you let
participate therein. So you, in like manner, receive us to all the
good works which you have performed and will perform. We assure you of
bread and water, the poor clothing of the Order, and labour and toil
enow." The preceptor then took the white mantle, with its ruddy cross,
placed it about his neck, and bound it fast. The chaplain repeated the
one hundred and thirty-second Psalm, _Ecce quam bonum_, and the prayer
of the Holy Spirit, _Deus qui corda fidelium_, each brother said a
_Pater_, the preceptor kissed the new brother, the chaplain did the
same. The Templar then placed himself at the feet of the preceptor, and
was by him exhorted to peace and charity with his brother Christians;
to chastity, obedience, humility, and piety; and thus the ceremony
ended.

At the head of the Order stood the Grand Master, who, like the General
of the Jesuits in modern times, was independent of all authority but
that of the sovereign pontiff. The residence of the Grand Master was
the city of Jerusalem; when the city was lost, he fixed his seat at
Antioch, next at Acre, then at the castle of the Pilgrims,[12] between
Caiphas and Caesarea, and finally in Cyprus, for his duty required
him to be always in the Holy Land. The Grand Master never resided in
Europe until the time of Jacques de Molay. The power of the Grand
Master was considerable, though he was very much controuled by the
chapter, without whose consent he could not dispose of any of the
higher offices, or undertake any thing of importance. He could not, for
instance, take money out of the treasury, without the consent of the
prior of Jerusalem; he could neither make war or truce, or alter laws,
but with the approbation of the chapter. But the Grand Master had the
right of bestowing the small commands, the governments of houses of
the Order, and of selecting the brethren who should form the chapter,
which power was again controuled by there being always assigned him two
brethren as assistants, who, with the Seneschal, were to form a part of
every chapter. The Order was aristocratic rather than monarchic; the
Grand Master was like a Doge of Venice, and his real power chiefly
depended on his personal qualities; he had, however, many distinctions;
the greater part of the executive power was in his hands--in war he
was the commander-in-chief; he had, as vicar-general of the Pope,
episcopal jurisdiction over the clergy of the Order; he ranked with
princes, and his establishment corresponded thereto; he had for his
service four horses, a chaplain, two secretaries, a squire of noble
birth, a farrier, a Turcopole and cook, with footmen, and a Turcoman
for a guide, who was usually fastened by a cord to prevent his escape.
When the Grand Master died, his funeral was celebrated with great
solemnity by the light of torches and wax tapers,--an honour bestowed
by the Order on no other of its Members. All the Knights and Prelates
were invited to assist. Each Brother who was present was to repeat two
hundred _Pater Nosters_ within the space of seven days, for the repose
of the soul of the deceased; and one hundred poor persons were fed at
home, at the expense of the Order, with the same design.[13]

Each province of the Order had a Grand Prior, who represented in it the
Grand Master; each house had its Prior at its head, who commanded its
Knights in war, and presided over its chapters in peace. In England,
the Grand Prior sat in Parliament as a Peer of the Realm. To complete
this sketch of the Order, we may remark, that except Scandinavia, (for
they had some possessions in Hungary,) there was not a country in
Europe in which the lavish piety of princes and nobles had not bestowed
on the Templars a considerable portion of the wealth of the state;
for in every province the Order had its churches and chapels--the
number of which was in the year 1240, as great as 1050--villages,
farm-houses, mills, corn-lands, pastures, woods, rights of venison,
and fisheries.[14] The revenues of the Templars in England in 1185, as
given by Dugdale, will afford some idea of their wealth. The entire
annual income of the Order has been estimated at not less than six
millions sterling.

It cannot be denied, that this enormous wealth, together with the
luxury and other evils which it engendered, provoked the hatred of
the secular clergy and laity, and paved the way to the spoliation of
the Order. In 1252, the pious pope-ridden Henry III. of England said,
that the prelates and clergy in general, but especially the Templars
and Hospitallers, had so many liberties and privileges, that their
excessive wealth made them mad with pride; he added, that what had
been bestowed imprudently, ought to be prudently resumed, and declared
his intention of revoking the inconsiderate grants of himself and his
predecessors. The Grand Prior of the Templars replied, "What sayest
thou, my Lord the King? Far be it that so discourteous and absurd a
word should be uttered by thy mouth. So long as thou observest justice,
thou mayest be a king, and as soon as thou infringest it, thou wilt
cease to be a king." A bold expression certainly, but the Prior knew
his man well, and he would hardly have spoken so to the son of Henry.
The anecdote of Richard I. bestowing his daughter Pride in marriage on
the Templars, is well known; and numerous traits of their haughtiness,
avarice, luxury, and other of the current vices, may be found in the
writers of the thirteenth century; but till the final attack was made,
no worse charge was brought against them, unless such is implied in a
bull of Pope Clement IV. in 1265, which is, however, easily capable
of a milder interpretation. Mr. Raynouard asserts, too, that the
proverbial expression _bibere Templariter_ is used by no writer of the
thirteenth century. In this he is preceded by Baluze and Roquefort, who
maintain, that, like _bibere Papaliter_, it only signified to live in
abundance and comfort.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: PERSECUTION OF THE TEMPLARS.]




[Illustration]

CHAP. III.

The Persecution of the Templars.


When Acre fell in 1292, the Templars, having lost all their possessions
and a great number of their members in the Holy Land, retired with
the other Christians to Cyprus. Having probably seen the folly of all
hope of recovering the Holy Land, they grew indifferent about it; few
members joined them from Europe, and it is more than probable that they
meditated a removal of the chief seat of the Order to France.[15] The
Hospitallers, on the other hand, with more prudence, as events showed,
resolved to continue the war against the infidels, and they attacked
and conquered Rhodes; while the Teutonic knights transferred the sphere
of their pious warfare to Prussia against its heathen inhabitants.
Thus, while the Templars were falling under the reproach of being
luxurious Knights, their rivals rose in consideration, and there was an
active and inveterate enemy ready to take advantage of their ill-repute.

Philip the Fair, a tyrannical and rapacious prince, was at that time
on the throne of France. His darling object was to set the power of
the monarchy above that of the church. In his celebrated controversy
with Pope Boniface, the Templars had been on the side of the Holy
See. Philip, whose animosity pursued Boniface even beyond the grave,
wished to be revenged on all who had taken his side; moreover, the
immense wealth of the Templars, which he reckoned on making his own if
he could destroy them, strongly attracted the king, who had already
tasted of the sweets of the spoliation of the Lombards and the Jews;
and he probably, also, feared the obstacle to the perfect establishment
of despotism which might be offered by a numerous, noble, and wealthy
society, such as the Templars formed. Boniface's successor, Clement
V. was the creature of Philip, to whom he owed his dignity, and at
his accession had bound himself to the performance of six articles
in favour of Philip, one of which was not expressed. It was probably
inserted without any definite object, and intended to serve the
interest of the French monarch on any occasion which might present
itself.

[Illustration: LA TOUR DU TEMPLE A PARIS]

It had been the object of Pope Boniface to form the three Military
Orders into one, and he had summoned them to Rome for that purpose, but
his death prevented it. Clement, on this, June 6, 1306, addressed the
Grand Masters of the Templars and the Hospitallers, inviting them to
come to consult with him about the best mode of supporting the Kings of
Armenia and Cyprus. He desired them to come as secretly as possible,
and with a very small train, as they would find abundance of their
Knights this side the sea; and he directed them to provide for the
defence of Limisso in Cyprus during their short absence. Fortunately
perhaps for himself and his Order, the Master of the Hospitallers was
then engaged in the conquest of Rhodes, but Jacques de Molay,[16] the
Master of the Templars, immediately prepared to obey the mandate of the
Pope, and he left Cyprus with a train of 60 Knights, and a treasure of
150,000 florins of gold, and a great quantity of silver money, the
whole requiring twelve horses to carry it.[17] He proceeded to Paris,
where he was received with the greatest honours by the King, and he
deposited his treasure in the Temple of that city. It is, as we have
said, not impossible that it was the intention of Molay to transfer
the chief seat of the Order thither, and that he had, therefore,
brought with him its treasure and the greater part of the members of
the chapter; and indeed it is difficult to say how early the project
of attacking the Templars entered into the minds of Philip and his
obsequious lawyers, or whether he originally aimed at more than
mulcting them under the pretext of reformation: and farther, whether
the first informers against them were suborned or not. The records
leave a considerable degree of obscurity on the whole matter. All we
can learn is, that a man named Squin de Flexian, who had been a Prior
of the Templars, and had been expelled the Order for heresy and various
vices, was lying in prison at Paris or Toulouse, it is uncertain which.
In the prison with him was a Florentine named Noffo Dei, "a man," says
Villani, "full of all iniquity." These two began to plan how they
might extricate themselves from the confinement to which they seemed
perpetually doomed. The example of the process against the memory of
Pope Boniface, shewed them that no lie was too gross or absurd not to
obtain ready credence, and they fixed on the Templars as the objects
of their charges. Squin told the governor of the prison that he had a
communication to make to the King, which would be of more value to him
than if he had gained a kingdom, but that he would only tell it to the
King in person. He was brought to Philip, who promised him his life,
and he made his confession, on which the King immediately arrested some
of the Templars, who are said to have confirmed the truth of Squin's
assertions. Shortly afterwards, it is said, similar discoveries were
made to the Pope by his chamberlain, Cardinal Cantilupo, who had been
in connexion with the Templars from his eleventh year.

Squin Flexian declared, 1. That every member on admission into the
Order swore on all occasions to defend its interests right or wrong;
2. That the heads of the Order were in secret confederacy with the
Saracens, had more of Mahommedan unbelief than of Christian faith, as
was proved by the mode of reception into the Order, when the novice was
made to spit and trample on the crucifix, and blaspheme the faith of
Christ; 3. That the superiors were sacrilegious, cruel, and heretical
murderers; for if any novice, disgusted with its profligacy, wished to
quit the Order, they secretly murdered him, and buried him by night;
so, also, when women were pregnant by them, they taught them how to
produce abortion, or secretly put the infants to death; 4. The Templars
were addicted to the error of the Fraticelli, and, like them, despised
the authority of the Pope and the Church; 5. That the superiors were
addicted to the practice of horrible crimes, and if any one opposed
them, they were condemned by the Master to perpetual imprisonment; 6.
That their houses were the abode of every vice and iniquity; 7. That
they endeavoured to put the Holy Land into the hands of the Saracens,
whom they favoured more than the Christians. Three other articles of
less importance completed this first body of charges. It is remarkable,
that we do not find among them those which made such a figure in the
subsequent examinations; namely, the devil appearing among them in
the shape of a cat; their idolatrous worship of an image with one or
three heads, or a skull covered with human skin, with carbuncles for
eyes, before which they burned the bodies of their dead brethren, and
then mingled the ashes with their drink, thereby thinking to gain more
courage; and, finally, their smearing this idol with human fat.[18]

It was unfortunate for the Templars that their chapters were held in
secret,[19] and by night, for an opportunity was thereby afforded
to their enemies of laying whatever secret enormities they pleased
to their charge, to refute which, by the production of indifferent
witnesses, was consequently out of their power. Philip having now all
things prepared, sent, like his descendant Charles IX. previous to
the St. Bartholomew massacre, secret orders to all his governors to
arm themselves on the 12th of October, and on the following night,
but not sooner, on pain of death, to open the king's letter, and act
according to it. On Friday the 13th of October, all the Templars
throughout France were simultaneously arrested at break of day. The
unhappy Knights were thrown into cold cheerless dungeons, (for they
were arrested, we should remember, at the commencement of winter), had
barely the necessaries of life, were deprived of the habit of their
Order, and of the rites and comforts of the church; were exposed to
every species of torture then in use, were shown a real or pretended
letter of the Grand Master, in which he confessed several of the
charges, and exhorted them to do the same; and finally, were promised
life and liberty, if they freely acknowledged the guilt of the Order.
Can we then be surprised that the spirit of many a Knight was broken,
that any hope of escape from misery was eagerly caught at, and that
falsehoods, the most improbable, were declared to be true? And it is
remarkable that the most improbable charges are those which were most
frequently acknowledged, so just is the observation, that men will
more readily in such circumstances acknowledge what is false than what
is true; for the false they know can be afterwards refuted by its own
absurdity, whereas truth is permanent.

Of the Templars in England 228 were examined;[20] the Dominican,
Carmelite, Minorite, and Augustinian friars brought abundance of
hearsay evidence against them, but nothing of any importance was
proved; in Castile and Leon it was the same; in Aragon the Knights
bravely endured the torture, and maintained their innocence; in
Germany all the lay witnesses testified in their favour; in Italy
their enemies were more successful, as the influence of the Pope was
there considerable, yet in Lombardy the Bishops acquitted the Knights.
Charles of Anjou, the cousin of Philip, and the foe of the Templars,
who had sided with Frederick against him, could not fail, it may be
supposed, in getting some evidences of their guilt in Sicily, Naples,
and Provence. It is not undeserving of attention, that one of these
witnesses, who had been received into the Order in Catalonia, (where
all who were examined had declared the innocence of the Order), said he
had been received there in the usual impious and indecent manner, and
mentioned the appearance and the worship of the cat in the chapter!!
Such is the value of rack-extorted testimony! In fine, in every country
out of the sphere of the immediate influence of Clement, Philip, and
Charles, the general innocence of the Order was acknowledged. In
Portugal they were preserved under the altered appellation of the
Knights of Christ,--a change which was effected by the friendly policy
of Prince Denys, who in 1218, secured for them the sanction of the
successor of Clement.[21]

Throughout the entire process against the Templars, from October 1307
to May 1312, the most determined design of the King and his ministers
to destroy the Order meets us at every step; Philip would have blood
to justify robbery; several Templars had already expired on the rack,
perished from the rigour of their imprisonment, or died by their own
hands; but on the 12th May 1310, fifty-four Templars who had confessed,
but afterwards retracted, were by his order committed to the flames,
in Paris, as relapsed heretics. They endured with heroic constancy the
most cruel tortures, asserting with their latest breath the innocence
of the Order, though offered life if they would confess, and implored
to do so by their friends and relatives. Similar executions took place
in other towns. The Pope soon went heart and hand with Philip. In vain
did the bishops assembled at Vienne propose to hear those members who
came forward as the defenders of the Order. A Bull of the Pope was
fulminated against the Order,[22] and transferred its possessions
to the Knights of St. John, who, however, had to pay such enormous
fines to the King and Pope before they could enter on them, as almost
ruined them; so that if Philip did not succeed to the utmost of his
anticipations, he had little reason to complain of his share.[23] The
members of the society of the Templars were permitted to enter that of
the Hospitallers,--a strange indulgence for those that had spitten on
the cross, and practised horrible vices.

But the atrocious scene was yet to come which was to complete the ruin
of the Templars, and satiate the vengeance of their enemies. Their
Grand Master, Molay, and three other dignitaries of the Order, still
survived: And, though they had made the most submissive acknowledgments
to their unrelenting persecutors, yet the influence which they had over
the minds of the vulgar, and their connection with many of the Princes
of Europe, rendered them formidable and dangerous to their oppressors.
By the exertion of that influence, they might restore union to their
dismembered party, and inspire them with courage to revenge the murder
of their companions;[24] or, by adopting a more cautious method, they
might repel, by uncontrovertible proofs, the charges for which they
suffered; and, by interesting all men in their behalf, they might
expose Philip to the attacks of his own subjects, and to the hatred and
contempt of Europe. Aware of the dangers to which his character and
person would be exposed by pardoning the surviving Templars, the French
Monarch commanded the Grand Master and his Brethren to be led out to
a scaffold, erected for the purpose, and there to confess before the
public, the enormities of which their Order had been guilty, and the
justice of the punishment which had been inflicted on their brethren.
If they adhered to their former confession, a full pardon was promised
to them; but if they should persist in maintaining their innocence,
they were threatened with destruction on a pile of wood, which the
executioners had erected in their view, to awe them into compliance.
While the multitude were standing around in awful expectation, ready,
from the words of the prisoners, to justify or condemn their King,
the venerable Molay, with a cheerful and undaunted countenance,
advanced, in chains, to the edge of the scaffold; and, with a firm and
impressive tone, thus addressed the spectators.--"It is but just, that
in this terrible day, and in the last moments of my life, I lay open
the iniquity of falsehood, and make truth to triumph. I declare then,
in the face of heaven and earth, and I confess, though to my eternal
shame and confusion, that I have committed the greatest of crimes; but
it has been only in acknowledging those that have been charged with
so much virulence upon an Order, which truth obliges me to pronounce
innocent. I made the first declaration they required of me, only to
suspend the excessive tortures of the rack, and mollify those that made
me endure them. I am sensible what torments they prepare for those
that have courage to revoke such a confession. But the horrible sight
which they present to my eyes, is not capable of making me confirm one
lie by another. On a condition so infamous as that, I freely renounce
life, which is already but too odious to me. For what would it avail
me to prolong a few miserable days, when I must owe them only to the
blackest of calumnies."[25] In consequence of this manly revocation,
the Grand Master and his companions were hurried into the flames, where
they retained that contempt for death which they had exhibited on
former occasions. This mournful scene extorted tears from the lowest
of the vulgar.[26] Four valiant Knights, whose charity and valour
had procured them the gratitude and applause of mankind, suffering,
without fear, the most cruel and ignominious death, was, indeed, a
spectacle well calculated to excite emotions of pity in the hardest
hearts. Humanity shudders at the recital of the horrid deed; and if the
voice of impartial posterity has not, with one accord, pronounced the
unqualified acquittal of the Templars, it has branded with the mark of
eternal infamy the conduct of their accusers and judges.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: CONTINUATION OF THE ORDER.]




[Illustration]

CHAP. IV.

The Continuation of the Order.


But the persecution of the Templars in the fourteenth century does
not close the history of the Order; for, though the Knights were
spoliated, the Order was not annihilated. In truth, the cavaliers were
not guilty,--the brother hood was not suppressed,--and, startling as
is the assertion, there has been a succession of Knights Templars from
the twelfth century down even to these days; the chain of transmission
is perfect in all its links. Jacques de Molay, the Grand Master at
the time of the persecution, anticipating his own martyrdom, appointed
as his successor, in power and dignity, Johannes Marcus Larmenius
of Jerusalem, and from that time to the present there has been a
regular and uninterrupted line of Grand Masters. The charter[27] by
which the supreme authority has been transmitted, is judicial and
conclusive evidence of the Order's continued existence. The charter of
transmission, with the signatures of the various chiefs of the Temple,
is still preserved at Paris, with the ancient statutes of the Order,
the rituals, the records, the seals, the standards, and other memorials
of the early Templars.

The brotherhood has been headed by the bravest cavaliers of France,
by men who, jealous of the dignities of Knighthood, would admit no
corruption, no base copies of the orders of chivalry, and who thought
that the shield of their nobility was enriched by the impress of the
Templars' red cross. Bertrand du Guesclin was the Grand Master from
1357 till his death in 1380, and he was the only French commander who
prevailed over the chivalry of our Edward III. From 1478 to 1497, we
may mark Robert Lenoncourt, a cavalier of one of the most ancient and
valiant families of Lorraine. Phillippe Chabot, a renowned captain in
the reign of Francis I., wielded the staff of power from 1516 to
1543. The illustrious family of Montmorency appear as Knights Templars,
and Henry, the first Duke, was the chief of the Order from the year
1574 to 1614. At the close of the seventeenth century, the Grand Master
was James Henry de Duras, a marshal of France, the nephew of Turenne,
and one of the most skilful soldiers of Louis XIV. The Grand Masters
from 1724 to 1776 were three princes of the royal Bourbon family. The
names and years of power of these royal personages who acknowledged
the dignity of the Order of the Temple, were Louis Augustus Bourbon,
Duke of Maine, 1724-1737,--Louis Henry Bourbon Conde, 1737-1741,--and
Louis Francis Bourbon Conty, 1741-1746. The successor of these princes
in the Grand Mastership of the Temple was Louis Hercules Timoleon,
Duke de Cosse Brissac, the descendant of an ancient family long
celebrated in French history for its loyalty and gallant bearing. He
accepted the office in 1776, and sustained it till he died in the
cause of royalty at the beginning of the French Revolution. The Order
has now at its head Sir William Sidney Smith, of chivalric renown,
who became Regent upon the death of the late Grand Master, Bernard
Raymond Fabre Palaprat. The high and heroic character of Sir Sidney
Smith,[28]--whose deeds of arms at St. Jean d'Acre, rivalling those of
the Royal Crusader, Richard I, obtained for him by Eastern Nations the
appellation of the modern "Coeur de Lion,"--specially pointed him out as
the most worthy of Christian Knights to fill this eminent station. He
who with such noble philanthropy founded and presided over the Society
of Knights Liberators of the White Slaves in Africa, cannot but shed
additional lustre on the Soldiery of the Temple, whose professed object
originally was, and yet is, the protection of defenceless pilgrims, and
the rescuing of Christians from Infidel bondage. Under such a Chief the
Order must prosper, and there are now Colleges or Establishments in
England and in many of the principal Cities of Europe.

[Illustration: BERTRAND DU GUESCLIN,

_From a Wood-cut in a rare gothic folio, printed at Lyons, 1490,
preserved in the Bibliotheque Royale, Paris; and called the "Chronique
de Bertrand du Guesclin."_]

[Illustration: ADMIRAL SIR SIDNEY SMITH. _Engraved by W. Greatbatch
from a picture by F. Opie R.A._]

Thus the very ancient and sovereign Order of the Temple is in full
and chivalric existence, like those Orders of Knighthood which were
either formed in imitation of it, or had their origin in the same noble
principles of chivalry. It has mourned as well as flourished, but
there is in its nature and constitution a principle of vitality which
has carried it through all the storms of fate; its continuance, by
representatives as well as by title, is as indisputable a fact as the
existence of any other chivalric fraternity. The Templars of these days
claim no titular rank, yet their station is so far identified with that
of the other Orders of Knighthood, that they assert equal purity of
descent from the same bright source of chivalry; nor is it possible to
impugn the legitimate claims to honourable estimation, which the modern
brethren of the Temple derive from the antiquity and pristine lustre of
their Order, without at the same time shaking to its centre the whole
venerable fabric of knightly honour.

After this short account of the continuation of the Order, which
we have extracted from Mill's Chivalry, it may be interesting to
describe the present nature and objects of the Institution; and we
shall accordingly make a brief abstract of the statutes established
by the Convent-General held at Versailles in 1705, under the Grand
Mastership of the Regent Duke of Orleans, and by succeeding General
Convocations, so far as they relate to these subjects. The Order of the
Fellow Soldiers of the Temple consists of two distinct classes, termed
a Superior and Inferior Militia; the former comprising all Knights
consecrated according to rites, rules, and usages, with their Esquires;
and the latter, the humbler brethren or persons admitted _propter
artem_, and the candidates, or as they are designated, the _postulants_
for the honours of Chivalry. Except as a serving brother,[29] no one
is eligible even to the lower grade, who is not of distinguished
rank in society, which in Great Britain is understood to imply that
station in life which would entitle a gentleman to attend the Court
of his Sovereign. The Candidate must moreover be strongly recommended
by Sponsors as a Christian of liberal education, eminent for virtue,
morals, and good breeding, and in no case is a scrutiny into these
qualifications dispensed with, unless the aspirant be a Knight of
Christ, a Teutonic Knight, or the descendant of a Knight Templar.
Should he be ambitious of the rank of Novice Esquire, which usually
precedes Knighthood, he is farther called on to produce proofs of
nobility in the fourth generation; and a deficiency in this requisite
can only be supplied by a formal decree of the Grand Master, conferring
on him the nobility necessary for his reception. Considerable fees
are paid by all entrants; and members, on being promoted to the
equestrian honours of the Order, are expected to make an oblation to
the Treasury, the amount of which cannot be less than four drams of
gold,[30] but generally very far exceeds that sum. Before receiving the
vow of profession, which is still administered to all Chevaliers,[31]
the Candidate makes a solemn declaration either that he does not
belong to the Order of Malta,[32] or that he abjures the spirit of
rival hostility which actuated the Knights of St. John in former days
against the Templars. These preliminaries being arranged, his petition
is finally decided on, either in a Conventual house, or by the special
legate of the Grand Master, in whose name only his reception can be
proclaimed, and once armed a Knight, and consecrated a Chevalier of the
Temple, he cannot on any pretence whatever renounce the Order.[33]

At the head of the Hierarchy of the Order, ranks the Convent-General,
or assembly of the Knights, but the executive power is vested in the
Grand Master, whose authority is almost unbounded. He is elected
for life from among the Knights, and it is declared impious to
substitute a successor to him unless he be deceased, or shall have
voluntarily abdicated; he may even nominate his successor by testament
or otherwise to the Convent-General. He can create new houses and
dignities on the Order, cancelling those already constituted, remit
penalties, and confer all benefices and offices, the collation to
which is not specially provided for in the statutes. He confirms all
Diplomas of profession and patents of appointment, and may send legates
possessing powers delegated by himself to different countries. His
interpretation of the laws is valid, even against a statute of the
Convent-General, and he alone has the power of proposing alterations in
the rules to that assembly.

Next in honour to the Grand Master, unless he has publicly appointed a
delegate or successor, are his four Deputes, or _Vicarii Magistrales_,
who are nominated by himself, and removable at his pleasure. After
these follow the Members of the Grand Council, which consists of the
Supreme Preceptor, and eight Grand Preceptors, the Primate of the
Order, and his four Coadjutors General, with all the Grand Priors,
Ministers, and other principal dignitaries that may be present at the
Magisterial City. Each nation of the Order is presided over by its
Grand Prior, appointed for life, whose language comprises the various
subordinate divisions of Bailiwicks or Provinces; Commanderies;
Convents of Knights and Noviciate Esquires; Abbeys of Ladies and
Canonesses; Chapters of Postulants, and Conclaves of Initiation. Except
in special cases, no Chevalier is eligible for a Commandery before
the expiration of two years from his having obtained the honours of
knighthood, and in like manner no Commander can be appointed a Bailli,
nor any Bailli a Grand Prior, before the same period has intervened.

In order that the objects of the Institution may be distinctly
understood, we shall now proceed to translate a decree by the present
Grand Master, bearing date the 4th September 1826, in explanation of
the Vow of Profession which has been already referred to, observing, at
the same time, that the Order of the Temple, being exclusively devoted
to the Christian religion, cannot be considered in the slightest degree
connected with Free Masonry, which, it is well known, welcomes equally
to its bosom the Jew and the Gentile, the Christian and the Mahommedan,
requiring from each only a belief in a Divine Being, with a just sense
of moral rectitude and conscientious obligation.

The decree alluded to states, that as the Vow contains many
_dispositions_ which, misconstructed, might appear incompatible with
the advance of knowledge and manners of the age, it is declared that
Candidates sign it under the following interpretation:--

_1st_, That by the Vow of Poverty, the Order does not mean to submit
the Chevaliers to an absolute poverty, but to remind them that they
ought always to be ready to share their fortune with the unfortunate,
and to sacrifice it for the wants of the Order.

_2d_, That the vow of chastity, and of abhorring lewdness, is the
solemn engagement of fulfilling the obligation that society imposes on
all men to labour to overcome their vicious propensities, in order not
to outrage either decency or morality.

_3d_, That the obedience due to the Grand Master, and to the
dignitaries of the Order, does not exclude the duty imposed on every
chevalier of conforming himself, as a man, to natural right, and of
obeying, as a citizen, the government of his country.

_4th_, Lastly, That the Templars are not actuated by the desire of
material conquests,--that their principal aim is not to recover the
dominions of which the Order was despoiled, or the earth which received
the body of Jesus the Christ, but to reconquer to the doctrine for
which was precipitated into the tomb that divine preceptor of men,--the
empire which it always had over the people when it was revealed to them
in all its purity,--in a word, that the Templars are not ambitious of
subduing the physical universe to their domination, but the nations
that cover it to Christian morality.

It has frequently been asserted, that the Templars have always
professed a religion peculiar to themselves, and much at variance with
almost every religious creed at present in existence, but on this
subject it is only necessary to say here, that although they possess
many religious documents of an extraordinary nature, and, amongst
others, a very ancient Greek manuscript of _Evangile_ and the Epistle
of St. John, differing from the version contained in the vulgate, yet
no chevalier is obliged to subscribe to them unless he be a candidate
for certain offices in the Order. This subject is fully explained in
a work lately published at Paris, "Recherches Historiques sur les
Templiers et sur leurs Croyances Religieuses par J. Plivard, officier
superieur d'Artillerie;" and, for the present, we are unwilling to
enter upon it, not having as yet received the _proces verbal_ of the
Convent-General of the Order, lately assembled at Paris, to which
the following question, under the authority of the Grand Master, was
submitted:--"L'ordre etant Cosmopolite, et d'apres le veu de profession
dans la Chevalerie, est il convenable de laisser subsister dans les
statuts des dispositions par lesquelles certains officiers de l'Ordre
ne pouvent etre choisis que parmis les Chevaliers professant la
religion Johannite?"

The habit of the Order[34] consists, as formerly, of the white tunic
and mantle, with the red cross on the left breast; a white cap with
a red feather; a white silk sash fringed with red; white pantaloons,
buff-boots, gold spurs and an equestrian sword with a silver hilt. The
dress differs somewhat according to the rank of the individual, but
every Chevalier is bound to wear the gold ring of profession, with the
Cross of the Order, and the letters, P. D. E. P.[35] together with
his own name, and the date of his reception engraven thereon. Each
Knight also is decorated with the conventual cross or jewel of the
Order, which consists of a gold cross of eight points enamelled white,
surmounted by the Grand Master's crown, and bearing on its centre a
cross pattee enamelled gules.

In concluding these observations, we regret to say that the Order
of the Temple, notwithstanding its undeniable claims to honourable
distinction, has never enjoyed much consideration amongst our
countrymen. Its exclusive character, together with the great expense
and difficulty which attend admission into its ranks, no Englishman
being legitimately eligible, unless formally recommended by the
illustrious Grand Prior of England, has raised against it a host of
enemies. Hence, calumnies have been propagated against it, and an
institution perfectly unconnected with politics, and actuated by the
purest principles of Christian Philanthropy,[36] has been represented
as engendering false notions of Government and wild infidelity. But
the registers of the Temple contain the respected names of Massillon
and Fenelon; Frederick the Great, and Napoleon[37] sanctioned its
ceremonies, and honoured its officers; and even in these days, princes
of the blood, and some of the most illustrious nobles, of our own
and other countries, have not disdained to display the humble ring
of profession, along with the gorgeous decorations of the Garter
and the Golden Fleece. Scattered over the mighty empire of Great
Britain, there are not more than forty subjects of Her Majesty who are
Knights Templars; and the whole Members of the Order do not probably
at this moment exceed three hundred; but we assert, without fear of
contradiction, that no institution equally limited can boast of a
greater number of distinguished and honourable associates.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: TEMPLARS OF SCOTLAND.]




[Illustration]

CHAP. V.

The Knights Templars of Scotland.


The Knights of the Temple were introduced into Scotland before 1153
by King David the First, who established them at Temple on the
Southesk,[38] and who was so attached to the brotherhood, that we are
told by an old historian "Sanctus David de proeclara Militia Templi
optimos fratres secum retinens, eos diebus et noctibus morum suorum
fecit esse custodes."[39] Malcolm, the grandson of David, conferred
on the brethren "in liberam et puram Elymosynam unum plenarium Toftum
in quolibet Burgo totius terrae," which foundation was enlarged by his
successors, William the Lion and Alexander the Second. The charter of
the latter is still in the possession of Lord Torphichen, whereby he
grants and confirms "Deo et fratribus Templi Salomonis de Jerusalem
omnes illas rectitudines, libertatis et consuetudines quas Rex DAVID
et Rex Malcolm et decessus pater meus Rex Willielmus eis dederunt et
concesserunt, sicut scripta eorum authentica attestant." This curious
document, after enumerating certain of these rights and liberties,
scilicet,--the king's sure peace; the privilege of buying, selling, and
trading with all his subjects; freedom from all tribute and toll, &c.
proceeds "Et nullus eis injuriam faciat, vel fieri consentiat super
meam defensionem, Et ubicunque in tota terra mea ad judiorum (_q.
judicium_) venerint, causa eorum primum tractata, et prius rectum suum
habeant, et postea faciant. Et nullus ponat hominem predictorum fratrum
nostrorum ad foram judicii si noluerint, &c. Et omnes libertates et
consuetudines quas ipsi per alias regiones habent in terra mea ubique
habeant."

These general privileges, throughout Europe, were very extensive.
The Templars were freed from all tythes to the church, and their
priests were entitled to celebrate mass, and to absolve from sins to
the same extent as bishops, a privilege which was strongly objected
to by the latter. Their houses possessed the right of sanctuary or
asylum for criminals. They could be witnesses in their own cause,
and were exempted from giving testimony in the cause of others. They
were relieved by the papal bulls from all taxes, and from subjection
and obedience to any secular power. By these great immunities, the
Order was rendered in a manner independent, but it would appear,
nevertheless, that both the Templars and Hospitallers considered
themselves subjects of the countries to which they belonged, and took
part in the national wars, for we find by the Ragman Roll, "Freere
Johan de Sautre, Mestre de la Chevalier del Temple en Ecoce," and
another Brother, swearing fealty to Edward I. in 1296; and the author
of the Annals of Scotland, taking notice of the Battle of Falkirk,
12th July 1298, informs us, that the only persons of note who fell
were Brian le Jay, Master of the English Templars, and the Prior
of Torphichen in Scotland, a Knight of another Order of religious
soldiery. The former of these Chevaliers met his death by the hand
of the redoubted Sir William Wallace, who advanced alone from the
midst of his little band, and slew him with a single blow, although
the historian adds, that Sir Brian le Jay was a Knight Templar of
high military renown, who had shewn himself most active against the
Scots.[40]

Little is known of the farther History of the Knights Templars in
Scotland from the time of Alexander II. down to the beginning of the
14th century, excepting that their privileges were continued to them by
succeeding Kings, whose bounty and piety were in those ages continually
directed towards the religious Orders. By their endowments, and the
bequests of the nobles, the possessions of the Order came to be so
extensive, that their lands were scattered "per totum regnum Scotiae,
a limitibus versus Angliam, et sic discendo per totum regnum usque
ad Orchades." Besides the House of the Temple in Mid-Lothian, the
following Establishments or Priories of the Order may be enumerated,
viz. St. Germains, in East Lothian; Inchynan, in Renfrewshire;
Maryculter, in Kincardineshire; Aggerstone, in Stirlingshire; Aboyne,
in Aberdeenshire; Derville or Derval, in Ayrshire; Dinwoodie, in
Dumfriesshire; Red-abbey-stedd, in Roxburghshire, and Temple Liston, in
West-Lothian.

The date of the spoliation of the Templars of Scotland, corresponds of
course with that of the persecution of the Order in other countries,
and it is to the credit of our forefathers that we can obtain no
account of any Member of the Brotherhood having been subjected to
personal torture or suffering amongst them; their estates, however,
appear to have been duly transferred to the possession of their rivals,
the Knights Hospitallers; into which Order it is not improbable that,
like their Brethren in England, a number of the Templars entered.

In November 1309, John de Soleure, the Papal Legate, and William,
Bishop of St. Andrews, held an Inquisitorial Court at the Abbey of
Holyrood to investigate the charges against the Templars, but Walter
de Clifton, Grand Preceptor of the Order in North Britain,[41] and
William de Middleton, were the only two Knights who appeared before
the Tribunal, the proceedings of which, as recorded at length in
Wilkins' Consilia, make no allusion to any punishment being inflicted,
so that we may fairly conclude they were soon set at liberty. The
Preceptor, in his examination, readily confessed that the rest of
the Brethren had fled, and dispersed themselves _propter scandalium
exortum contra ordinem_, and we are told by a learned French writer,
that having deserted the Temple, they had ranged themselves under the
banners of Robert Bruce, by whom they were formed into a new Order,
the observances of which were based on those of the Templars, and
became, according to him, the source of Scottish Free Masonry.[42]
This statement corresponds with the celebrated Charter of Larmenius
already referred to, in which the Scottish Templars are excommunicated
as _Templi desertores, anathemate percussos_; and along with the
Knights of St. John, _dominiorum Militiae spoliatores_, placed for
ever beyond the pale of the Temple, _extra gyrum Templi nunc, et in
futurum_; and it is likewise supported in some measure by the authority
of the accurate historian of Free Masonry, M. Thory, who, in his "Acta
Latomorum," states that Robert Bruce founded the Masonic Order of
Heredom de Kilwinning, after the Battle of Bannockburn, reserving to
himself and his successors on the Throne of Scotland, the office and
title of Grand Master. Scottish tradition has, moreover, always been
in favour of this origin of the Ancient Mother Kilwinning Lodge, which
certainly at one time possessed other degrees of Masonry besides those
of St. John; and it is well known to our Masonic readers, that there
are even in our own days at Edinburgh, a few individuals claiming to
be the representatives of the Royal Order established by Bruce, which,
though now nearly extinct in this country,[43] still flourishes in
France, where it was established by Charter from Scotland, and even
by the Pretender himself, in the course of last century, and is now
conferred as the highest and most distinguished grade of Masonry,
sanctioned by the Grand Orient, under the title of the _Rose Croix
de Heredom de Kilwinning_. It may be interesting to add, that the
introduction on the Continent of this ancient branch of our national
Masonry, has been commemorated by a splendid medal struck at Paris,
bearing, amongst other devices, the Royal Arms and Motto of Scotland;
and that the Brethren of the Lodge of Constancy at Arras, still
preserve with reverence an original charter of the Order, granted to
their Chapter in 1747, by Charles Edward Stuart, and signed by that
unfortunate Prince himself as the representative of the Scottish
Kings.[44] Nor can any thing indicate more strongly the high estimation
in which the chivalry of the Rosy Cross of Kilwinning is held in
France, than the fact that the Prince Cambaceres, Arch-chancellor of
the Empire, presided over it as Provincial Grand Master, (the office of
supreme head being inherent in the Crown of Scotland,) for many years;
and that he was succeeded in his dignity, if we mistake not, by the
head of the illustrious family of Choiseul.

But whether the Scottish Templars really joined the victorious
standard of Robert Bruce, and with him, as our countrymen would fain
hope, fought and conquered at Bannockburn, or whether the majority of
them transferred themselves along with the possessions of the Order,
to the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, certain it is, that from the
time of the persecution, the Order of the Temple, together with all its
wealth, became merged in that of the Hospitallers, though certainly
not to such a degree as to obliterate all distinct traces of the Red
Cross Knights. On the contrary, we find by a public document recorded
entire in the Register of the Great Seal of Scotland, and dated _two
centuries_ after the incorporation of the Orders, that King James the
Fourth confirmed all former grants _sancto Hospitali de Jerusalem, et
fratribus ejusdem militiae Templi Salomonis_,--a satisfactory proof
that the Order, although proscribed by the Pope, was still retained
conjointly with that of the Hospital, in law papers at least.[45]

The Knights of St. John had also been introduced into Scotland by
King David the First, and had a charter granted to them by Alexander
the Second, two years after that to the Templars. The Preceptory
of Torphichen, in West Lothian, was their first, and continued to
be their chief residence, and by the accession of the Temple lands
and other additions, their property at the time of the Reformation
came to be immense. When that event took place, the chief dignitary
or Grand Preceptor of the Order in Scotland, with a seat as a Peer
in Parliament, was Sir James Sandilands, a cadet of the family of
Calder, whose head, as is well known to readers of Scottish History,
was the private friend of John Knox, and one of the first persons of
distinction to embrace the reformed religion. We might suspect, that
even before the promulgation of the statute 1560, prohibiting all
allegiance within the realm to the See of Rome, the former personage
had become indifferent to the charge confided to him by the Order; for
a rescript from the Grand Master and Chapter at Malta, dated so early
as the 1st of October 1557, and addressed to him, is still on record,
wherein they complain "that many of the possessions, jurisdictions,
&c. were conveyed or taken away from them contrary to the statutes
and oaths, and to the damnation of the souls, as well of those who
possessed them, as of those who, without sufficient authority, yielded
them up; producing thereby great detriment to religion and the said
Commandery;" but be this as it may, we are certain that the conversion
of Sir James Sandilands, or as he was termed, the Lord of St. John of
Jerusalem in Scotland, was followed by his surrender to the Crown of
the whole possessions of the combined Templars and Hospitallers, which
having been declared forfeited to the State on the ground that "the
principal cause of the foundation of the Preceptory of Torphichen,
_Fratribus Hospitalis Hierosolimitani, Militibus Templi Salomonis_, was
the service enjoined to the Preceptor on oath to defend and advance the
Roman Catholic Religion," were by a process of transformation well
understood by the Scottish Parliament of those days, converted into a
Temporal Lordship, which the unfortunate Queen Mary, then only twenty
years of age, and newly established amongst her Scottish subjects, in
consideration of a payment of ten thousand crowns of the Sun, and of
his _fidele, nobile, et gratuitum, servitium, nobis nostrisque patri
et matri bonae memoriae_, conferred on, or rather retransferred to the
Ex Grand Preceptor himself and his heirs with the title of Torphichen,
which, although the estate is much dilapidated, still remains in his
family.[46] All this was transacted acted on the petition of Sir
James Sandilands himself, with the formal approbation of the National
Legislature; and after renouncing the profession of a soldier-monk, we
find that the last of Scottish Preceptors of St. John became married
and lived to a good old age, having died so late as 1596 without issue,
when the title of Torphichen passed to his grand nephew, the lineal
descendant of his elder brother, Sir John Sandilands of Calder.

We shall not pause to consider whether a body of Masonic Templars
unconnected with the Hospitallers, and representing the Royal Order
which Bruce is said to have instituted from the relict of the
Ancient Knights, has been perpetuated in Scotland since the days of
Bannockburn, having no means of illustrating so obscure a subject; but,
with all due respect to the learned French writer, whose authority we
have already quoted, we may observe, that the Masonic Tradition of
the country does not connect the Templars with Bruce's Order in any
way whatever, but, on the contrary, invariably conjoins those Knights
with the Hospitallers, and consequently points to the period of the
renunciation of Popery, as the time when they first sought refuge, and
a continuance of their Chivalry among the "Brethren of the Mystic Tie."
The Chevaliers also of the Rosy Cross of Kilwinning in France, own no
alliance with Masonic Templary, which they consider a comparatively
modern invention; nor do there exist, so far as we know, any authentic
records anterior to the Reformation, to prove a connection between the
Knights Templars and Freemasons in any part of the world, though we
must not omit to mention, that a formal document in the Latin language
is said to be deposited in a Lodge at Namur on the Meuse, purporting
to be a proclamation by the Freemasons of Europe, "of the Venerable
Society sacred to John," assembled by representatives from London,
Edinburgh, Vienna, Amsterdam, Paris, Madrid, Venice, Brussels, and
almost every other Capital City, at Cologne on the Rhine in 1535;
and signed, amongst others, by the famous Melancthon, in which,
after declaring that "to be more effectually vilified and devoted to
public execration, they had been accused of reviving the Order of the
Templars," they solemnly affirm, that "the Freemasons of St. John
derive not their origin from the Templars, nor from any other Order of
Knights; neither have they any, or the least communication with them
directly, or through any manner of intermediate tie, being far more
ancient," &c.--all of which would imply, that some sort of connection
was understood in those days to exist between certain of the Masonic
Fraternities and the Knights Templars. A Copy of this document was
sent to Edinburgh in 1826, by M. de Marchot, an Advocate at Nivelles,
and a translation of it has been inserted under the attestation of a
Notary Public in the Records of the Ancient Lodge of Edinburgh, (Mary's
Chapel); but we have little faith in German documents on Free Masonry,
unless supported by other testimony; and as no Historian of the Craft
makes the slightest allusion to the great Convocation of the Brethren
at Cologne, in the sixteenth century, rather than ask the reader to
believe that it ever took place, we shall presume that M. de Marchot
may have been deceived.[47]

From the era of the Reformation, the combined Order appears in Scotland
only as a Masonic body; but there are some records to indicate that,
so early as 1590, a few of the brethren had become mingled with the
Architectural Fraternities, and that a Lodge at Stirling, patronised by
King James, had a Chapter of Templars attached to it, who were termed
cross-legged Masons; and whose initiatory ceremonies were performed
not in a room, but in the Old Abbey, the ruins of which are still to
be seen in the neighbourhood. The next authentic notice we can find
on this subject, is in M. Thory's excellent Chronology of Masonry,
wherein it is recorded, that about 1728, Sir John Mitchell Ramsay,
the well-known author of Cyrus, appeared in London, with a system of
Scottish Masonry, up to that date, perfectly unknown in the metropolis,
tracing its origin from the Crusades, and consisting of three degrees,
the _Ecossais_, the _Novice_, and the _Knight Templar_. The English
Grand Lodge rejected the system of Ramsay, who, as is well known,
along with the other adherents of the Stuart Family, transferred it to
the Continent, where it became the corner-stone of the _hauts grades_,
and the foundation of those innumerable ramifications into which an
excellent and naturally simple institution has been very uselessly
extended in France, Germany, and other countries abroad.[48]

In pursuing the very curious subject of the _hauts grades_, we may
observe, however, that they never obtained much consideration during
the lifetime of Ramsay, although they are invariably traced to him
and to Scotland, the fairy land of Foreign Masonry,[49] but gathered
their chief impulse from the disgraceful dissentions in the Masonic
Lodges at Paris, about the middle of last century, which induced the
Chevalier de Bonneville, and other distinguished persons at the Court
of France, to form themselves into a separate institution, named the
Chapitre de Clermont, in honour of one of the Princes of the Blood,
Louis de Bourbon, Prince de Clermont, then presiding over the Masonic
Fraternities. In this Chapter they established, amongst other degrees,
Ramsay's system of the Masonic Templars, which, along with other high
grades, was soon conveyed into the Northern Kingdoms of Europe, by the
Officers of the French Army, but especially, by the Marquis de Bernez,
and the Baron de Hund, the latter of whom made it the ground-work
of his Templar _Regime de la Stricte Observance_, which occupied,
for several years, so prominent a place in the Secret Societies of
Germany. This adventurer appeared in that country with a patent,
under the sign-manual of Prince Charles Edward Stuart, appointing him
Grand Master of the seventh province; but although he had invented a
plausible tale in support of his title and authority,--both of which
he affirmed had been made over to him by the Earl Marischal on his
death-bed,--and of the antiquity of his order, which he derived,
of course, from Scotland, where the chief seat of the Templars was
Aberdeen,[50]--the imposture was soon detected, and it was even
discovered that he had himself enticed and initiated the ill-fated
Pretender into his fabulous order of Chivalry. The delusions on this
subject, however, had taken such a hold in Germany, that they were
not altogether dispelled, until a deputation had actually visited
Aberdeen, and found amongst the worthy and astonished brethren there,
no trace either of very ancient Templars or Freemasonry.[51] From some
of the Continental States, it is conjectured that Masonic Templary
was transplanted into England and Ireland, in both of which countries
it has continued to draw a languid existence, unconnected with any
remnant of the Knights of St. John, whose incorporation in the Scottish
Order, is one of the most remarkable features of that Institution. We
are happy to add, nevertheless, that the most fraternal feelings and
intercourse subsist between the Scottish brethren and the Templars of
the sister kingdoms, and we can ourselves testify to the cordiality
with which the former are received in the encampments of London.

During the whole of the eighteenth century the combined Order of the
Temple and Hospital in Scotland can be but faintly traced, though I
have the assurance of well-informed Masons that thirty or forty years
ago they knew old men who had been members of it for sixty years, and
it had sunk so low at the time of the French Revolution, that the
sentence which the Grand Lodge of Scotland fulminated in 1792 against
all degrees of Masonry except those of St. John, was expected to put
a period to its existence. Soon after this, however, some active
individuals revived it, and with the view of obtaining documentary
authority for their chapters, as well as of avoiding any infringement
of the statutes then recently enacted against secret societies, adopted
the precaution of accepting charters of constitution from a body of
Masonic Templars, named the Early Grand Encampment, in Dublin, of
whose origin we can find no account, and whose legitimacy, to say
the least, was quite as questionable as their own. Several charters
of this description were granted to different Lodges of Templars in
Scotland about the beginning of the present century, but these bodies
maintained little concert or intercourse with each other, and were
certainly not much esteemed in the country. Affairs were in this state
when, about 1808, Mr. Alexander Deuchar was elected Commander, or Chief
of the Edinburgh Encampment of Templars, and his brother, Major David
Deuchar, along with other Officers of the Royal Regiment, was initiated
into the Order. This infusion of persons of higher station and better
information gave an immediate impulse to the Institution, and a General
Convocation of all the Templars of Scotland, by representatives, having
taken place at the Capital, they unanimously resolved to discard the
Irish Charters, and to rest their claims, as the representatives of
the Knights of old, on the general belief of the country in their
favour, and the well-accredited traditions handed down from their
forefathers. They further determined to entreat the Duke of Kent,
who was a Chevalier du Temple, as well as the chief of the Masonic
Templars in England, to become the Patron Protector of the Order in
North Britain, offering to submit themselves to His Royal Highness in
that capacity, and to accept from him a formal Charter of Constitution,
erecting them into a regular Conclave of Knights Templars, and Knights
of St. John of Jerusalem. The Duke of Kent lost no time in complying
with their request, and his Charter bears date 19th of June 1811. By a
provision in it, Mr. Deuchar, who had been nominated by the Brethren,
was appointed Grand Master for life.

These wise and vigorous measures rescued the Order from obscurity;
and in its improved condition, we find that it continued rapidly to
flourish, numbering, in the course of a few years, no less than forty
encampments or lodges in different parts of the British dominions
holding of its Conclave. In 1828, the Order seemed to have received
a fresh impulse, and assumed a novel and interesting aspect by the
judicious introduction of the ancient chivalric costume and forms.
Dissentions, however, unfortunately occurred, from 1830 to 1835,
tending to impede the further progress of the Order; and for a while it
may be said to have again almost fallen into abeyance. In the end of
the latter year, a committee of ten gentlemen was appointed to settle
all differences, as well as to frame proper regulations for the future
government of the Order. Under their arrangement and arbitration,
the present statutes were established, and a reconciliation effected
between the contending parties. In January 1836, Admiral Sir David
Milne, K. C. B. was unanimously elected Grand Master, and at a general
election in the same month, Lord Ramsay (now Earl of Dalhousie) was
appointed his Depute, the various other offices in the Order being
filled by gentlemen, generally well known, and of a respectable station
in society. In the course of three months after the re-union, not
fewer than a hundred persons, chiefly men of fortune, officers, and
members of the learned professions, had been received into the Order in
the Edinburgh Canongate Kilwinning Priory or Encampment alone. Since
then, other Priories have been established in the country, and the
Institution has assumed an importance and dignity worthy of the highest
class of gentlemen connected with the Masonic Institutions of Scotland.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: APPENDIX.]




[Illustration]

Bull of Pope Clement V.


Ordinis statum habitum atque nomen, Non Sine Cordis Amaritudine et
Dolore sacro approbante concilio, Non Per Modum Definitivae Sententiae,
cum eam super hoc secundum inquisitiones et processus super his
habitos, Non possumus Ferre, de Jure, Sed Per viam Provisionis, seu
ordinationis apostolicae, irrefragabili et Perpetuo Valitura sustulimus
sanctione, ipsum prohibitione Perpetuae supponentes, distinctius
inhibendo ne quis dictum Ordinem de coetero intrare, vel ejus habitum
suscipere aut portare, vel pro Templario gerere se praesumeret; quod
si quis contra faceret, excommunicationis incurreret sententiam, ipso
facto. Datum Viennae, vi. non. Maii, pont. nostrianno vii. (ii. Maii
MCCCIII.)

[Illustration: CLEMENTUS PP. V]




Charter of Transmission.

[Illustration: V.D. S.A.]


Ego Frater Johannes-Marcus Larmenius, Hierosolymitanus, Dei gratia et
Secretissimo Venerandi sanctissimique Martyris, Supremi Templi Militiae
Magistri (cui honos et gloria) decreto, communi Fratrum Consilio
confirmato, super universum Templi Ordinem Summo et Supremo Magisterio
insignitus, singulis has decretales litteras visuris salutem, salutem,
salutem.

Notum sit omnibus tam praesentibus quam futuris, quod, deficientibus,
propter extremam aetatem, viribus, rerum angustia et gubernaculi
gravitate prepensis, ad majorem Dei gloriam, Ordinis, Fratrum et
Statutorum tutelam et salutem ego, supra dictus, humilis Magister
Militiae Templi, inter validiores manus Supremum statuerim deponere
Magisterium.

Idcirco, Deo juvante, unoque Supremi Conventus Equitum
consensu, apud eminentem Commendatorem et carissimum Fratrem,
Franciscum-Thomam-Theobaldum Alexandrinum, Supremum Ordinis Templi
Magisterium, auctoritatem et privilegia contuli, et hoc praesenti
decreto pro vita confero, cum potestate, secundum temporis et rerum
leges, Fratri alteri, institutionis et ingenii nobilitate morumque
honestate praestantissimo, Summum et Supremum Ordinis Templi Magisterium
summamque auctoritatem conferendi. Quod sic, ad perpetuitatem
Magisterii, successorum non intersectam seriem et Statutorum
integritatem tuendas. Jubeo tamen ut non transmitti possit Magisterium,
sine commilitonum Templi Conventus Generalis consensu, quoties colligi
valuerit Supremus iste Conventus; et, rebus ita sese habentibus,
successor ad nutum Equitum eligatur.

Ne autem Languescant Supremi Officii munera, sint nunc et perenniter
quatuor Supremi Magistri Vicarii, supremam potestatem, eminentiam et
auctoritatem, super universum Ordinem, salvo jure Supremi Magistri,
habentes; qui Vicarii Magistri apud seniores secundum professionis
seriem, eligantur. Quod Statutum e commendato mihi et Fratribus voto
sacrosancti supra dicti Venerandi Beatissimique Magistri nostri,
Martyris (cui honos et gloria) Amen.

Ego denique, Fratrum Supremi Conventus decreto, e suprema mihi
commissa auctoritate, Scotos Templarios Ordinis desertores, anathemate
percussos, illosque et Fratres Sancti Johannis Hierosolymae, dominiorum
Militiae spoliatores (quibus apud Deum misericordia) extra girum Templi,
nunc et in futurum, volo, dico et jubeo.

Signa, ideo, pseudo-Fratribus ignota et ignoscenda constitui, ore
commilitonibus tradenda, et quo, in Supremo Conventu, jam tradere modo
placuit.

Quae vero signa tantummodo pateant post debitam professionem et
equestrem consecrationem, secundum Templi commilitonum Statuta, ritus
et usus, supra dicto eminenti Commendatori a me transmissa, sicut a
Venerando et Sanctissimo Martyre Magistro (cui honos et gloria) in meas
manus habui tradita. Fiat sicut dixi. Fiat. Amen.

Ego Johannes-Marcus Larmenius dedi, die decima tertia februarii 1324.

Ego Franciscus-Thomas-Theobaldus Alexandrinus, Deo juvante, Supremum
Magisterium acceptum habeo, 1324.

Ego Arnulphus De Braque, Deo juvante, Supremum Magisterium acceptum
habeo, 1340.

Ego Johannes Claromontanus, Deo juvante, Supremum Magisterium acceptum
habeo, 1349.

Ego Bertrandus Duguesclin, Deo juvante, Supremum Magisterium acceptum
habeo, 1357.

Ego Johannes Arminiacus, Deo juvante, Supremum Magisterium acceptum
habeo, 1381.

Ego Bernardus Arminiacus, Deo juvante, Supremum Magisterium acceptum
habeo, 1392.

Ego Johannes Arminiacus, Deo juvante, Supremum Magisterium acceptum
habeo, 1419.

Ego Johannes Croyus, Deo juvante, Supremum Magisterium acceptum habeo,
1451.

Ego Robertus Lenoncurtius, Deo juvante, Supremum Magisterium acceptum
habeo, 1478.

Ego Galeatius de Salazar, Deo juvante, Supremum Magisterium acceptum
habeo, 1497.

Ego Philippus Chabotius, Deo juvante, Supremum Magisterium acceptum
habeo, 1516.

Ego Gaspardus De Salciaco, Tavannensis, Deo juvante, Supremum
Magisterium acceptum habeo, 1544.

Ego Henricus De Monte Morenciaco, Deo juvante, Supremum Magisterium
acceptum habeo, 1574.

Ego Carolus Valesius, Deo juvante, Supremum Magisterium acceptum habeo,
1615.

Ego Jacobus Ruxellius de Grancio, Deo juvante, Supremum Magisterium
acceptum habeo, 1651.

Ego Jacobus-Henricus De Duro Forti, dux de Duras, Deo juvante,
Supremum Magisterium acceptum habeo, 1681.

Ego Philippus, dux Aurelianensis, Deo juvante, Supremum Magisterium
acceptum habeo, 1705.

Ego Ludovicus-Augustus Borbonius, dux du Maine, Deo juvante, Supremum
Magisterium acceptum habeo, 1724.

Ego Ludovicus-Henricus Borbonius-Condoeus, Deo juvante, Supremum
Magisterium acceptum habeo, 1737.

Ego Ludovicus-Franciscus Borbonius-Conty, Deo juvante, Supremum
Magisterium acceptum habeo, 1741.

Ego Ludovicus-Hercules-Timoleo de Cosse-Brissac, Deo juvante, Supremum
Magisterium acceptum habeo, 1776.

Ego Claudius-Mathaeus Radix de Chevillon, Templi senior Vicarius
Magistri, adstantibus Fratribus Prospero-Maria-Petro-Michaele
Charpentier de Saintot, Bernardo-Raymundo Fabre-Palaprat, Templi
Vicariis Magistris, et Johnne-Baptista-Augusto de Courchant, Supremo
Praeceptore, hasce litteras decretales a Ludovico-Hercule-Timoleone
de Cosse-Brissac, supremo Magistro, in temporibus infaustis mihi
depositas, Fratri Jacobo-Philippo Ledru, Templi seniori Vicario
Magistro tradidi, ut istae litterae, in tempore opportuno, ad perpetuam
Ordinis nostri memoriam, juxta ritum (voyez le Rituel levitique)
Orientalem, vigeant: Die decima junii 1804.

Ego Bernardus-Raymundus Fabre-Palaprat, Deo juvante, Supremum
Magisterium acceptum habeo: Die quarta novembris 1804.

[Illustration: SIGILLVM MILITVM XPISTI]

BOISGELIN, himself a Knight of Malta, gives the following authentic
copy of the Oath of Profession, from the original text, which every
Candidate took at his reception into the Order:--




Vow of the Knights of St. John.


"Io N. faccio voto e prometto a Dio Omnipotente, ed alla Beata Maria
sempre Vergine, Madre di Dio, ed a San Giovanni Battista d'osservare
perpetuamente, con l'ajuta di Dio, vera obedienza a qualunque superiore
che mi sera data da Dio e dalla nostra religione, e di piu vivere senza
proprio e d'osservare castita."

[Illustration]




[Illustration]


      Militia Templi.

  Die} Lunae           Anno Ordinis
     } Mensis          Anno D.N.J.C.

               Votum,

In nomine Dei Patris + et Filii + et Spiritus Sancti.

Ego,

Ordinis Templi Militiae Sanctae memetipsum ad praesens et in oevum
devovens, libere solemniterque Obedientiae, Paupertatis, et Castitatis,
sicut et Fraternitatis, Hospitalitatis et Praeliationis Votum suscipere
profiteor;

Quo voto firmam et non quassabilem edico voluntatem, ad Religionis
Christianae, Ordinis Templi, Commilitonumque causam, tutelam et
honorem, maximamque illustrationem, et ad Templi Sepulchrique Domini
Nostri Jesu Christi Palestinae, Orientisque terrae et Patrum dominiorum
recuperationem, gladium, vires, vitamque et singula alia mea impendendi,

Regulae S. P. Bernardi, Chartae transmissionis, regulis, legibus,
decretis, singulisque aliis actis, secundum Ordinis Statuta emissis
me submittendi: nullos Equites creaturus, nullosve titulos aut gradus
ritusque et usus Ordinis proditurus, nisi patuerit ex Statutis
licentia: omni denique modo, sive in Ordinis domibus sive foras et in
quocumque vitae, statu Supremo Magistro, omnibusque et singulis in
Militia superioribus absolute obediturus.

Sic Fratres meos Equites Templi, Sororesque Equitissas in charitate
habendi, ut ipsos, Fratrumque Viduas et liberos, sicut et Sororum
liberos, gladio, concilio, copiis, opibus, auctoritate, singulisque
rebus meis adjuvem, illosque semper et ubique, nullo casu excepto,
cuivis Commilitonum Templi non consorti praeferam;

Pios peregrinos tuendi; captivorum propter crucem, infirmorumque et
pauperum subsidio simul et solatio inserviendi:

Infideles et incredulos, exemplo, virtute, bonis operibus, alloquiisque
suasoriis oppugnandi: in Infideles autem et incredulos gladio Crucem
aggredientes, propter Crucem gladio praeliandi:

Ab omni impudicitia abhorrendi, et ad nullam carnis operam, nisi
debitam, et tantum cum uxore legitima accedendi:

Tandem apud singulas quas adibo Gentes, ipsarum, salvo Religionis
Ordinisque jure, legibus et moribus obtemperandi: Gentibus vero
Hospitalitate et amicitia Ordinem colentibus, Cuis et Equitis
fidelissimi sacra officia praestandi.

Haec sic, coram Equitibus (huicce Conventui adstantibus) Voveo, alta
voce Dico, et Vovere Profiteor. Quod Votum Sanguine meo subsigno et
confirmo, atque in tabulas (conventuales) iterum scribo et subsigno,
subsignantibus supra dictis testibus.

Gloria Patri + et Filio + et Spritui Sancto, + Amen.

N.B.--The above Vow is always signed with the interpretation explained
in the text annexed to it.




[Illustration]

Le Tresor.

    _Inventaire des Chartre, Statuts, Reliques et Insignes composant
    le Tresor sacre de l'Ordre du Temple, extrait de la minute du
    proces-verbal qui en a ete dresse le 14e. jour de la lune de Tab.,
    l'an de l'Ordre 692, du Magister le 6e._ (18 mai 1810.)


Ire. PIECE DU TRESOR.

La chartre de transmission (par J. M. _Larmenius_), ecrite en deux
colonnes et demie sur une tres-grande feuille de parchemin, ornee,
suivant le gout du temps, de dessins gothiques architecturaux, de
lettres fleuronnees, coloriees, dorees et argentees, dont la premiere
offre un chevalier appuye sur un bouclier armorie de la croix de
l'Ordre.

Au haut, en tete, est peinte la croix conventuelle dans la forme
aulique.

Au bas est le sceau de la milice, suspendu par des lacs de parchemin.

Les acceptations par les Grands-Maitres commencent vers le milieu de la
troisieme colonne, se continuant a la troisieme, et finissant aux deux
tiers inferieurs de la marge a droite.


IIe. PIECE.

L'archetype des Statuts de l'an de l'Ordre (587,) transcrits a la
main sur vingt-sept feuilles de papier, relies en un volume petit
in-folio, couvert en velours cramoisi, double en satin _idem_, dore sur
tranche.--Cette piece signee Philippus (_d'Orleans_.)


IIIe. PIECE.

Un petit reliquaire de cuivre, en forme d'eglise gothique, contenant,
dans un suaire de lin, quatre fragmens d'os brules, extraits du bucher
des martyrs de l'Ordre.


IVe. PIECE.

Une epee de fer (cruciforme) surmontee d'une boule, et presumee avoir
servi au G.-M. J. _Molay_.


Ve. PIECE.

Un casque de fer, a visiere, armorie de dauphins et damastique en or,
presume etre celui de _Guy_, dauphin d'Auvergne.


VIe. PIECE.

Un ancien eperon de cuivre dore.


VIIe. PIECE.

Une patene de bronze, dans l'interieur de laquelle est gravee une main
etendue, dont le petit doigt et l'annulaire sont replies dans la paume.


VIIIe. PIECE.

Une paix en bronze dore, representant Saint-Jean sous une arcade
gothique.


IXe. PIECE.

Trois sceaux gothiques de bronze en forme ovale pointue, et de grandeur
differente, designes dans les Statuts sous les noms de _sceau du G.-M.
Jean, sceau du chevalier croise, et sceau de Saint-Jean_.


Xe. PIECE.

Un haut de crosse d'ivoire et trois mitres d'etoffe, l'une en or,
brodee en soie, et deux en argent, brodees en perles, ayant servi aux
ceremonies de l'Ordre.


XIe. PIECE.

Le bauceant en laine blanche, a la croix de l'Ordre.


XIIe. et derniere PIECE.

Le drapeau de guerre, en laine blanche, a quatre raies noires.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]


Ordre du Temple.

A la plus Grande Gloire de Dieu.

Guillaume-Sidney,

    Par la Grace de Dieu, et la designation Testamentaire du dernier
                             Grand-Maitre.

             Prince Magistral, Regent de l'Ordre du Temple;

                A Tous Ceux qui ces Presentes, Verront:

Salut.

Vu, l'Article 38 des Statuts de l'Ordre du Temple, et le 3me paragraphe
de la Charte de transmission;

Vu, les Articles 13, 15, 16 et suivans desdits Status;

Considerant, que l'etat de haute civilisation des diverses Nations
Europeennes et principalement de la France, ou se trouve le siege
Magistral, permet toute Reunion du Convent General, sans qu'il puisse
en resulter le moindre danger pour les Chevaliers;

Considerant, que les tems sont venus de rendre au Convent general
tous les droits dont il a joui jusques au G. M. Jacques de Molay, (a
qui scient honneur et gloire), et de faire rentrer dans de sages et
constitutionnelles limites la puissance du Magistere;

Considerant, qu'une reforme prudente et reflechie des Statuts, dans les
parties qui ne sont plus en harmonie avec la Charte de transmission,
les moeurs du siecle et la regle, est le moyen le plus efficace de
rendre possible l'accomplissement des hautes destinees auxquelles
l'Ordre du Temple est appelle;

Le conseil prive entendu;

Nous avons decrete et decretons ce qui suit:


Article Premier.

Le Convent General de l'Ordre du Temple est Convoque pour le dix
Novembre, 1838.


Article II.

Immediatemement apres sa reunion, le Convent general devra se prononcer
sur la presentation du Prince Magistral Regent, designe par Bernard
Raymond (a qui soient honneur et gloire) pour lui succeder en qualite
de Grand Maitre de l'Ordre du Temple.


Article III.

En tete du Commentarium sera place la revision du Chapitre IV et de
tous les Articles des Statuts qui ont des connexions avec ce Chapitre.


Article IV.

Il sera ouvert a la Secretairerie Magistrale un Registre destine a
l'inscription des propositions faites pour etre presentees au Convent
general, et qui seront inserees au Commentarium, conformement aux
Statuts.

Soit, le present decret, expedie, enregistre et scelle par qui et a
qui de droit; adresse specialement au Grand Connetable, au Gouverneur
general et au Grand Maitre des Depeches, qui sont charges de son
execution;

Soit aussi, ledit Decret, envoye par lettres communicatoires, 1er, au
Prieur de chaque Convent, pour etre porte a la connaissance de tous les
Chevaliers de son obedience, 2e, et personnellement, aux Chevaliers qui
ne feraient partie d'aucune Maison de l'Ordre.

_Donne a Paris, en notre residence Magistrale, le 1er du mois de Mai,
de l'an de N. S. J. C. 1838, 720e. de l'Ordre.