CANDIDATUS LINSENBARTH (QUASI "Lentil-beard") LIKEWISE VISITS BERLIN.

By far the notablest arrival in Berlin is M. de Voltaire's July 10th; a
few days before Hanbury got his First Audience, "five minutes long." But
that arrival will require a Chapter to itself;--most important arrival,
that, of all! The least important, again, is probably that of Candidatus
Linsenbarth, in these same weeks;--a rugged poverty-stricken
old Licentiate of Theology; important to no mortal in Berlin or
elsewhere:--upon whom, however, and upon his procedures in that City, we
propose, for our own objects, to bestow a few glances; rugged Narrative
of the thing, in singular exotic dialect, but true every word,
having fortunately come to us from Linsenbarth's own hand. [Through
Rodenbeck,--Beitrage,--i. 463 et seq.]

Berlin, it must be admitted, after all one's reading in poor Dryasdust,
remains a dim empty object; Teutschland is dim and empty: and out of
the forty blind sacks, or out of four hundred such, what picture can
any human head form to itself of Friedrich as King or Man? A trifling
Adventure of that poor individual, called Linsenbarth CANDIDATUS
THEOLOGIAE, one of the poorest of mortals, but true and credible in
every particular, comes gliding by chance athwart all that; and like the
glimmer of a poor rushlight, or kindled straw, shows it us for moments,
a thing visible, palpable, as it worked and lived. In the great dearth,
Linsenbarth, if I can faithfully interpret him for the modern reader,
will be worth attending to.

Date of Linsenbarth's Adventure is June-August, 1750. "Schloss of
Beichlingen" and "Village of Hemmleben" are in the Thuringen Hill
Country (Weimar not far off to eastward): the Hero himself, a tall
awkward raw-boned creature, is, for perhaps near forty years past, a
CANDIDATUS, say Licentiate, or Curate without Cure. Subsists, I should
guess, by schoolmastering--cheapest schoolmaster conceivable, wages mere
nothing--in the Villages about; in the Village of Hemmleben latterly;
age, as I discover, grown to be sixty-one, in those straitened but by
no means forlorn circumstances. And so, here is veteran Linsenbarth of
Hemmleben, a kind of Thuringian Dominie Sampson; whose Interview with
such a brother mortal as Friedrich King of Prussia may be worth looking
at,--if I can abridge it properly.

Well, it appears, in the year 1750, at this thrice-obscure Village of
Hemmleben, the worthy old pastor Cannabich died;--worthy old man, how
he had lived there, modestly studious, frugal, chiefly on
farm-produce, with tobacco and Dutch theology; a modest blessing to
his fellow-creatures! And now he is dead, and the place vacant.
Twenty pounds a Year certain; let us guess it twenty, with glebe-land,
piggeries, poultry-hutches: who is now to get all that? Linsenbarth
starts with his Narrative, in earnest.

Linsenbarth, who I guess may have been Assistant to the deceased
Cannabich, and was now out of work, says: "I had not the least thought
of profiting by this vacancy; but what happened? The Herr Graf von
Werthern, at Schloss Beichlingen, sent his Steward [LEHNSDIRECTOR,
FIEF-DIRECTOR is the title of this Steward, which gives rise to
obsolete thought of mill-dues, road-labor, payments IN NATURA], his
Lehnsdirector, Herr Kettenbeil, over to my LOGIS [cheap boarding
quarters]; who brought a gracious salutation from his Lord; saying
farther, That I knew too well [excellent Cannabich gone from us,
alas!] the Pastorate of Hemmleben was vacant; that there had various
competitors announced themselves, SUPPLICANDO, for the place; the Herr
Graf, however, had yet given none of them the FIAT, but waited always
till I should apply. As I had not done so, he (the Lord Graf) would
now of his own motion give me the preference, and hereby confer the
Pastorate upon me!"--

"Without all controversy, here was a VOCATIO DIVINA, to be received with
the most submissive thanks! But the lame second messenger came hitching
in [HALTING MESSENGER, German proverb] very soon. Kettenbeil began
again: 'He must mention to me SUB ROSA, Her Ladyship the Frau Grafin
wanted to have her Lady's-maid provided for by this promotion, too; I
must marry her, and take the living at the same time.'"

Whew! And this is the noble Lady's way of thinking, up in her fine
Schloss yonder? Linsenbarth will none of it. "For my notion fell at
once," says he, "when I heard it was DO UT FACIAS, FACIO UT FACIAS (I
give that thou mayest do, I do that thou mayest do; Wilt have the kirk,
then take the irk, WILLST DU DIE PFARRE, SO NIMM DIE QUARRE); on those
terms, my reply was: 'Most respectful thanks, Herr Fief-judge, and No,
for such a vocation! And why? The vocation must have LIBERTATEM, there
must be no VITIUM ESSENTIALE in it; it must be right IN ESSENTIALI,
otherwise no honest man can accept it with a good conscience. This were
a marriage on constraint; out of which a thousand INCONVENIENTIAE might
spring!'" Hear Linsenbarth, in the piebald dialect, with the sound
heart, and preference of starvation itself to some other things!
Kettenbeil (CHAIN-AXE) went home; and there was found another Candidatus
willing for the marriage on constraint, "out of which INCONVENIENTIAE
might spring," in Linsenbarth's opinion.

"And so did the sneakish courtly gentleman [HOFMANN, courtier as
Linsenbarth has it], who grasped with both hands at my rejected offer,
experience before long," continues Linsenbarth. "For the loose thing of
court-tatters led him such a life that, within three years, age yet only
thirty, he had to bite the dust" (BITE AT THE GRASS, says Linsenbarth,
proverbially), which was an INCONVENIENTIA including all others. "And I
had LEGITIMAM CAUSAM to refuse the vocation CUM TALI CONDITIONE.

"However, it was very ill taken of me. All over that Thuringian region
I was cried out upon as a headstrong foolish person: The Herr Graf von
Werthern, so ran the story, had of his own kindness, without request of
mine, offered me a living; RARA AVIS, singular instance; and I, rash and
without head, flung away such gracious offer. In short, I was told to
my face [by good-natured friends], Nobody would ever think of me for
promotion again;"--universal suffrage giving it clear against poor
Linsenbarth, in this way.

"To get out of people's sight at least," continues he, "I decided to
leave my native place, and go to Berlin," 250 miles away or more. "And
so it was that, on June the 20th, 1750, I landed at Berlin for the
first time: and here straightway at the PACKHOF (or Custom-house), in
searching of my things, 400 THALERS (some 60 pounds), all in Nurnberg
BATZEN, were seized from me;"--BATZEN, quarter-groats we may say; 7
and a half batzen go to a shilling; what a sack there must have been
of them, 9,000 in all, about the size of herring-scales, in bad silver;
fruit of Linsenbarth's stern thrift from birth upwards:--all snatched
from him at one swoop. "And why?" says he, quite historically: Yes,
Why? The reader, to understand it wholly, would need to read
in Mylius's--Edicten-Sammlung,--in SEYFARTH and elsewhere;
[Mylius,--Edict--xli., January, 1744, &c. &c.] and to know the
scandalous condition of German coinage at this time and long after;
every needy little Potentate mixing his coin with copper at discretion,
and swindling mankind with it for a season; needing to be peremptorily
forbidden, confiscated or ordered home, by the like of Friedrich.
Linsenbarth answers his own "And why?" with historical calmness:--

"The king had, some (six) years ago, had the batzen utterly cried down
(GANZ UND GAR); they were not to circulate at all in his Countries;
and I was so bold, I had brought batzen hither into the King's Capital,
KONIGLICHE RESIDENZ itself! At the Packhof, there was but one answer,
'Contraband, Contraband!'"--Here was a welcome for a man. "I made my
excuses: Did not the least know; came straight from Thuringen, many
miles of road; could not guess there What His Majesty the King had been
pleased to forbid in His (THEIRO) Countries. 'You should have
informed yourself,' said the Packhof people; and were deaf to such
considerations. 'A man coming into such a Residenz Town as Berlin, with
intent to abide there, should have inquired a little what was what,
especially what coins were cried down, and what allowed,' said they of
the Packhof." Poor Linsenbarth!"'But what am I to do now? How am I to
live, if you take my very money from me?' 'That is your outlook,'
said they;--and added, He must even find stowage for his stack of
herring-scales or batzen, as soon as it was sealed up; 'we have no room
for it in the Packhof!'" for a man: Here is a roughish welcome "I must
leave all my money here; and find stowage for it, in a day or two.

"There was, accordingly, a truck-porter called in; he loaded my effects
on his barrow, and rolled away. He brought me to the WHITE SWAN in the
JUDENSTRASSE [none of the grandest of streets, that Berlin JEWRY], threw
my things out, and demanded four groschen. Two of my batzen" 2 and a
half exact, "would have done; but I had no money at all. The landlord
came out: seeing that I had a stuffed feather-bed [note the luggage of
Linsenbarth: "FEDER-BETT," of extreme tenuity], a trunk full of linens,
a bag of Books and other trifles, he paid the man; and sent me to a
small room in the court-yard [Inn forms a Court, perhaps four stories
high]: 'I could stay there,' he said; 'he would give me food and drink
in the meanwhile.' And so I lived in this Inn eight weeks long, without
one red farthing, in mere fear and anxiety." June 20th PLUS eight weeks
brings us to August 15th; Voltaire in HEIGHT of feather; and very great
things just ahead! ["Grand Carrousel, 25th August;" &c.]--of which soon.

The White Swan was a place where Carriers lodged: some limb of the Law,
of Subaltern sort, whom Linsenbarth calls "DER ADVOCAT B." (one of the
Ousted of Cocceji, shall we fancy!), had to do with Carriers and their
pie-powder lawsuits. Advocat B. had noticed the gray dreary CANDIDATUS,
sitting sparrow-like in remote corners; had spoken to him;--undertook
for a LOUIS D'OR, no purchase no pay, to get back his batzen for
him. They went accordingly, one morning, to "a grand House;" it was
a Minister's (name not given), very grand Official Man: he heard the
Advocat B.'s short statement; and made answer: "Monsieur, and is it
you that will pick holes in the King's Law? I have understood you were
rather aiming at the HAUSVOGTEI [Common Jail of Berlin]: Go on in that
way, and you are sure of your promotion!"--Advocat B. rushed out with
Linsenbarth into the street; and there was neither pay nor purchase in
that quarter.

Poor Linsenbarth was next advised, by simple neighbors, to go direct to
the King; as every poor man can, at certain hours of the day. "Write out
your Case (Memorial) with extreme brevity," said they; "nothing but
the essential points, and those clear." Linsenbarth, steam at the
high-pressure, composed (CONZIPIRTE) a Memorial of that right laconic
sort; wrote it fair (MUNDIRTE ES);--and went off therewith "at opening
of the Gates (middle time of August, 1750, no date farther), [August
21st? (See Rodenbeck, DIARY, which we often quote, i. 205.)]--without
one farthing in my pocket, in God's name, to Potsdam." He continues:--

"And at Potsdam I was lucky enough to see the King; my first sight of
him. He was on the Palace Esplanade there, drilling his troops [fine
trim sanded Expanse, with the Palace to rear, and Garden-walks and River
to front; where Friedrich Wilhelm sat, the last day he was out, and
ordered Jockey Philips's house to be actually set about; where the
troops do evolutions every morning;--there is Friedrich with cocked-hat
and blue coat; say about 11 A.M.].

"When the drill was over, his Majesty went into the Garden, and the
soldiers dispersed; only four Officers remained lounging upon the
Esplanade, and walked up and down. For fright I knew not what to do;
I pulled the Papers out of my pocket,--these were my Memorial, two
Certificates of character, and a Thuringen Pass [poor soul]. The
Officers noticed this; came straight to me, and said, 'What letters has
He there, then?' I thankfully and gladly imparted the whole; and when
the Officers had read them, they said, 'We will give you [Him, not even
THEE] a good advice, The King is extra-gracious to-day, and is gone
alone into the Garden. Follow him straight. Thou wilt have luck.'

"This I would not do; my awe was too great. They thereupon laid hands
on me [the mischievous dogs, not ill-humored either]: one took me by the
right arm, another by the left, 'Off, off; to the Garden!' Having got
me thither, they looked out for the King. He was among the gardeners,
examining some rare plant; stooping over it, and had his back to us.
Here I had to halt; and the Officers began, in underhand tone [the
dogs!], to put me through my drill: 'Hat under left arm!--Right foot
foremost!--Breast well forward!--Head up!--Papers from pouch!--Papers
aloft in right hand!--Steady! Steady!'--And went their ways, looking
always round, to see if I kept my posture. I perceived well enough they
were pleased to make game of me; but I stood, all the same, like a wall,
being full of fear. The Officers were hardly out of the Garden, when
the King turned round, and saw this extraordinary machine,"--telegraph
figure or whatever we may call it, with papers pointing to the sky. "He
gave such a look at me, like a flash of sunbeams glancing through you;
and sent one of the gardeners to bring my papers. Which having got, he
struck into another walk with them, and was out of sight. In few minutes
he appeared again at the place where the rare plant was, with my Papers
open in his left hand; and gave me a wave with them To come nearer. I
plucked up a heart, and went straight towards him. Oh, how thrice and
four-times graciously this great Monarch deigned to speak to me!--

KING. "'My good Thuringian (LIEBER THURINGER), you came to Berlin,
seeking to earn your bread by industrious teaching of children; and
here, at the Packhof, in searching your things, they have taken your
Thuringen hoard from you. True, the batzen are not legal here; but the
people should have said to you: You are a stranger, and did n't know the
prohibition;--well then, we will seal up the Bag of Batzen; you send it
back to Thuringen, get it changed for other sorts; we will not take it
from you!--

"'Be of heart, however; you shall have your money again, and interest
too.--But, my poor man, Berlin pavement is bare, they don't give
anything gratis: you are a stranger; before you are known and get
teaching, your bit of money is done; what then?'

"I understood the speech right well; but my awe was too great to say:
'Your Majesty will have the all-highest grace to allow me something!'
But as I was so simple and asked for nothing, he did not offer anything.
And so he turned away; but had scarcely gone six or eight steps, when
he looked round, and gave me a sign I was to walk by him; and then began
catechising:--

KING. "'Where did you (ER) study?'

LINSENBARTH. "'Your Majesty, in Jena.'

KING. "'What years?'

LINSENBARTH. "'From 1716 to 1720.' ["Born 1689" (Rodenbeck, p. 474);
twenty-five when he went.]

KING. "'Under what Pro-rector were you inscribed?'

LINSENBARTH. "'Under the PROFESSOR THEOLOGIAE Dr. Fortsch.'

KING. "'Who were your other Professors in the Theological Faculty?'"

LINSENBARTH--names famed men; sunk now, mostly, in the bottomless
waste-basket: "Buddaus" (who did a DICTIONARY of the BAYLE sort,
weighing four stone troy, out of which I have learned many a thing),
"Buddaeus," "Danz," "Weissenborn," "Wolf" (now back at Halle after his
tribulations,--poor man, his immortal System of Philosophy, where is
it!).

KING. "'Did you study BIBLICA diligently?'

LINSENBARTH. "'With Buddaeus (BEYM BUDDAO).'

KING. "'That is he who had such quarrelling with Wolf?'

LINSENBARTH. "'Yea, your Majesty! He was--'

KING (does not want to know what he was). "'What other useful Courses of
Lectures (COLLEGIA) did you attend?'

LINSENBARTH. "'Thetics and Exegetics with Fortsch [How the deuce did
Fortsch teach these things?]; Hermeneutics and Polemics with Walch
[editor of--Luther's Works,--I suppose]; Hebraics with Dr. Danz;
Homiletics with Dr. Weissenborn; PASTORALE [not Pastoral Poetry, but
the Art of Pastorship] and MORALE with Dr. Buddaeus.' [There, your
Majesty!--what a glimpse, as into infinite extinct Continents, filled
with ponderous thorny inanities, invincible nasal drawling of didactic
Titans, and the awful attempt to spin, on all manner of wheels,
road-harness out of split cobwebs: Hoom! Hoom-m-m! Harness not to be had
on those terms. Let the dreary Limbus close again, till the general Day
of Judgment for all this.]

KING (glad to get out of the Limbus). "'Were things as wild then at
Jena, in your time, as of old, when the Students were forever
scuffling and ruffling, and the Couplet went:--

          --"Wer kommt von Jena ungeschlagen,
          Der hat von grossen Gluck zu sagen.--
         "He that comes from Jena SINE BELLO,
          He may think himself a lucky fellow"?'

LINSENBARTH. "'That sort of folly is gone quite out of fashion; and
a man can lead a silent and quiet life there, just as at other
Universities, if he will attend to the DIC, CURHIC? [or know what his
real errand is]. In my time their Serene Highnesses, the Nursing-fathers
of the University (NUTRITORES ACADEMIAE),--of the Ernestine Line
[Weimar-Gotha Highnesses, that is], were in the habit of having the
Rufflers (RENOMISTEN), Renowners as they are called, who made so much
disturbance, sent to Eisenach to lie in the Wartburg a while; there they
learned to be quiet.' [Clock strikes Twelve,--dinner-time of Majesty.]

KING. "'Now I must go: they are waiting for their soup'" (and so ends
Dialogue for the present). 'Did the King bid me wait?

"When we got out of the Garden," says Linsenbarth, silent on this point,
"the four Officers were still there upon the Esplanade [Captains of
Guard belike]; they went into the Palace with the King,"--clearly
meaning to dine with his Majesty.

"I remained standing on the Esplanade. For twenty-seven hours I had not
tasted food: not a farthing IN BONIS [of principal or interest] to
get bread with; I had waded twenty miles hither, in a sultry morning,
through the sand. Not a difficult thing to keep down laughter in such
circumstances!"--Poor soul; but the Royal mind is human too.--"In this
tremor of my heart, there came a KAMMER-HUSSAR [Soldier-Valet, Valet
reduced to his simplest expression] out of the Palace, and asked, 'Where
is the man that was with my King (MEINEM KONIG,--THY King particularly?)
in the Garden?' I answered, 'Here!' And he led me into the Schloss, to
a large Room, where pages, lackeys, and Kammer-hussars were about. My
Kammer-hussar took me to a little table, excellently furnished; with
soup, beef; likewise carp dressed with garden-salad, likewise game with
cucumber-salad: bread, knife, fork, spoon and salt were all there [and I
with an appetite of twenty-seven hours; I too was there]. My hussar set
me a chair, said: 'This that is on the table, the King has ordered to be
served for you (IHM): you are to eat your fill, and mind nobody; and I
am to serve. Sharp, then, fall to!'--I was greatly astonished, and knew
not what to do; least of all could it come into my head that the King's
Kammer-hussar, who waited on his Majesty, should wait on me. I pressed
him to sit by me; but as he refused, I did as bidden; sat down, took my
spoon, and went at it with a will (FRISCH)!

"The hussar took the beef from the table, set it on the charcoal dish
(to keep it hot till wanted); he did the like with the fish and
roast game; and poured me out wine and beer--[was ever such a lucky
Barmecide!] I ate and drank till I had abundantly enough. Dessert,
confectionery, what I could,--a plateful of big black cherries, and a
plateful of pears, my waiting-man wrapped in paper and stuffed them into
my pockets, to be a refreshment on the way home. And so I rose from the
Royal table; and thanked God and the King in my heart, that I had so
gloriously dined,"--HERRLICH, "gloriously" at last. Poor excellent
down-trodden Linsenbarth, one's heart opens to him, not one's larder
only.

"The hussar took away. At that moment a Secretary came; brought me a
sealed Order (Rescript) to the Packhof at Berlin, with my Certificates
(TESTIMONIA), and the Pass; told down on the table five Tail-ducats
(SCHWANZ-DUKATEN), and a Gold Friedrich under them [about 3 pounds 10s.,
I think; better than 10 pounds of our day to a common man, and better
than 100 pounds to a Linsenbarth],--saying, The King sent me this to
take me home to Berlin again.

"And if the hussar took me into the Palace, it was now the Secretary
that took me out again. And there, yoked with six horses, stood a royal
Proviant-wagon; which having led me to, the Secretary said: 'You people,
the King has given order you are to take this stranger to Berlin, and
also to accept no drink-money from him.' I again, through the HERRN
SECRETARIUM, testified my most submissive thankfulness for all Royal
graciousnesses; took my place, and rolled away.

"On reaching Berlin, I went at once to the Packhof, straight to the
office-room,"--standing more erect this time,--"and handed them my Royal
Rescript. The Head man opened the seal; in reading, he changed color,
went from pale to red; said nothing, and gave it to the second man to
read. The second put on his spectacles; read, and gave it to the third.
However, he [the Head man] rallied himself at last: I was to come
forward, and be so good as write a quittance (receipt), 'That I had
received, for my 400 thalers all in Batzen, the same sum in Brandenburg
coin, ready down, without the least deduction.' My cash was at once
accurately paid. And thereupon the Steward was ordered, To go with me to
the White Swan in the Judenstrasse, and pay what I owed there, whatever
my score was. For which end they gave him twenty-four thalers; and if
that were not enough, he was to come and get more." On these high terms
Linsenbarth marched out of the Packhof for the second time; the sublime
head of him (not turned either) sweeping the very stars.

"That was what the King had meant when he said, "You shall have your
money back and interest too:' VIDELICET, that the Packhof was to pay my
expenses at the White Swan. The score, however, was only 10 thaler,'
4 groschen, 6 pfennigs [30 shillings, 5 pence, and 2 or perhaps
3 quarter-farthings], for what I had run up in eight weeks,"--an
uncommonly frugal rate of board, for a man skilled in Hermeneutics,
Hebraics, Polemics, Thetica, Exegetics, Pastorale, Morale (and Practical
Christianity and the Philosophy of Zeno, carried to perfection, or
nearly so)!"And herewith this troubled History had its desired finish."
And our gray-whiskered, raw-boned, great-hearted Candidatus lay down to
sleep, at the White Swan; probably the happiest man in all Berlin, for
the time being.

Linsenbarth dived now into Private-teaching, "INFORMATION," as he calls
it; forming, and kneading into his own likeness, such of the young
Berliners as he could get hold of:--surely not without some good effect
on them, the model having, besides Hermeneutics in abundance, so much
natural worth about it. He himself found the mine of Informing a very
barren one, as to money: continued poor in a high degree, without honor,
without emolument to speak of; and had a straitened, laborious, and what
we might think very dark Life-pilgrimage. But the darkness was nothing
to him, he carried such an inextinguishable frugal rushlight within.
Meat, clothes and fire he did not again lack, in Berlin, for the time
he needed them,--some twenty-seven years still. And if he got no printed
praise in the Reviews, from baddish judges writing by the sheet,--here
and there brother mortals, who knew him by their own eyes and
experiences, looked, or transiently spoke, and even did, a most real
praise upon him now and then. And, on the whole, he can do without
praise; and will stand strokes even without wincing or kicking, where
there is no chance.

A certain Berlin Druggist ("Herr Medicinal-Assessor Rose," whom we may
call Druggist First, for there were Two that had to do with Linsenbarth)
was good and human to him. In Rose's House, where he had come to teach
the children, and which continued, always thenceforth, a home to him
when needful, he wrote this NARRATIVE (Anno 1774); and died there, three
years afterwards,--"24th August, 1777, of apoplexy, age 88," say the
Burial Registers. [In Rodenbeck,--Beitrage,--i. 472-475, these latter
Details (with others, in confused form); IB. 462-471, the NARRATIVE
itself.] Druggist Second, on succeeding the humane Predecessor, found
Linsenbarth's papers in the drug-stores of the place: Druggist Second
chanced to be one Klaproth, famed among the Scientific of the world; and
by him the Linsenbarth Narrative was forwarded to publication, and such
fame as is requisite.




SIR JONAS HANWAY STALKS ACROSS THE SCENE, TOO; IN A PONDERING AND
OBSERVING MANNER.

Of the then very famous "Berlin Carrousel of 1750" we propose to say
little; the now chief interesting point in it being that M. de Voltaire
is curiously visible to us there. But the truth is, they were very great
days at Berlin, those of Autumn, 1750; distinguished strangers come
or coming; the King giving himself up to entertainment of them, to
enjoyment of them; with such a hearty outburst of magnificence, this
Carrousel the apex of it, as was rare in his reign. There were his
Sisters of Schwedt and Baireuth, with suite, his dear Wilhelmina queen
of the scene; ["Came 8th August" (Rodenbeck, 205).] there were--It
would be tedious to count what other high Herrschaften and Durchlauchtig
Persons. And to crown the whole, and entertain Wilhelmina as a Queen
should be, there had come M. de Voltaire; conquered at length to us, as
we hope, and the Dream of our Youth realized. Voltaire's reception,
July 10th and ever since, has been mere splendor and kindness; really
extraordinary, as we shall find farther on. Reception perfect in all
points, except that of the Pompadour's Compliments alone. "That sublime
creature's compliments to your Majesty; such her express command!"
said Voltaire. "JE NE LA CONNAIS PAS," answered Friedrich, with his
clear-ringing voice, "I don't know her;" [Voltaire to Madame Denis,
"Potsdam, 11th August, 1750" (--OEuvres,--lxxiv. 184).]--sufficient
intimation to Voltaire, but painful and surprising. For which some
diplomatic persons blame Friedrich to this day; but not I, or any reader
of mine. A very proud young King; in his silent way, always the prouder;
and stands in no awe of the Divine Butterflies and Crowned Infatuations
never so potent, as more prudent people do.

In a Berlin of such stir and splendor, the arrivals of Sir Jonas Hanway,
of the "young Lord Malton" (famed Earl or Marquis of Rockingham that
will be), or of the witty Excellency Hanbury, are as nothing;--Sir
Jonas's as less than nothing. A Sir Jonas noticed by nobody; but himself
taking note, dull worthy man; and mentionable now on that account. Here
is a Scrap regarding him, not quite to be thrown away:

"Sir Jonas Hanway was not always so extinct as he has now become.
Readers might do worse than turn to his now old Book of TRAVELS again,
and the strange old London it awakens for us: A 'Russian Trading
Company,' full of hope to the then mercantile mind; a Mr. Hanway
despatched, years ago, as Chief Clerk, inexpressibly interested to
manage well;--and managing, as you may read at large. Has done his best
and utmost, all this while; and had such travellings through the
Naphtha Countries, sailings on the Caspian; such difficulties,
successes,--ultimately, failure. Owing to Mr. Elton and Thamas Kouli
Khan mainly. Thamas Kouli Khan--otherwise called Nadir Shah (and a very
hard-headed fellow, by all appearance)--wiled and seduced Mr. Elton, an
Ex-Naval gentleman, away from his Ledgers, to build him Ships; having
set his heart on getting a Navy. And Mr. Elton did build him (spite of
all I could say) a Bark or two on the Caspian;--most hopeful to the said
Nadir Shah; but did it come to anything? It disgusted, it alarmed
the Russians; and ruined Sir Jonas,--who is returning at this period,
prepared to render account of himself at London, in a loftily resigned
frame of mind. [Jonas Hanway,--An Account of &c.--(or in brief, TRAVELS:
London, 3 vols. 4to, 1753), ii. 183. "Arrived in Berlin," from the
Caspian and Petersburg side, "August 15th, 1750."]

"The remarks of Sir Jonas upon Berlin--for he exercises everywhere a
sapient observation on men and things--are of dim tumidly insignificant
character, reminding us of an extinct Minerva's Owl; and reduce
themselves mainly to this bit of ocular testimony, That his Prussian
Majesty rides much about, often at a rapid rate; with a pleasant
business aspect, humane though imperative; handsome to look upon, though
with face perceptibly reddish [and perhaps snuff on it, were you near].
His age now thirty-eight gone; a set appearance, as if already got into
his forties. Complexion florid, figure muscular, almost tending to be
plump.

"Listen well through Hanway, you will find King Friedrich is an object
of great interest, personal as well as official, and much the theme in
Berlin society; admiration of him, pride in him, not now the audiblest
tone, though it lies at the bottom too: 'Our Friedrich the Great,' after
all [so Hanway intimates, though not express as to epithets or words
used]. The King did a beautiful thing to Lieutenant-Colonel Keith the
other day [as some readers may remember]: to Lieutenant-Colonel Keith;
that poor Keith who was nailed to the gallows for him (in effigy), at
Wesel long ago; and got far less than he had expected. The other
day, there had been a grand Review, part of it extending into Madam
Knyphausen's grounds, who is Keith's Mother-in-law. 'Monsieur Keith,'
said the King to him, 'I am sorry we had to spoil Madam's fine
shrubbery by our manoeuvres: have the goodness to give her that, with my
apologies,'--and handed him a pretty Casket with key to it, and in the
interior 10,000 crowns. Not a shrub of Madam's had been cut or injured;
but the King, you see, would count it 1,500 pounds of damage done,
and here is acknowledgment for it, which please accept. Is not that a
gracious little touch?

"This King is doing something at Embden, Sir Jonas fears, or trying to
do, in the Trade-and-Navigation way; scandalous that English capitalists
will lend money in furtherance of such destructive schemes by the
Foreigner! For the rest, Sir Jonas went to call on Lord Malton (Marquis
of Rockingham that will be): an amiable and sober young Nobleman,
come thus far on his Grand Tour," and in time for the Carrousel. "His
Lordship's reception at Court here, one regretted to hear, was nothing
distinguished; quite indifferent, indeed, had not the Queen-Mother stept
in with amendments. The Courts are not well together; pity for it. My
Lord and his Tutor did me the honor to return my visit; the rather as
we all quartered in the same Inn. Amiable young Nobleman,"--so
distinguished since, for having had unconsciously an Edmund Burke,
and such torrents of Parliamentary Eloquence, in his breeches-pocket
(BREECHES-POCKET literally; how unknown to Hanway!)--"Amiable young
Nobleman, is not it one's duty to salute, in passing such a one? Though
I would by no means have it over-done, and am a calmly independent man.

"Sir Jonas also saw the Carrousel [of which presently]; and admired the
great men of Berlin. Great men, all obsolete now, though then admired
to infinitude, some of them: 'You may abuse me,' said the King to some
stranger arrived in Berlin; 'you may abuse me, and perhaps here
and there get praise by doing it: but I advise you not to doubt of
Lieberkuhn [the fashionable Doctor] in any company in Berlin,'" [Hanway,
ii. 190, 202, &c.]--How fashionable are men!

One Collini, a young Italian, quite new in Berlin, chanced also to be at
the Carrousel, or at the latter half of it,--though by no means in
quest of such objects just at present, poor young fellow! As he came
afterwards to be Secretary or Amanuensis of Voltaire, and will turn up
in that capacity, let us read this Note upon him:--

"Signor Como Alessandro Collini, a young Venetian gentleman of some
family and education, but of no employment or resource, had in late
years been asking zealously all round among his home circle, What am I
to do with myself? mere echo answering, What,--till a Signora Sister
of Barberina the Dancer's answered: 'Try Berlin, and King FRIDERICO IL
GRANDE there? I could give you a letter to my Sister!' At which Collini
grasps; gets under way for Berlin,--through wild Alpine sceneries,
foreign guttural populations; and with what thoughts, poor young fellow.
It is a common course to take, and sometimes answers, sometimes not. The
cynosure of vague creatures, with a sense of faculty without direction.
What clouds of winged migratory people gathering in to Berlin, all
through this Reign. Not since Noah's Ark a stranger menagerie of
creatures, mostly wild. Of whom Voltaire alone is, in our time, worth
mention.

"Collini gazed upon the Alpine chasms, and shaggy ice-palaces, with
tender memory of the Adriatic; courageously steered his way through the
inoffensive guttural populations; had got to Berlin, just in this time;
been had to dinner daily by the hospitable Barberinas, young Cocceji
always his fellow-guest,--'Privately, my poor Signorina's Husband!'
whispered old Mamma. Both the Barberinas were very kind to Collini;
cheering him with good auguries, and offers of help. Collini does not
date with any punctuality; but the German Books will do it for him.
August 25th-27th was Carrousel; and Collini had arrived few days
before." [Collini,--Mon Sejour aupres de Voltaire--(Paris, 1807), pp.
1-21.]

And now it is time we were at the Carrousel ourselves,--in a brief
transient way.




Chapter VI.--BERLIN CARROUSEL, AND VOLTAIRE VISIBLE THERE.

Readers have heard of the PLACE DU CARROUSEL at Paris; and know probably
that Louis XIV. held world-famous Carrousel there (A.D. 1662); and,
in general, that Carrousel has something to do with Tourneying, or
the Shadow of Tourneying. It is, in fact, a kind of superb be-tailored
running at the ring, instead of be-blacksmithed running at one another.
A Second milder Edition of those Tournament sports, and dangerous trials
of strength and dexterity, which were so grand a business in the Old
iron Ages. Of which, in the form of Carrousel or otherwise, down
almost to the present day, there have been examples, among puissant
Lords;--though now it is felt to have become extremely hollow; perhaps
incapable of fully entertaining anybody, except children and their
nurses on a high occasion.

A century ago, before the volcanic explosion of so many things which
it has since become wearisome to think of in this earnest world, the
Tournament, emblem of an Age of Chivalry, which was gone: but had not
yet declared itself to be quite gone, and even to be turned topsy-turvy,
had still substance as a mummery,--not enough, I should say, to spend
much money upon. Not much real money: except, indeed, the money were
offered you gratis, from other parties interested? Sir Jonas kindly
informs us, by insinuation, that this was, to a good degree, Friedrich's
case in the now Carrousel: "a thing got up by the private efforts of
different great Lords and Princes of the blood;" each party tailoring,
harnessing and furbishing himself and followers; Friedrich contributing
little but the arena and general outfit. I know not whether even the
40,000 lamps (for it took place by night) were of his purchase, though
that is likely; and know only that the Suppers and interior Palace
Entertainments would be his. "Did not cost the King much money," says
Sir Jonas; which is satisfactory to know. For of the Carrousel kind,
or of the Royal-Mummery kind in general, there has been, for graceful
arrangement, for magnificence regardless of expense,--inviting your
amiable Lord Malton, and the idlers of all Countries, and awakening the
rapture of Gazetteers,--nothing like it since Louis the Grand's time.
Nothing,--except perhaps that Camp of Muhlberg or Radowitz, where we
once were. Done, this one, not at the King's expense alone, but at other
people's chiefly: that is an unexpected feature, welcome if true; and,
except for Sir Jonas, would not have helped to explain the puzzle
for us, as it did in the then Berlin circles. Muhlberg, in my humble
judgment, was worth two of this as a Mummery;--but the meritorious
feature of Friedrich's is, that it cost him very little.

It was, say all Gazetteers and idle eye-witnesses, a highly splendid
spectacle. By much the most effulgent exhibition Friedrich ever made of
himself in the Expensive-Mummery department: and I could give in extreme
detail the phenomena of it; but, in mercy to poor readers, will not.
Fancy the assiduous hammering and sawing on the Schloss-Platz, amid
crowds of gay loungers, giving cheerful note of preparation, in those
latter days of August, 1750. And, on WEDNESDAY NIGHT, 25th AUGUST,
look and see,--for the due moments only, and vaguely enough (as in the
following Excerpt):--

PALACE-ESPLANADE OF BERLIN, 25th AUGUST, 1750 (dusk sinking into dark):
"Under a windy nocturnal sky, a spacious Parallelogram, enclosed for
jousting as at Aspramont or Trebisond. Wide enough arena in the centre;
vast amphitheatre of wooden seats and passages, firm carpentry and
fitted for its business, rising all round; Audience, select though
multitudinous, sitting decorous and garrulous, say since half-past
eight. There is royal box on the ground-tier; and the King in it, King,
with Princess Amelia for the prizes: opposite to this is entrance for
the Chevaliers,--four separate entrances, I think. Who come,--lo, at
last!--with breathings and big swells of music, as Resuscitations from
the buried Ages.

"They are in four 'Quadrilles,' so termed: Romans, Persians,
Carthaginians, Greeks. Four Jousting Parties, headed each by a Prince
of the Blood:--with such a splendor of equipment for jewels, silver
helmets, sashings, housings, as eye never saw. Prancing on their
glorious battle-steeds (sham-battle, steeds not sham, but champing their
bits as real quadrupeds with fire in their interior):--how many in all,
I forgot to count. Perhaps, on the average, sixty in each Quadrille,
fifteen of them practical Ritters; the rest mythologic winged
standard-bearers, blackamoors, lictors, trumpeters and shining melodious
phantasms as escort,--of this latter kind say in round numbers Two
Hundred altogether; and of actual Ritters threescore. [Blumenthal,--Life
of De Ziethen--(Ziethen was in it, and gained a prize), i. 257-263 et
seq.; Voltaire's LETTERS to Niece Denis (--OEuvres,--lxxiv. 174, 179,
198);--and two contemporary 4tos on the subject, with Drawings &c.,
which may well continue unknown to every reader.] Who run at rings, at
Turks' heads, and at other objects with death-doing lance; and prance
and flash and career along: glorious to see and hear. Under proud
flourishings of drums and trumpets, under bursts and breathings of
wind-music; under the shine of Forty Thousand Lamps, for one item. All
Berlin and the nocturnal firmament looking on,--night rather gusty,
'which blew out many of the lamps,' insinuates Hanway.

"About midnight, Beauty in the form of Princess Amelia distributes the
prizes; Music filling the air; and human 'EUGE'S,' and the surviving
lamps, doing their best. After which the Principalities and Ritters
withdraw to their Palace, to their Balls and their Supper of the gods;
and all the world and his wife goes home again, amid various commentary
from high and low. 'JAMAIS, Never,' murmured one high Gentleman, of the
Impromptu kind, at the Palace Supper-table:--

      --'Jamais dans Athene et dans Rome
      On n'eut de plus beaux jours, ni de plus digne prix.
      J'ai vu le fils de Mars sous les traits de Paris,
            Et Venus qui donnait la pomme.'"--

["Never in Athens or Rome were there braver sights or a worthier prize:
I have seen the son of Mars [King Friedrich] with Paris's features, and
Venus [Amelia] crowning the victorious." (--OEuvres de Voltaire,--xviii.
320.)]

And Amphitheatre and Lamps lapse wholly into darkness, and the thing has
finished, for the time being. August 27th, it was repeated by daylight:
if possible, more charming than ever; but not to be spoken of farther,
under penalties. To be mildly forgotten again, every jot and tittle
of it,--except one small insignificant iota, which, by accident, still
makes it remarkable. Namely, that Collini and the Barberinas were
there; and that not only was Voltaire again there, among the Princes and
Princesses; but that Collini saw Voltaire, and gives us transient
sight of him,--thanks to Collini. Thursday, 27th August, 1750, was the
Daylight version of the Carrousel; which Collini, if it were of any
moment, takes to have PRECEDED that of the 40,000 Lamps. Sure enough
Collini was there, with eyes open:--

"Madame de Cocceji [so one may call her, though the known alias is
Barberina] had engaged places; she invited me to come and see this
Festivity. We went;" and very grand it was. "The Palace-Esplanade was
changed" by carpentries and draperies "into a vast Amphitheatre; the
slopes of it furnished with benches for the spectators, and at the four
corners of it and at the bottom, magnificently decorated boxes for the
Court." Vast oval Amphitheatre, the interior arena rectangular, with its
Four Entrances, one for each of the Four Quadrilles. "The assemblage was
numerous and brilliant: all the Court had come from Potsdam to Berlin.

"A little while before the King himself made appearance, there rose
suddenly a murmur of admiration, and I heard all round me, from
everybody, the name 'Voltaire! Voltaire!' Looking down, I saw Voltaire
accordingly; among a group of great lords, who were walking over the
Arena, towards one of the Court Boxes. He wore a modest countenance,
but joy painted itself in his eyes: you cannot love glory, and not feel
gratefully the prize attached to it,"--attained as here. "I lost sight
of him in few instants," as he approached his Box "the place where I was
not permitting farther view." [Collini,--Mon Sejour,--p. 21.]

This was Collini's first sight of that great man (DE CE GRAND HOMME).
With whom, thanks to Barberina, he had, in a day or two, the honor of an
Interview (judgment favorable, he could hope); and before many months,
Accident also favoring, the inexpressible honor of seeing himself the
great man's Secretary,--how far beyond hope or aspiration, in these
Carrousel days!

Voltaire had now been here some Seven Weeks,--arrived 10th July, as
we often note;--after (on his own part) a great deal of haggling,
hesitating and negotiating; which we spare our readers. The poor man
having now become a Quasi-Widower; painfully rallying, with his whole
strength, towards new arrangements,--now was the time for Friedrich to
urge him: "Come to me! Away from all that dismal imbroglio; hither, I
say!" To which Voltaire is not inattentive; though he hesitates; cannot,
in any case, come without delay;--lingers in Paris, readjusting many
things, the poor shipwrecked being, among kind D'Argentals and friends.
Poor Ishmael, getting gray; and his tent in the desert suddenly carried
off by a blast of wind!

To the legal Widower, M. le Marquis, he behaves in money matters like
a Prince; takes that Paris Domicile, in the Rue Traversiere, all to
himself; institutes a new household there,--Niece Denis to be female
president. Niece Denis, widow without encumbrances; whom in her married
state, wife to some kind of Commissariat-Officer at Lille, we have seen
transiently in that City, her Uncle lodging with her as he passed. A
gadding, flaunting, unreasonable, would-be fashionable female--(a Du
Chatelet without the grace or genius, and who never was in love with
you!)--with whom poor Uncle had a baddish life in time coming. All which
settled, he still lingers. Widowed, grown old and less adventurous!
'That House in the Rue Traversiere, once his and Another's, now his
alone,--for the time being, it is probably more like a Mausoleum than
a House to him. And Versailles, with its sulky Trajans, its Crebillon
cabals, what charm is in Versailles? He thinks of going to Italy for a
while; has never seen that fine Country: of going to Berlin for a while:
of going to--In fact, Berlin is clearly the place where he will land;
but he hesitates greatly about lifting anchor. Friedrich insists, in a
bright, bantering, kindly way; "You were due to me a year ago; you said
always, 'So soon as the lying-in is over, I am yours:'--and now, why
don't you come?"

Friedrich, since they met last, has had some experiences of Voltaire,
which he does not like. Their roads, truly--one adulating Trajan
in Versailles, and growing great by "Farces of the Fair;" the other
battling for his existence against men and devils, Trajan and Company
included--have lain far apart. Their Correspondence perceptibly
languishing, in consequence, and even rumors rising on the subject,
Voltaire wrote once: "Give me a yard of ribbon, Sire [your ORDER OF
MERIT, Sire], to silence those vile rumors!" Which Friedrich, on such
free-and-easy terms, had silently declined. "A meddlesome, forward kind
of fellow; always getting into scrapes and brabbles!" thinks Friedrich.
But is really anxious, now that the chance offers again, to have such
a Levite for his Priest, the evident pink of Human Intellect; and tries
various incitements upon him;--hits at last (I know not whether by
device or by accident) on one which, say the French Biographers, did
raise Voltaire and set him under way.

A certain M. Baculard d'Arnaud, a conceited, foolish young fellow, much
patronized by Voltaire, and given to write verses, which are unknown to
me, has been, on Voltaire's recommending, "Literary Correspondent"
to Friedrich (Paris Book-Agent and the like) for some time past;
corresponding much with Potsdam, in a way found entertaining; and is now
(April, 1750) actually going thither, to Friedrich's Court, or perhaps
has gone. At any rate, Friedrich--by accident or by device--had answered
some rhymes of this D'Arnaud, "Yes; welcome, young sunrise, since
Voltaire is about to set!" [--OEuvres de Frederic,--xiv. 95 (Verses "A
D'ARNAUD," of date December, 1749.)] I hope it was by device; D'Arnaud
is such a silly fellow; too absurd, to reckon as morning to anybody's
sunset. Except for his involuntary service, for and against, in
this Voltaire Journey, his name would not now be mentionable at
all. "Sunset?" exclaimed Voltaire, springing out of bed (say the
Biographers), and skipping about indignantly in his shirt: "I will
show them I am not set yet!" [Duvernet (Second), p. 159.] And instantly
resolved on the Berlin Expedition. Went to Compiegne, where the Court
then was; to bid his adieus; nay to ask formally the Royal leave,--for
we are Historiographer and titular Gentleman of the Chamber, and King's
servant in a sense. Leave was at once granted him, almost huffingly; we
hope not with too much readiness? For this is a ticklish point: one is
going to Prussia "on a Visit" merely (though it may be longish); one
would not have the door of France slammed to behind one! The tone at
Court did seem a little succinct, something almost of sneer in it.
But from the Pompadour herself all was friendly; mere witty,
cheery graciosities, and "My Compliments to his Majesty of
Prussia,"--Compliments how answered when they came to hand: "JE NE LA
CONNAIS PAS!"

In short, M. de Voltaire made all his arrangements; got under way;
piously visited Fontenoy and the Battle-fields in passing: and is here,
since July 10th,--in very great splendor, as we see:--on his Fifth Visit
to Friedrich. Fifth; which proved his Last,--and is still extremely
celebrated in the world. Visit much misunderstood in France and
England, down to this day. By no means sorted out into accuracy and
intelligibility; but left as (what is saying a great deal!) probably the
wastest chaos of all the Sections of Friedrich's History. And has, alone
of them, gone over the whole world; being withal amusing to read,
and therefore well and widely remembered, in that mendacious and
semi-intelligible state. To lay these goblins, full of noise, ignorance
and mendacity, and give some true outline of the matter, with what
brevity is consistent with deciphering it at all, is now our sad
task,--laborious, perhaps disgusting; not impossible, if readers will
loyally assist.

Voltaire had taken every precaution that this Visit should succeed, or
at least be no loss to one of the parties. In a preliminary Letter from
Paris,--prose and verse, one of the cleverest diplomatic pieces ever
penned; Letter really worth looking at, cunning as the song of Apollo,
Voltaire symbolically intimates: "Well, Sire, your old Danae, poor
malingering old wretch, is coming to her Jove. It is Jove she wants,
not the Shower of Jove; nevertheless"--And Friedrich (thank Hanbury,
in part, for that bit of knowledge) had remitted him in hard money 600
pounds "to pay the tolls on his road." [Walpole, i. 451 ("Had it from
Princess Amelia herself"); see Voltaire to Friedrich, "Paris, 9th
June, 1750;" Friedrich to Voltaire, "Potsdam, 24th May" (--OEuvres de
Voltaire,--lxxiv. 158, 155).] As a high gentleman would; to have done
with those base elements of the business.

Nay furthermore, precisely two days before those splendors of the
Carrousel, Friedrich,--in answer to new cunning croakeries and
contrivances ("Sire, this Letter from my Niece, who is inconsolable that
I should think of staying here;" where, finding oneself so divinized,
one is disposed to stay),--has answered him like a King: By Gold Key of
Chamberlain, Cross of the Order of Merit, and Pension of 20,000 francs
(850 pounds) a year,--conveyed in as royal a Letter of Business as I
have often read; melodious as Apollo, this too, though all in business
prose, and, like Apollo, practical God of the SUN in this case.
["Berlin, 23d August, 1750" (--OEuvres de Frederic,--xxii.
255);--Voltaire to Niece Denis, "24th August" (misprinted "14th"); to
D'Argental, "28th August" (--OEuvres de Voltaire,--lxxiv. 185, 196).]
Dated 23d August, 1750. This Letter of Friedrich's I fancy to be what
Voltaire calls, "Your Majesty's gracious Agreement with me," and often
appeals to, in subsequent troubles. Not quite a Notarial Piece, on
Friedrich's part; but strictly observed by him as such.

Four days after which, Collini sees Voltaire serenely shining among the
Princes and Princesses of the world; Amphitheatre all whispering with
bated breath, "Voltaire! Voltaire!" But let us hear Voltaire himself,
from the interior of the Phenomenon, at this its culminating point:--

Voltaire to his D'Argentals,--to Niece Denis even, with whom, if with
no other, he is quite without reserve, in showing the bad and the
good,--continues radiantly eloquent in these first months: ...
"Carrousel, twice over; the like never seen for splendor, for [rather
copious on this sublimity]--After which we played ROME SAUVEE [my
Anti-Crebillon masterpiece], in a pretty little Theatre, which I have
got constructed in the Princess Amelia's Antechamber. I, who speak to
you, I played CICERO." Yes; and was manager and general stage-king and
contriver; being expert at this, if at anything. And these beautiful
Theatricals had begun weeks ago, and still lasted many weeks;
[Rodenbeck, "August-October," 1750.]--with such divine consultings,
directings, even orderings of the brilliant Royalties concerned.--
Duvernet (probably on D'Arget's authority) informs us that "once, in one
of the inter-acts, finding the soldiers allowed him for Pretorian Guards
not to understand their business here," not here, as they did at
Hohenfriedberg and elsewhere, "Voltaire shrilled volcanically out to
them [happily unintelligible): 'F----, Devil take it, I asked for men;
and they have sent me Germans (J'AI DEMANDE DES HOMMES, ET L'ON M'ENVOIE
DES ALLEMANDS)!' At which the Princesses were good-natured enough to
burst into laughter." [Duvernet (Second), p. 162,--time probably 15th
October.] Voltaire continues: "There is an English Ambassador here who
knows Cicero's Orations IN CATILINAM by heart;" an excellent Etonian,
surely. "It is not Milord Tyrconnell" (blusterous Irish Jacobite), OUR
Ambassador, note him, fat Valori having been recalled); no, "it is the
Envoy from England," Excellency Hanbury himself, who knows his Cicero by
heart. "He has sent me some fine verses on ROME SAUVEE; he says it is my
best work. It is a Piece appropriate for Ministerial people; Madame la
Chanceliere," Cocceji's better half, "is well pleased with it.
[--OEuvres,--lxxiv. (LETTERS, to the D'Argentals and Denis,
"20th August-23d September, 1750"), pp. 187, 219, 231, &c. &c.]
And then,"--But enough.

In Princess Amelia's Antechamber, there or in other celestial places,
in Palace after Palace, it goes on. Gayety succeeding gayety; mere
Princesses and Princes doing parts; in ROME SAUVEE, and in masterpieces
of Voltaire's, Voltaire himself acting CICERO and elderly characters,
LUSIGNAN and the like. Excellent in acting, say the witnesses;
superlative, for certain, as Preceptor of the art,--though impatient now
and then. And wears such Jewel-ornaments (borrowed partly from a Hebrew,
of whom anon), such magnificence of tasteful dress;--and walks his
minuet among the Morning Stars. Not to mention the Suppers of the King:
chosen circle, with the King for centre; a radiant Friedrich flashing
out to right and left, till all kindles into coruscation round him; and
it is such a blaze of spiritual sheet-lightnings,--wonderful to think
of; Voltaire especially electric. Never, or seldom, were seen such
suppers; such a life for a Supreme Man of Letters so fitted with the
place due to him. Smelfungus says:--

"And so your Supreme of Literature has got into his due place at
last,--at the top of the world, namely; though, alas, but for moments or
for months. The King's own Friend; he whom the King delights to honor.
The most shining thing in Berlin, at this moment. Virtually a kind
of PAPA, or Intellectual Father of Mankind," sneers Smelfungus; "Pope
improvised for the nonce. The new Fridericus Magnus does as the old
Pipinus, old Carolus Magnus did: recognizes his Pope, in despite of the
base vulgar; elevates him aloft into worship, for the vulgar and for
everybody! Carolus Magnus did that thrice-salutary feat [sublimely
human, if you think of it, and for long centuries successful more or
less]; Fridericus Magnus, under other omens, unconsciously does the
like,--the best he can! Let the Opera Fiddlers, the Frerons, Travenols
and Desfontaines-of-Sodom's Ghost look and consider!"--

Madame Denis, an expensive gay Lady, still only in her thirties,
improvable by rouge, carries on great work in the Rue Traversiere;
private theatricals, suppers, flirtations with Italian travelling
Marquises;--finds Intendant Longchamp much in her way, with his rigorous
account-books, and restriction to 100 louis per month; wishes even
her Uncle were back, and cautions him, Not to believe in Friedrich's
flattering unctions, or put his trust in Princes at all. Voltaire, with
the due preliminaries, shows Friedrich her Letter, one of her Letters,
[Now lost, as most of them are; Voltaire's Answer to it, already cited,
is "24th August, 1750" (misprinted "14th August,"--OEuvres,--lxxiv. 185;
see IB. lxxv. 135); King Friedrich's PRACTICAL Answer (so munificent
to Denis and Voltaire), "Your Majesty's gracious Agreement," bore date
"August 23d."]--with result as we saw above.

Formey says: "In the Carnival time, which Voltaire usually passed at
Berlin, in the Palace, people paid their court to him as to a declared
Favorite. Princes, Marshals, Ministers of State, Foreign Ambassadors,
Lords of the highest rank, attended his audience; and were received,"
says Formey, nowhere free from spite on this subject, "in a sufficiently
lofty style (HAUTEUR ASSEZ DEDAIGNEUSE). [Formey,--Souvenirs,--i. 235,
236.] A great Prince had the complaisance to play chess with him; and
to let him win the pistoles that were staked. Sometimes even the pistole
disappeared before the end of the game," continues Formey, green
with spite;--and reports that sad story of the candle-ends; bits of
wax-candle, which should have remained as perquisite to the valets,
but which were confiscated by Voltaire and sent across to the
wax-chandler's. So, doubtless, the spiteful rumor ran; probably little
but spite and fable, Berlin being bitter in its gossip. Stupid Thiebault
repeats that of the candle-ends, like a thing he had seen (twelve years
BEFORE his arrival in those parts); and adds that Voltaire "put them in
his pocket,"--like one both stupid and sordid. Alas, the brighter your
shine, the blacker is the shadow you cast.

Friedrich, with the knowledge he already had of his yoke-fellow,--one
of the most skittish, explosive, unruly creatures in harness,--cannot
be counted wise to have plunged so heartily into such an adventure with
him. "An undoubted Courser of the Sun!" thought Friedrich;--and forgot
too much the signs of bad going he had sometimes noticed in him on the
common highways. There is no doubt he was perfectly sincere and simple
in all this high treatment of Voltaire. "The foremost, literary
spirit of the world, a man to be honored by me, and by all men; the
Trismegistus of Human Intellects, what a conquest to have made; how
cheap is a little money, a little patience and guidance, for such
solacement and ornament to one's barren Life!" He had rashly hoped that
the dreams of his youth could hereby still be a little realized; and
something of the old Reinsberg Program become a fruitful and blessed
fact. Friedrich is loyally glad over his Voltaire; eager in all ways to
content him, make him happy; and keep him here, as the Talking Bird, the
Singing Tree and the Golden Water of intelligent mankind; the glory of
one's own Court, and the envy of the world. "Will teach us the secret
of the Muses, too; French Muses, and help us in our bits of Literature!"
This latter, too, is a consideration with Friedrich, as why should it
not,--though by no means the sole or chief one, as the French give it
out to be.

On his side, Voltaire is not disloyal either; but is nothing like so
completely loyal. He has, and continued always to have, not unmixed with
fear, a real admiration for Friedrich, that terrible practical Doer,
with the cutting brilliances of mind and character, and the irrefragable
common sense; nay he has even a kind of love to him, or something like
it,--love made up of gratitude for past favors, and lively anticipation
of future. Voltaire is, by nature, an attached or attachable creature;
flinging out fond boughs to every kind of excellence, and especially
holding firm by old ties he had made. One fancies in him a mixed set of
emotions, direct and reflex,--the consciousness of safe shelter, were
there nothing more; of glory to oneself, derived and still derivable
from this high man:--in fine, a sum-total of actual desire to live
with King Friedrich, which might, surely, have almost sufficed even for
Voltaire, in a quieter element. But the element was not quiet,--far from
it; nor was Voltaire easily sufficeable!



PERPETUAL PRESIDENT MAUPERTUIS HAS A VISIT FROM ONE KONIG, OUT OF
HOLLAND, CONCERNING THE INFINITELY LITTLE.

Whether Maupertuis, in red wig with yellow bottom, saw these high
gauderies of the Carrousel, the Plays in Princess Amelia's Antechamber,
and the rest of it, I do not know: but if so, he was not in the top
place; nor did anybody take notice of him, as everybody did of Voltaire.
Meanwhile, I have something to quote, as abridged and distilled from
various sources, chiefly from Formey; which will be of much concernment
farther on.

Some four weeks after those Carrousel effulgencies, Perpetual President
Maupertuis had a visit (September 21st, just while the Sun was crossing
the Line; thanks to Formey for the date, who keeps a Note-book,
useful in these intricacies): visit from Professor Konig, an effective
mathematical man from the Dutch parts. Whom readers have forgotten
again; though they saw him once: in violent quarrel, about the
Infinitely Little, with Madame du Chatelet, Voltaire witnessing with
pain;--it was just as they quitted Cirey together, ten years ago, for
these new courses of adventure. Do readers recall the circumstance?
Maupertuis, referee in that quarrel, had, with a bluntness offensive to
the female mind, declared Konig indisputably in the right; and there had
followed a dryness between the divine Emilie and the Flattener of the
Earth, scarcely to be healed by Voltaire's best efforts.

Konig has gone his road since then; become a fine solid fellow;
Professor in a Dutch University; more latterly Librarian to the Dutch
Stadtholder: still frank of speech, and with a rugged free-and-easy
turn, but of manful manners; really a person of various culture, and as
is still noticeable, of a solid geometric turn of mind. Having now, as
Librarian at the Hague, more leisure and more money, he has made a run
to Berlin,--chiefly or entirely to see his Maupertuis again, whom he
still remembers gratefully as his first Patron in older times, and a man
of sound parts, though rather blusterous now and then, A little bit of
scientific business also he has with him. Konig is Member of the Berlin
Academy, for some years back; and there is a thing he would speak with
the Perpetual President upon. "Wants nothing else in Berlin," says
Formey: a hearing by the road that Maupertuis was not there, he had
actually turned homewards again: but got truer tidings, and came on.
"The more was the pity, as perhaps will appear!"He arrived September 20th
[if you will be particular on cheese-parings]; called on me that day,
being lodged in my neighborhood; and next day, found Maupertuis at
home;" [Formey, i. 176-179.]--and flew into his arms again, like a good
boy long absent.

Maupertuis, not many months ago, had, in Two successive Papers, I think
Two, communicated to the Academy a Discovery of Metaphysico-Mathematical
or altogether Metaphysical nature, on the Laws of Motion;--Discovery
which he has, since that, brought to complete perfection, and sent forth
to the Universe at large, in his sublime little Book of COSMOLOGY; [In
La Beaumelle,--Vie de Maupertuis--(Paris, 1856), pp. 105-130, confused
account of this "Discovery," and of the gradual Publication of it to
mankind,--very gradual; first of all in the old Paris times; in the
Berlin ACADEMY latterly; and in fine, to all the world, in this ESSAI
DE COSMOLOGIE (Berlin, Summer of 1750).]--grateful Academy striving to
admire, and believe, with its Perpetual President, that the Discovery
was sublime to a degree; second only to the flattening of the Earth; and
would probably stand thenceforth as a milestone in the Progress of Human
Thought. "Which Discovery, then?" Be not too curious, reader; take only
of it what shall concern you!

It is well known there have been, to the metaphysical head, difficulties
almost insuperable as to How, in the System of Nature, Motion is?
How, in the name of wonder, it can be; and even, Whether it is at all?
Difficulties to the metaphysical head, sticking its nose into the gutter
there;--not difficult to my readers and me, who can at all times walk
across the room, and triumphantly get over them. But stick your nose
into any gutter, entity, or object, this of Motion or another,
with obstinacy,--you will easily drown, if that be your
determination!--Suffice it for us to know in this matter, that
Maupertuis, intensely watching Nature, has discovered, That the key of
her enigma (or at least the ultimate central DOOR, which hides all
her Motional enigmas, the key to WHICH cannot even be imagined as
discoverable!) is, that "Nature is superlatively THRIFTY in this affair
of motion;" that she employs, for every Motion done or do-able, "a
MINIMUM OF ACTION;" and that, if you well understand this, you will, at
least, announce all her procedures in one proposition, and have found
the DOOR which leads to everything. Which will be a comfort to you;
still looking vainly for the key, if there is still no key conceivable.

Perpetual President Maupertuis, having surprised Nature in this manner,
read Papers upon it to an Academy listening with upturned eyes; new
Papers, perfected out of old,--for he has long been hatching these
Phoenix-eggs; and has sent them out complete, quite lately, in a little
Book called COSMOLOGIE, where alone I have had the questionable benefit
of reading them. Grandly brief, as if coming from Delphi, the utterance
is; loftily solemn, elaborately modest, abstruse to the now human mind;
but intelligible, had it only been worth understanding:--a painful
little Book, that COSMOLOGIE, as the Perpetual President's generally
are. "Minimum of Action, LOI D'EPARGNE, Law of Thrift," he calls this
sublime Discovery;--thinks it will be Sovereign in Natural Theology
as well: "For how could Nature be a Save-all, without Designer
present?"--and speaks, of course, among other technical points, about
"VIS VIVA, or Velocity multiplied by the Square of the Time:" which two
points, "LOI D'EPARGNE," and that "the VIS VIVA is always a Minimum,"
the reader can take along with him; I will permit him to shake the
others into Limbo again, as forgettable by human nature at this epoch
and henceforth.

In La Beaumelle's--Vie de Maupertuis--(printed at last, Paris, 1856,
after lying nearly a century in manuscript, an obtuse worthless leaden
little Book), there is much loud droning and detailing, about this
COSMOLOGIE, this sublime "Discovery," and the other sublime Discoveries,
Insights and Apocalyptic Utterances of Maupertuis; though in so confused
a fashion, it is seldom you can have the poor pleasure of learning
exactly when, or except by your own severe scrutiny, exactly what. For
reasons that will appear, certain of those Apocalyptic Utterances by
Perpetual President Maupertuis have since got a new interest, and one
has actually a kind of wish to read the IPSISSIMA VERBA of them, at
this date! But in La Beaumelle (his modern Editor lying fast asleep
throughout) there is no vestige of help. Nay Maupertuis's own Book,
[--OEuvres de Maupertuis,--Lyon, 1756, 4 vols. 4to.] luxurious
cream-paper Quartos, or Octaves made four-square by margin,--which you
buy for these and the cognate objects,--proves altogether worthless
to you. The Maupertuis Quartos are not readable for their own sake
(solemnly emphatic statement of what you already know; concentrated
struggle to get on wing, and failure by so narrow a miss; struggle which
gets only on tiptoe, and won't cease wriggling and flapping); and
then (to your horror) they prove to be carefully cleaned of all
the Maupertuis-VOLTAIRE matter;--edition being SUBSEQUENT to that
world-famous explosion. CAVEAT EMPTOR.--Our Excerpt proceeds:--

"Industrious Konig, like other mathematical people, has been listening
to these Oracles on the 'Law of Minimum,' by the Perpetual President;
and grieves to find, after study, That said Law does not quite hold;
that in fact it is, like Descartes's old key or general door, worth
little or nothing; as Leibnitz long ago seems to have transiently
recognized. Konig has put his strictures on paper: but will not dream
of publishing, till the Perpetual President have examined them and
satisfied himself; and that is Konig's business at present, as he knocks
on Maupertuis, while Sol is crossing the Line. Maupertuis has a House of
the due style: Wife a daughter of Minister Borck's (high Borcks, 'old
as the DIUVEL'); no children;--his back courts always a good deal dirty
with pelicans, bustards, perhaps snakes and other zoological wretches,
which sometimes intrude into the drawing-rooms, otherwise very fine. A
man of some whims, some habits; arbitrary by nature, but really honest,
though rather sublimish in his interior, with red Wig and yellow bottom.

"Konig, all filial gladness, is received gladly;--though, by degrees,
with some surprise, on the paternal part, to find Konig ripened out of
son, client and pupil, into independent posture of a grown man. Frankly
certain enough about himself, and about the axioms of mathematics.
Standing, evidently, on his own legs; kindly as ever, but on these
new terms,--in fact rather an outspoken free-and-easy fellow (I should
guess), not thinking that offence can be taken among friends. Formey
confesses, this was uncomfortable to Maupertuis; in fact, a shock which
he could not recover from. They had various meetings, over dinner aud
otherwise, at the Perpetual President's, for perhaps two weeks at
this time (dates all to be had in Formey's Note-book, if anybody would
consult); in the whole course of which the shock to the Perpetual
President increased, instead of diminishing. Republican freedom and
equality is evidently Konig's method; Konig heeds not a whit the
oracular talent or majestic position of Maupertuis; argues with the
frankest logic, when he feels dissent;--drives a majestic Perpetual
President, especially in the presence of third parties, much out of
patience. Thus, one evening, replying to some argument of the Perpetual
President's, he begins: 'My poor friend, MON PAUVRE AMI, don't you
perceive, then'--Upon which Maupertuis sprang from his chair, violently
stamping, and pirouetted round the room, 'Poor friend, poor friend?
are you so rich: then!' frank Konig merely grinning till the paroxysm
passed. [Formey, i. 177.] Konig went home again, RE INFECTA about the
end of the month."

Such a Konig--had better not have come! As to his strictures on the LAW
OF THRIFT, the arguings on them, alone together, or with friends by,
merely set Maupertuis pirouetting: and as to the Konig Manuscripts
on them "to be published in the Leipzig ACTA, after your remarks and
permission," Maupertuis absolutely refused to look at said Manuscripts:
"Publish them there, here, everywhere, in the Devil and his
Grandmother's name; and then there is an end, Monsieur!" Konig went his
ways therefore, finding nothing else for it; published his strictures,
in the Leipzig ACTA in March next,--and never saw Maupertuis again, for
one result, out of several that followed! I have no doubt he was out to
Voltaire, more than once, in this fortnight; and eat "the King's roast"
pleasantly with that eminent old friend. Voltaire always thought him
a BON GARCON (justly, by all the evidence I have); and finds his talk
agreeable, and his Berlin news--especially that of Maupertuis and his
explosive pirouettings. Adieu, Herr Professor; you know not, with
your Leipzig ACTA and Fragment of Leibnitz, what an explosion you are
preparing!




Chapter VII.--M. DE VOLTAIRE HAS A PAINFUL JEW-LAWSUIT.

Voltaire's Terrestrial Paradise at Berlin did not long continue perfect.
Scarcely had that grand Carrousel vanished in the azure firmaments,
when little clouds began rising in its stead; and before long, black
thunder-storms of a very strange and even dangerous character.

It must have been a painful surprise to Friedrich to hear from his
Voltaire, some few weeks after those munificences, That he, Voltaire,
was in very considerable distress of mind, from the bad, not to call it
the felonious and traitorous, conduct of M. D'Arnaud,--once Friedrich's
shoeing-horn and "rising-sun" for Voltaire's behoof; now a vague
flaunting creature, without significance to Friedrich or anybody! That
D'Arnaud had done this and done that, of an Anti-Voltairian, treasonous
nature;--and that, in short, life was impossible in the neighborhood of
such a D'Arnaud!"D'Arnaud has corrupted my Clerk (Prince Henri hungering
in vain for LA PUCELLE, has got sight of it, in this way); [Clerk was
dismissed accordingly (one Tinois, an ingenious creature),--and COLLINI
appointed in his stead.] D'Arnaud has been gossiping to Freron and the
Paris Newspapers; D'Arnaud has" [Voltaire to Friedrich (--OEuvres de
Frederic,--xxii. 257), undated, "November, 1750."]--Has, in effect,
been a flaunting young fool; of dissolute, esurient, slightly profligate
turn; occasionally helping in the Theatricals, and much studious to make
himself notable, and useful to the Princely kind. A D'Arnaud of nearly
no significance, to Friedrich or to anybody. A D'Arnaud whose bits of
fooleries and struttings about, in the peacock or jackdaw way, might
surely have been below the notice of a Trismegistus!

Friedrich, painfully made sensible what a skinless explosive
Trismegistus he has got on hand, answers, I suppose, in words little or
nothing,--in Letters, I observe, answers absolutely nothing, to Voltaire
repeating and re-repeating;--does simply dismiss D'Arnaud (a "BON
DIABLE," as Voltaire, to impartial people, calls him), or accept
D'Arnaud's demission, and cut the poor fool adrift. Who sallies out into
infinite space, to Paris latterly ("alive there in 1805"); and claims
henceforth perpetual oblivion from us and mankind. And now there will be
peace in our garden of the gods, and perpetual azure will return?

Alas, D'Arnaud is not well gone, when there has begun brewing in
threefold secrecy a mass of galvanic matter, which, in few weeks more,
filled the Heavens with miraculous foul gases and the blackness of
darkness;--which, in short, exploded about New-year's time, as the
world-famous VOLTAIRE-HIRSCH LAWSUIT, still remembered, though only as a
portent and mystery, by observant on-lookers. Of which it is now our sad
duty to say something; though nowhere, in the Annals of Jurisprudence,
is there a more despicable thing, or a deeper involved in lies and
deliriums by current reporters of it, about which the sane mind can be
called upon accidentally to speak a word. Beaten, riddled, shovelled,
washed in many waters, by a patient though disgusted Predecessor in
this field, there lies by me a copious but wearisome Narrative of this
matter;--the more vivid portions of which, if rightly disengaged, and
shown in sequence, may satisfy the curious.

Duvernet (who, I can guess, had talked with D'Arget on the subject) has,
alone of the French Biographers, some glimmer of knowledge about it;
Duvernet admits that it was a thing of Illegal Stock-jobbing; that--

1. "That M. de Voltaire had agreed with a Jew named Hirsch to go to
Dresden and, illegally, PURCHASE a good lot of STEUER-SCHEINE [Saxon
Exchequer Bills, which are payable in gold to a BONA FIDE PRUSSIAN
holding them, but are much in discount otherwise, as readers may
remember]; and given Hirsch a Draft on Paris, due after some weeks, for
payment of the same; Hirsch leaving him a stock of jewels in pledge till
the STEUER-SCHEINE themselves come to hand.

2. "That Hirsch, having things of his own in view with the money, sent
no STEUER-SCHEINE from Dresden, nothing but vague lying talk instead
of STEUER: so that Voltaire's suspicions naturally kindling, he stopped
payment of the Paris Draft, and ordered Hirsch to come home at once.

3. "That Hirsch coming, a settlement was tried: 'Give me back my Draft
on Paris, you objectionable blockhead of a Hirsch; there are your
Diamonds, there is something even for your expenses (some fair moiety,
I think); and let me never see your unpleasant face again!' To
which Hirsch, examining the diamonds, answered [says Duvernet, not
substantially incorrect hitherto, though stepping along in total
darkness, and very partial on Voltaire's behalf],--Hirsch, examining the
diamonds, answered, 'But you have changed some of them! I cannot take
these!'--and drove Voltaire quite to despair, and into the Law-Courts;
which imprisoned Hirsch, and made him do justice." [Duvernet (T.J.D.V.),
170, 173, 175:--vague utterly; dateless (tries one date, and is mistaken
even in the Year); wrong in nearly every detail; "the 'STAIRE or STEUER
was a BANK?" &c. &c.]

In which last clause, still more in the conclusion, that it was "to the
triumph of Voltaire," Duvernet does substantially mistake! And indeed,
except as the best Parisian reflex of this matter, his Account is
worth nothing:--though it may serve as Introduction to the following
irrefragable Documents and more explicit featurings. We learn from him,
and it is the one thing we learn of credible, That "Voltaire, when
it came to Law Procedures, begged Maupertuis to speak for him to M.
Jarriges," a Prussian Frenchman, "one of the Judges; and that Maupertuis
answered, 'I cannot interfere in a bad business (ME MELER D'UNE MAUVAISE
AFFAIRE).'" The other French Biographies, definable as "IGNOR-AMUS
speaking in a loud voice to IGNOR-ATIS," require to be altogether swept
aside in this matter. Even "Clog." jumbling Voltaire's undated LETTERS
into confusion thrice confounded, and droning out vituperatively in the
dark, becomes a MINUS quantity in these Friedrich affairs. In regard
to the Hirsch Process, our one irrefragable set of evidences is: The
Prussian LAW-REPORT by KLEIN,--especially the Documents produced in
Court, and the Sentence given. [Ernst Ferdinand Klein,--Annalen
der Gesetzgebung und Rechtsgelehrsamkeit in den Preussischen
Staaten--(Berlin und Stettin), 1790, v. 215-260.] Other lights are to
be gathered, with severe scrutiny and caution, from the circumambient
contemporary rumor,--especially from the PREFACE to a "Comedy" so called
of "TANTALE EN PROCES (Tantalus," Voltaire, "at Law");--which PREFACE is
evidently Hirsch's own Story, put into language for him by some humane
friend, and addressed to a "clear-seeing Public." [TANTALE EN PROCES
(ascribed to Friedrich himself, by some wonderful persons!) is
in--Supplement aux OEuvres Posthumes de Frederic II.--(Cologne, 1789),
i. 319 et seq. Among the weakest of Comedies (might be by D'Arnaud, or
some such hand); nothing in it worth reading except the Preface.] "And
in fine," says my Manuscript, "by sweeping out the distinctly false,
and well discriminating the indubitable from what is still in part
dubitable, sufficient twilight [abridgable in a high degree, I hope!]
rises over the Affair, to render it visible in all its main features."




THE VOLTAIRE-HIRSCH TRANSACTION: PART I. ORIGIN OF LAWSUIT (10th
November-25th December, 1750).

"Saxon STEUER-SCHEIN, some readers know, is, in the rough, equivalent to
Exchequer Bill. Payable at the Saxon Treasury; to Prussians, in gold; to
all other men, in paper only,--which (thanks to Bruhl and his unheard-of
expenditures and financierings) is now at a discount say of 25, or even
30 per cent. By Article Eleventh of the Dresden TREATY OF PEACE, King
Friedrich, if our readers have not forgotten, got stipulated, That all
Prussian holders of these SCHEINE should be paid in gold; interest
at the due days; and at the due days principal itself:--in gold they,
whatever became of others. No farther specifications, as to proof,
method, limits or conditions of any kind, occur in regard to this
Eleventh Article; which is a just one, beyond doubt, but most carelessly
drawn up. Apparently it trusts altogether to the personal honesty of all
Prussian subjects: 'Prove yourself a Prussian subject, and we pay your
Steuer-Schein in real money.' But now if a Saxon or other Non-Prussian,
who can get no payment save in paper, were to have his Note smuggled or
trafficked over into Prussia, and presented as a Prussian one? In our
time, such traffic would start on the morrow morning; and in a week or
two, all Notes whatsoever would be presented as Prussian, payable in
gold! Not so in those days;--though a small contraband of that kind does
by degrees threaten to establish itself, and Friedrich had to publish
severe rescripts (one before this Hirsch-Voltaire business, [10th
August, 1748 (Seyfarth, i. 62).] one still severer after), and menace
it down again. The malpractice seems to have proved menaceable in that
manner; nor was any new arrangement made upon it,--no change, till the
Steuer-Scheine, by their gradual terms, were all paid either in real
money or imaginary, and thus, in the course of years, the thing burnt to
the socket, and went out."

Voltaire's rash Adventure, dangerous Navigation and gradual Wreck,
in this Forbidden Sea of Steuer-Scheine,--will become conceivable to
readers, on study diligent enough of the following Documents and select
Details:--


DOCUMENT FIRST (a small Missive, in Voltaire's hand).

"Je prie instamment monsieur hersch de venir demain mardi matin a
potsdam pour affaire pressante, et d'aporter (SIC) avec luy les diamants
qui doivent servir pour la representation de la tragedie qui se jouera a
cinq heures de soir chez S.A.R. Monseigneur le Prince henri  Ce lundy a
midy. VOLTAIRE."

Which being interpreted, rightly spelt, and dated (as by chance we can
do) with distinctness, will run as follows in English:--

"POTSDAM, Monday, 9th November, 1750. "I earnestly request Mr. Hirsch to
come to-morrow Tuesday morning to Potsdam, on business that is urgent;
and to bring with him the Diamonds needed for the Tragedy which is to
be represented, at five in the evening, in His Royal Highness Prince
Henry's Apartment." [Klein, v. 260.]

"On Tuesday the 10th," say the Old Newspapers, "was ROME SAUVEE;"--with
Voltaire, perceptible there as "CICERON," [Rodenbeck, i. 209.] in due
 A glorious enough Cicero;--and such a piece of "urgent business" done
with your Hirsch, just before emerging on the stage!

"Hirsch, in that NARRATIVE, describes himself as a young innocent
creature. Not very old, we will believe: but as to innocence!--For
certain, he is named Abraham Hirsch, or Hirschel: a Berlin Jew of the
Period; whom one inclines to figure as a florid oily man, of Semitic
features, in the prime of life; who deals much in jewels, moneys, loans,
exchanges, all kinds of Jew barter; whether absolutely in old clothes,
we do not know--certainly not unless there is a penny to be turned. The
man is of oily Semitic type, not old in years,--there is a fraternal
Hirsch, and also a paternal, who is head of the firm;--and this
young one seems to be already old in Jew art. Speaks French and other
dialects, in a Hebrew, partially intelligible manner; supplies Voltaire
with diamonds for his stage-dresses, as we perceive. To all appearance,
nearly destitute of human intellect, but with abundance of vulpine
instead. Very cunning; stupid, seemingly, as a mule otherwise;--and,
on the whole, resembling in various points of character a mule put into
breeches, and made acquainted with the uses of money. He is come 'on
pressing business,'--perhaps not of stage-diamonds alone? Here now is
DOCUMENT SECOND; nearly of the same date; may be of the very same;--more
likely is a few days later, and betokens mysterious dialogue and
consultation held on Tuesday 10th. It is in two hands: written on some
scrap or TORN bit of paper, to judge by the length of the lines."


DOCUMENT SECOND.

"In Voltaire's hand, this part:--

--'Savoir s'il est encore tems de declarer les billets qu'on a sur la
steure. si on en specifie le numero dans la declaration.'--

'If it is still time to declare [to announce in Saxony and demand
payment for] Notes one holds on the Steuer? If one is to specify the No.
in the declaration?'

"In Hirsch's hand, this part:--

--'l'on peut declarer des billets sur la
steure, qu'on a en depost en pays etranger, et dont on ne pourra savoir
le numero que dans quinze jours ou trois Semaines.'--[Klein, 259.]

'One can declare Notes on the Steuer, which one holds in deposit in
Foreign Countries; and of which one cannot state the No. till after a
fortnight or three weeks.'

"Which of these Two was the Serpent, which the Eve, in this
STEUER-SCHEIN Tree of Knowledge, that grew in the middle of Paradise,
remains entirely uncertain. Hirsch, of course, says it was Voltaire;
Voltaire (not aware that DOCUMENT SECOND remained in existence)
had denied that his Hirsch business was in any way concerned with
STEUER;--and must have been a good deal struck, when DOCUMENT SECOND
came to light; though what could he do but still deny! Hirsch asserts
himself to have objected the 'illegality, the King's anger;' but that
Voltaire answered in hints about his favor with the King; 'about his
power to make one a Court-Jeweller,' if he liked; and so at last
tempted the baby innocence of Hirsch;--for the rest, admits that the
Steuer-Notes were expected to yield a Profit--of 35 per cent:--and,
in fact, a dramatic reader can imagine to himself dialogue enough, at
different times, going on, partly by words, partly by hint, innuendo
and dumb-show, between this Pair of Stage-Beauties. But, for near a
fortnight after DOCUMENT FIRST, there is nothing dated, or that can be
clearly believed,--till,

"MONDAY, 23d NOVEMBER, 1750. It is credibly certain the Jew Hirsch
came again, this day, to the Royal Schloss of Potsdam, to Voltaire's
apartment there [right overhead of King Friedrich's, it is!]--where,
after such dialogue as can be guessed at, there was handed to Hirsch
by Voltaire, in the form of Two negotiable Bills, a sum of about 2,250
pounds; with which the Jew is to make at once for Dresden, and
buy Steuer-Scheine. [Hirsch's Narrative, in Preface to--Tantale en
Proces,--p. 340.] Steuer-Scheine without fail: 'but in talking or
corresponding on the matter, we are always to call them FURS
or DIAMONDS,'--mystery of mysteries being the rule for us. This
considerable sum of 2,250 pounds may it not otherwise, contrives
Voltaire, be called a 'Loan' to Jeweller Hirsch, so obliging a Jeweller,
to buy 'Furs' or 'Diamonds' with? At a gain of 35 per 100 Pieces, there
will be above 800 pounds to me, after all expenses cleared: a very
pretty stroke of business do-able in few days!"--

"Monday, 23d November:" The beautiful Wilhelmina, one remarks, is just
making her packages; right sad to end such a Visit as this had been!
Thursday night, from her first sleeping-place, there is a touching
Farewell to her Brother;--tender, melodiously sorrowful, as the Song
of the Swan. [Wilhelmina to Friedrich, "Brietzen, 26th November, JOUR
FUNESTE POUR MOI" (--OEuvres de Frederic,--xxvii. i. 197).] To Voltaire
she was always good; always liked Voltaire. Voltaire would be saying
his Adieus, in state, among the others, to that high Being,--just in the
hours while such a scandalous Hirsch-Concoction went, on underground!

"As to the Two Bills and Voltaire's security for them, readers are to
note as follows. Bill FIRST is a Draft, on Voltaire's Paris Banker for
40,000 livres (about 1,600 pounds), not payable for some weeks: 'This I
lend you, Monsieur Hirsch; mind, LEND you,--to buy Furs!' 'Yes, truly,
what we call Furs;--and before the Bill falls payable, there will be
effects for it in Monseigneur de Voltaire's hand; which is security
enough for Monseigneur.' The SECOND Bill, again"--Truth is, there were
in succession two Second Bills, an INTENDED-Second (of this same Monday
23d), which did not quite suit, and an ACTUAL-Second (two days later),
which did. INTENDED-Second Bill was one for 4,000 thalers (about 600
pounds), drawn by Voltaire on the Sieur Ephraim,--a very famous Jew
of Berlin now and henceforth, with whom as money-changer, if not yet
otherwise (which perhaps Ephraim thinks unlucky), Voltaire, it would
seem, is in frequent communication. This Bill, Ephraim would not accept;
told Hirsch he owed M. de Voltaire nothing; "turned me rudely away,"
says Hirsch (two of a trade, and no friends, he and I!)--so that there
is nothing to be said of this Ephraim Bill; and except as it elucidates
some dark portions of the whirlpools, need not have been noticed at all.
"Hirsch," continues my Authority, "got only Two available Bills; the
first on Paris for 1,600 pounds, payable in some weeks; and, after a day
or two, this other: The ACTUAL BILL SECOND; which is a Draft for 4,430
thalers (about 650 pounds), by old Father Hirsch, head of the Firm, on
Voltaire himself:--'Furs too with that, Monsieur Hirsch, at the rate
of 35 per piece, you understand?' 'Yea, truly, Monseigneur!'--Draft
accepted by Voltaire, and the cash for it now handed to Hirsch Son: the
only absolutely ready money he has yet got towards the affair.

"For these Two Bills, especially for this Second, I perceive, Voltaire
holds borrowed jewels (borrowed in theatrical times, or partly bought,
from the Hirsch Firm, and not paid for), which make him sure till he see
the STEUER Papers themselves.--(And now off, my good Sieur Hirsch; and
know that if you please ME, there are--things in my power which would
suit a man in the Jeweller and Hebrew line!) Hirsch pushes home to
Berlin; primed and loaded in this manner; Voltaire naturally auxious
enough that the shot may hit. Alas, the shot will not even go off, for
some time: an ill omen!

"SUNDAY, 29th NOVEMBER, Hirsch, we hear, is still in Berlin. Fancy the
humor of Voltaire, after such a week as last! (TUESDAY, December 1st)
Hirsch still is not off: 'Go, you son of Amalek!' urges Voltaire; and
sends his Servant Picard, a very sharp fellow, for perhaps the third
time,--who has orders now, as Hirsch discovers, to stay with him, not
quit sight of him till he do go. [Hirsch's Narrative; see Voltaire's
Letter to D'Arget (--OEuvres,--lxiv. 11).] Hirsch's hour of departure
for Dresden is not mentioned in the ACTS; but I guess he could hardly
get over Wednesday, with Picard dogging him on these terms; and must
have taken the diligence on Wednesday night: to arrive in Dresden about
December 4th. 'Well; at least, our shot is off; has not burst out, and
lodged in our person here,--thanked be all the gods!'

"Off, sure enough:--and what should we say if the whole matter were
already oozing out; if, on this same Sunday evening, November 29th) not
quite a week's time yet, the matter (as we learn long afterwards) had
been privately whispered to his Majesty: 'That Voltaire has sent off
a Jew to buy Steuer-Scheine, and has promised to get him made
Court-Jeweller!' [Voltaire,--OEuvres,--lxxiv. 314 ("Letter to Friedrich,
February, 1751,"--AFTER Catastrophe).], So; within a week, and before
Hirsch is even gone! For men are very porous; weighty secrets oozing out
of them, like quicksilver through clay jars. I could guess, Hirsch,
by way of galling insolent Ephraim, had blabbed something: and in the
course of five days, it has got to the very King,--this Kammerherr
Voltaire being such a favorite and famous man as never was; the
very bull's-eye of all kinds of Berlin gossip in these days. 'Hm,
Steuer-Scheine, and the Jew Hirsch to be Court-Jeweller, you say?'
thinks the King, that Sunday night; but locks the rumor in his Royal
mind, he, for his part; or dismisses it as incredible: 'There ought to
be impervious vessels too, among the porous!' Voltaire notices nothing
particular, or nothing that he speaks of as particular. This must
have been a horrid week to him, till Hirsch got away." Hirsch is away
(December 2d); in Dresden, safe enough; but--

"But, the fortnight that follows is conceivable as still worse. Hirsch
writing darkly, nothing to the purpose; Voltaire driving often into
Berlin, hearing from Ephraim hints about, 'No connection with that
House;' 'If Monseigneur have intrusted Hirsch with money,--may there be
a good account of it!' and the like. Black Care devouring Monseigueur;
but nothing definite; except the fact too evident, That Hirsch does not
send or bring the smallest shadow of Steuer-Scheine,--'Peltries,' or
'Diamonds,' we mean,--or any value whatever for that Paris Bill of ours,
payable shortly, and which he has already got cashed in Dresden. Nothing
but excuses, prevarications; stupid, incoherently deceptive jargon,
as of a mule intent on playing fox with you. Vivid Correspondence is
conceivable; but nothing of it definite to us, except this sample"
(which we give translated):--

DOCUMENT THIRD (torn fraction in Voltaire's hand: To Hirsch, doubtless;
early in December).... "Not proper (IL NE FALLAIT PAS) to negotiate
Bills of Exchange, and never produce a single diamond"--bit of peltry,
or ware of any kind, you son of Amalek! "Not proper to say: I have got
money for your bills of exchange, and I bring you nothing back; and I
will repay your money when you shall no longer be here [in Germany at
all]. Not proper to promise at 35 louis, and then say 30. To say 30,
and then next morning 25. You should at least have produced goods (IL
FALLAIT EN DONNER) at the price current; very easy to do when one was
on the spot. All your procedures have been faults hitherto. [Klein, v.
259.]

"These are dreadful symptoms. Steuer-Notes, promised at 35 discount, are
not to be had except at 30. Say 30 then, and get done with it, mule of
a scoundrel! Next day the 30 sinks to 25; and not a Steuer-Note, on any
terms, comes to hand. And the mule of a scoundrel has drawn money, in
Dresden yonder, for my Bill on Paris,--excellent to him for trade of his
own! What is to be done with such an Ass of Balaam? He has got the bit
in his teeth, it would seem. Heavens, he too is capable of stopping
short, careless of spur and cudgel; and miraculously speaking to a NEW
Prophet [strange new "Revealer of the Lord's Will," in modern dialect],
in this enlightened Eighteenth Century itself!--One thing the new
Prophet, can do: protest his Paris Bill.

"DECEMBER 12th [our next bit of certainty], Voltaire writes, haste,
haste, to Paris, 'Don't pay;' and intimates to Hirsch, 'You will have
to return your Dresden Banker his money for that Paris Bill. At Paris
I have protested it, mark me; and there it never will be paid to him
or you. And you must come home again instantly, job undone, lies not
untold, you--!' Hirsch, with money in hand, appears not to have wanted
for a briskish trade of his own in the Dresden marts. But this of
cutting off his supplies brings him instantly back:"--and at Berlin,
DECEMBER 16th, new facts emerge again of a definite nature.

"WEDNESDAY, 16th DECEMBER, 1750. 'To-day the King with Court and
Voltaire come to Berlin for the Carnival;' [Rodenbeck, i. 209.] to-day
also Voltaire, not in Carnival humor, has appointed his Jew to meet
him. In the Royal Palace itself,--we hope, well remote from Friedrich's
Apartment!--this sordid conference, needing one's choicest diplomacy
withal, and such exquisite handling of bit and spur, goes on. And
probably at great length. Of which, as the FINALE, and one clear
feature significant to the fancy, here is,--for record of what they call
'COMPLETE SETTLEMENT,' which it was far from turning out to be:--


DOCUMENT FOURTH (in Hirsch's hand, First Piece of it).

--"'Pour quittance generale promettant de rendre a Mr. de Voltaire tous
billets, ordres et lettres de change a moy donnez jusqu'a ce jour, 16
Decembre, 1750.--

"'Account all settled; I promising to return M. de
Voltaire all Letters, Orders and Bills of Exchange given me to this day,
16th December, 1750.

[Hirsch signs. But you have forgotten something, Monsieur Hirsch!
Whereupon]--et promets de donner a Mr. de Voltaire dans le jour de
demain ou apres au plustard deux cent guatre-vingt frederics d'or au
lieu de deux cent quatre-vingt louis d'or, que je lui ai payez, le tout
pour quittance generale, ce 16 Decembre, 1750, a berlin--And promise
to give M. de Voltaire, in the course of to-morrow, or the day after
to-morrow at latest, 280 FREDERICS D'OR, instead of 280 LOUIS D'OR [gold
FREDERICS the preferabe coin, say experts] which I have now paid him;
whereby All will be settled.

[Hirsch again signs; but has again forgotten something, most important
thing. And]--je lui remettrai surtout les 40,000 livres de billets de
change sur paris qu'il mavoit donnez et fiez'--I will especially return
him the Bill on Paris for 40,000 livres (1,600 pounds) which he had
given and trusted to me,'--but has since protested, as is too evident.

[And Hirsch signs for the last time]." [Klein, pp. 258, 260.]--

Symptomatic, surely, of a haggly settlement, these THREE shots instead
of one!--"Voltaire's return is:--

--"'Pour quittance generale de tout compte solde entre nous, tout paye
au sieur abraham hersch a berlin, 16 Decembre, 1750.--Voltaire'--
"'Account all settled between us, payment of the Sieur Abraham Hirsch in
full: Berlin, 16th Deember, 1750.'

[which Second Piece, we perceive, is to lie in Hirsch's hand, to keep,
if he find it valuable].

"This 'COMPLETE SETTLEMENT,'--little less than miraculous to Voltaire
and us,--one finds, after sifting, to have been the fruit of Voltaire's
exquisite skill in treating and tuning his Hirsch (no harshness of
rebuke, rather some gleam of hope, of future bargains, help at Court):
(Your expenses; compensation for protesting of that Bill on Paris? Tush,
cannot we make all that good! In the first place, I will BUY of you
these Jewels [this one discovers to have been the essence of the
operation!], all or the best part of them, which I have here in pawn for
Papa's Bill: 650 pounds was it not? Well, suppose I on the instant take
450 pounds worth, or so, of these Jewels (I want a great many jewels);
and you to pay me down a 200 or so of gold LOUIS as balance,--gold
LOUIS, no, we will say FREDERICS rather. There now, that is settled.
Nothing more between us but settles itself, if we continue friends!'
Upon which Hirsch walked home, thankful for the good job in Jewels;
wondering only what the Allowance for Expenses and Compensation will
be. And Voltaire steps out, new-burnished, into the Royal Carnival
splendors, with a load rolled from his mind.

"This COMPLETE SETTLEMENT, meanwhile, rests evidently on two legs, both
of which are hollow. 'What will the handsome Compensation be, I wonder?'
thinks Hirsch;--and is horror-struck to find shortly, that Voltaire
considers 60 thalers (about 9 pounds) will be the fair sum! 'More than
ten times that!' is Hirsch's privately fixed idea. On the other hand,
Voltaire has been asking himself, 'My 450 pounds worth of Jewels, were
they justly valued, though?' Jew Ephraim (exaggerative and an enemy to
this Hirsch House) answers, 'Justly? I would give from 300 pounds to 250
pounds for them!'--So that the legs both crumbling to powder, Complete
Settlement crashes down into chaos: and there ensues,"--But we must
endeavor to be briefer!

There ensues, for about a week following, such an inextricable scramble
between the Sieur Hirsch and M. de Voltaire as,--as no reader, not
himself in the Jew-Bill line, or paid for understanding it, could
consent to have explained to him. Voltaire, by way of mending the bad
jewel-bargain, will buy of Hirsch 200 pounds worth more jewels; gets
the new 200 pounds worth in hand, cannot quite settle what articles will
suit: "This, think you? That, think you?" And intricately shuffles them
about, to Hirsch and back. Hirsch, singular to notice, holds fast by
that Protested Paris Bill; on frivolous pretexts, always forgets to
bring that: "May have its uses, that, in a Court of Justice yet!"
Meetings there are, almost daily, in the Voltaire Palace-Apartment;
DECEMBER 19th and DECEMBER 24th) there are Two DOCUMENTS (which we must
spare the reader, though he will hear of them again, as highly notable,
especially of one of them, as notable in the extreme!)--indicating the
abstrusest jewel-bargainings, scramblings, re-bargainings.

"My Jewels are truly valued!" asseverates Hirsch always: "Ephraim is my
enemy; ask Herr Reklam, chief Jeweller in Berlin, an impartial man!"
The meetings are occasionally of stormy character; Voltaire's patience
nearly out: "But did n't I return you that Topaz Ring, value 75 pounds?
And you have NOT deducted it; you--!" "One day, Picard and he pulled a
Ring [doubtless this Topaz] off my finger," says the pathetic Hirsch,
"and violently shoved me out of the room, slamming their door,"--and
sent me home, along the corridors, in a very scurvy humor! Thus, under a
skin of second settlement, there are two galvanic elements, getting ever
more galvanic, which no skin of settlement can prevent exploding before
long.

Explosion there accordingly was; most sad and dismal; which rang through
all the Court circles of Berlin; and, like a sound of hooting and of
weeping mixed, is audible over seas to this day. But let not the reader
insist on tracing the course of it henceforth. Klein, though faithful
and exact, is not a Pitaval; and we find in him errors of the press. The
acutest Actuary might spend weeks over these distracted Money-accounts,
and inconsistent Lists of Jewels bought and not bought; and would be
unreadable if successful. Let us say, The business catches fire at
this point; the Voltaire-Hirsch theatre is as if blown up into mere
whirlwinds of igneous rum and smoky darkness. Henceforth all plunges
into Lawsuit, into chaos of conflicting lies,--undecipherable, not worth
deciphering. Let us give what few glimpses of the thing are clearly
discernible at their successive dates, and leave the rest to picture
itself in the reader's fancy.

It appears, that Meeting of DECEMBER 24th, above alluded to, was
followed by another on Christmas-day, which proved the final one. Final
total explosion took place at this new meeting;--which, we find farther,
was at Chasot's Lodging (the CHAPEAU of Hanbury), who is now in Town,
like all the world, for Carnival. Hirsch does not directly venture on
naming Chasot: but by implication, by glimmers of evidence elsewhere,
one sufficiently discovers that it is he: Lieutenant-Colonel, King's
Friend, a man glorious, especially ever since Hohenfriedberg, and
that haul of the "sixty-seven standards" all at once. In the way of
Arbitration, Voltaire thinks Chasot might do something. In regard to
those 450 pounds worth of bought Jewels, there is not such a judge in
the world! Hirsch says: "Next morning [December 25th, morrow after that
jumbly Account, with probable slamming of the door, and still worse!],
Voltaire went to a Lieutenant-Colonel in the King's service; and ask
him to send for me." [Duvernet (Second), p. 172; Hirsch's Narrative
(in--Tantale,--p. 344).] This is Chasot; who knows these jewels well.
Duvernet,--who had talked a good deal with D'Arget, in latter years, and
alone of Frenchmen sometimes yields a true particle of feature in things
Prussian,--Duvernet tells us, these Jewels were once Chasot's own: given
him by a fond Duchess of Mecklenburg,--musical old Duchess, verging
towards sixty; HONI SOIT, my friend! What Hirsch gave Chasot for these
Jewels is not a doubtful quantity; and may throw conviction into Hirsch,
hopes Voltaire.

DECEMBER 25th, 1750. The interview at Chasot's was not lengthy, but it
was decisive. Hirsch never brings that Paris Bill; privately fixed,
on that point. Hirsch's claims, as we gradually unravel the intricate
mule-mind of him, rise very high indeed. "And as to the value of those
Jewels, and what I allowed YOU for them, Monsieur Chasot; that is no
rule: trade-profits, you know"--Nay, the mule intimates, as a last
shift, That perhaps they are not the same Jewels; that perhaps M. de
Voltaire has changed some of them! Whereupon the matter catches fire,
irretrievably explodes. M. de Voltaire's patience flies quite done; and,
fire-eyed fury now guiding, he springs upon the throat of Hirsch like a
cat-o'-mountain; clutches Hirsch by the windpipe; tumbles him about the
room: "Infamous canaille, do you know whom you have got to do with? That
it is in my power to stick you into a hole underground for the rest
of your life? Sirrah, I will ruin and annihilate you!"--and "tossed me
about the room with his fist on my throat," says Hirsch; "offering to
have pity nevertheless, if I would take back the Jewels, and return
all writings." [Narrative (in--Tantale--).] Eyes glancing like a
rattlesnake's, as we perceive; and such a phenomenon as Hirsch had not
expected, this Christmas! In short, the matter has here fairly exploded,
and is blazing aloft, as a mass of intricate fuliginous ruin, not to be
deciphered henceforth. Such a scene for Chasot on the Christmas-day at
Berlin! And we have got to




PART II. THE LAWSUIT ITSELF (30th December, 1750-18th and 26th February,
1751).

Hirsch slunk hurriedly home, uncertain whether dead or alive. Old
Hirsch, hearing of such explosion, considered his house and family
ruined; and, being old and feeble, took to bed upon it, threatening
to break his heart. Voltaire writes to Niece Denis, on the morrow; not
hinting at the Hirsch matter, far from that; but in uncommonly dreary
humor: "My splendor here, my glory, never was the like of it; MAIS,
MAIS," BUT, and ever again BUT, at each new item,--in fact, the humor of
a glorious Phoenix-Peacock suddenly douched and drenched in dirty water,
and feeling frost at hand! ["To Madame Denis" (lxxiv. 279, "Berlin
Palace, 26th December, 1750;"--and ib. 249, 257, &c. of other dates).]
Humor intelligible enough, when dates are compared.

Better than that, Voltaire is applying, on all points of the compass, to
Legal and Influential Persons, for help in a Court of Law. To Chancellor
Cocceji; to Jarriges (eminent Prussian Frenchman), President of Court;
to Maupertuis, who knows Jarriges, but "will not meddle in a bad
business;"--at last, even to dull reverend Formey, whom he had not
called on hitherto. Cocceji seems to have answered, to the effect, "Most
certainly: the Courts are wide open;"--but as to "help"! December
30th, the Suit, Voltaire VERSUS Hirsch, "comes to Protocol,"--that is,
Cocceji, Jarriges, Loper, three eminent men, have been named to try it;
and Herr Hofrath Bell, Advocate for Voltaire Plaintiff, hands in his
First Statement that day. Berlin resounds, we may fancy how! Rumor,
laughter and wonder are in all polite quarters; and continue, more or
less vivid, for above two months coming. Here is one direct glimpse of
Plaintiff, in this interim; which we will give, though the eyes are none
of the best: "The first visit I," Formey, "had from Voltaire was in the
afternoon of January 8th) 1751 [Suit begun ten days ago]. I had, at the
time, a large party of friends. Voltaire walked across the Apartment,
without looking at anybody; and, taking me by the hand, made me lead him
to a cabinet adjoining. His Lawsuit with a Jew was the matter on hand.
He talked to me at large about his Lawsuit, and with the greatest
vehemence; he wound up by asking me to speak to Law-President M. de
Jarriges (since Chancellor): I answered what was suitable;"--probably
did speak to Jarriges, but might as well have held my tongue. "Voltaire
then took his leave: stepping athwart the former Apartment with some
precipitation, he noticed my eldest little girl, then in her fourth
year, who was gazing at the diamonds on his Cross of the Order of
Merit. 'Bagatelles, bagatelles, MON ENFANT!' said he, and disappeared."
[Formey, i. 232.]

On New-Year's day, Friday, 1st January, 1751, Voltaire had legally
applied to Herr Minister von Bismark, for Warrant to arrest Hirsch, as
a person that will not give up Papers not belonging to him. Warrant was
granted, and Hirsch lodged in Limbo. Which worsens the state of poor old
Father Hirsch; threatening now really to die, of heart-break and other
causes. Hirsch Son, from the interior of Limbo, appeals to Bismark,
"Lord Chancellor Cocceji is seized of my Plea, your gracious
Lordship!"--"All the same," answers Bismark; "produce CAUTION, or you
can't get out." Hirsch produces caution; and gets out, after a day or
two;--and has been "brought to Protocol January 4th." No delay in this
Court: both parties, through their Advocates, are now brought to book;
the points they agree in will be sifted out, and laid on this side as
truth; what they differ in, left lying on that side, as a mixture of
lies to be operated on by farther processes and protocols.

We will not detail the Lawsuit;--what I chiefly admire in it is its
brevity. Cocceji has not reformed in vain. Good Advocates, none other
allowed; and no Advocate talks; he merely endeavors to think, see and
discover; holds his tongue if he can discover nothing: that doubtless
is one source of the brevity!--Many lies are stated by Hirsch, many by
Voltaire: but the Judges, without difficulty, shovel these aside; and
come step by step upon the truth. Hirsch says plainly, He was sent to
buy STEUER-SCHEINE at 35 per cent discount; Voltaire entirely denies
the Steuer-Notes; says, It was an affair of Peltries and Jewelries,
originating in loans of money to this ungrateful Jew. Which necessitates
much wriggling on the part of M. de Voltaire;--but he has himself
written in a Lawyer's Office, in his young days, and knows how to
twist a turn of expression. The Judges are not there to judge
about Steuer-Notes; but they give you to understand that Voltaire's
Peltry-and-Jewelry story is moonshine. Hirsch produces the Voltaire
Scraps of Writing, already known to our readers; Voltaire says,
"Mere extinct jottings; which Hirsch has furtively picked out of the
grate,"--or may be said to have picked; Papers annihilated by our
Bargain of December 16th, and which should have been in the grate, if
they were not; this felon never having kept his word in that respect.
Peltries and Jewelries, I say: he will not give me back that Paris
Bill which was protested; pays me the other 3,000 crowns (Draft of 650
pounds) in Jewels overvalued by half.--"Jewels furtively changed since
Plaintiff had them of me!" answers Hirsch;--and the steady Judges keep
their sieves going.

The only Documents produced by Voltaire are Two; of 19th DECEMBER and of
24th DECEMBER;--which the reader has not yet seen, but ought now to gain
some notion of, if possible. They affect once more, as that of December
16th had done, to be "Final Settlements" (or Final Settlement of 19th,
with CODICIL of 24th); and turn on confused Lists of Jewels, bought,
returned, re-bought (that "Topaz ring" torn from one's hand, a
conspicuous item), which no reader would have patience to understand,
except in the succinct form. Let all readers note them, however,--at
least the first of them, that of December 19th; especially the words we
mark in Italics, which have merited a sad place for IT in the history
of human sin and misery. Klein has given both Documents in engraved
fac-simile; we must help ourselves by simpler methods. Berlin, December
19th, 1750; Voltaire writes, Hirsch signs;--and the Italics are believed
to be words foisted in by M. de Voltaire, weeks after, while the Hirsch
pleadings were getting stringent! Read,--a very sad memorial of M. de
Voltaire,--

DOCUMENT FIFTH (in Voltaire's hand, written at two times; and the old
writing MENDED in parts, to suit the new!).--"FOR PAYMENT OF 3,000
THALERS BY ME DUE, I have sold to M. de Voltaire, at the price
costing by estimation and tax, with 2 per cent for my commission ["OR
GRATIFICATION," written above], the following Diamonds, taxed [blotted
into "TAXABLE"], as here adjoined; viz."--seven pieces of jewelry,
pendeloques, &c., with price affixed, among which is the violated
Topaz,--"the whole estimated by him ["him" crossed out, and "ME" written
over it], being 3,640 thalers. Whereupon, received from Monsieur de
Voltaire [what is very strange; not intelligible without study!] the sum
of 2,940 thalers, and he has given me back the Topaz, with 60 crowns for
my trouble.--Berlin, 19th December, 1750." (Hitherto in Voltaire's hand;
after which Hirsch writes:) "APROUVE, A. Hirschel." [Sic: that is always
his SIGNATURE; "Abraham HirschEL," so given by Klein, while Klein and
everybody CALL him Hirsch (STAG), as we have done,--if only to save a
syllable on the bad bargain.] And between these two lines ("... 1750"
and "APPROVED..."), there is crushed in, as afterthought, "VALUED BY
MYSELF [Hirsch's self], 2,940, ADD 60, IS 3,000." And, in fine, below
the Hirsch signature, on what may be called the bottom margin, there
is,--I think, avowedly Voltaire's and subsequent,--this: "N.B. that
Hirsch's valuing of all the jewels [present lot and former lot] is, by
real estimation, between twice and thrice too high;" of which, it is
hoped, your Lordships will take notice!

Was there ever seen such a Paper; one end of it contradicting the other?
Payment TO M. de Voltaire, and payment BY M. de Voltaire;--with other
blottings and foistings, which print and italics will not represent!
Hirsch denies he ever signed this Paper. Is not that your writing, then:
"APROUVE, A. Hirschel"?--"No!" and they convict him of falsity in that
respect: the signature IS his, but the Paper has been altered since he
signed it. That is what the poor dark mortal meant to express; and in
his mulish way, he has expressed into a falsity what was in itself a
truth. There is not, on candid examination of Klein's Fac-similes and
the other evidence, the smallest doubt but Voltaire altered, added and
intercalated, in his own privacy, those words which we have printed in
italics; TAXES changed into TAXABLES ("estimated at" into "estimable
at"), HIM for ME, and so on; and above all, the now first line of the
Paper, FOR PAYMENT OF 3,000 THALERS BY ME DUE, and in last line
the words VALUED BY MYSELF, &c., are palpable interpolations, sheer
falsifications, which Hirsch is made to continue signing after his back
is turned!

No fact is more certain; and few are sadder in the history of M. de
Voltaire. To that length has he been driven by stress of Fortune. Nay,
when the Judges, not hiding their surprise at the form of this Document,
asked, Will you swear it is all genuine? Voltaire answered, "Yes,
certainly!"--for what will a poor man not do in extreme stress of
Fortune? Hirsch, as a Jew, is not permitted to make oath, where a
Quasi-Christian will swear to the contrary, or he gladly would; and
might justly. The Judges, willing to prevent chance of perjury, did not
bring Voltaire to swearing, but contrived a way to justice without that.

FEBRUARY 18th, 1751, the Court arrives at a conclusion. Hirsch's
Diamonds, whatever may have been written or forged, are not, nor
were, worth more than their value, think the Judges. The Paris Bill is
admitted to be Voltaire's, not Hirsch's, continue they;--and if Hirsch
can prove that Voltaire has changed the Diamonds, not a likely fact,
let him do so. The rest does not concern us. And to that effect, on the
above day, runs their Sentence: "You, Hirsch, shall restore the Paris
Bill; mutual Papers to be all restored, or legally annihilated. Jewels
to be valued by sworn Experts, and paid for at that price. Hirsch, if he
can prove that the Jewels were changed, has liberty to try it, in a new
Action. Hirsch, for falsely denying his Signature, is fined ten thalers
(thirty shillings), such lie being a contempt of court, whatever more."

"Ha, fined, you Jew Villain!" hysterically shrieks Voltaire: "in the
wrong, weren't you, then; and fined thirty shillings?" hysterically
trying to believe, and make others believe, that he has come off
triumphant. "Beaten my Jew, haven't I?" says he to everybody, though
inwardly well enough aware how it stands, and that he is a Phoenix
douched, and has a tremor in the bones! Chancellor Cocceji was far
from thinking it triumphant to him. Here is a small Note of Cocceji's,
addressed to his two colleagues, Jarriges and Loper, which has been
found among the Law Papers:

"BERLIN, 20th FEBRUARY, 1751. The Herr President von Jarriges and
Privy-Councillor Loper are hereby officially requested to bring the
remainder of the Voltaire Sentence to its fulfilment: I am myself not
well, and can employ my time much better. The Herr von Voltaire has
given in a desperate Memorial (EIN DESPERATES MEMORIAL) to this purport:
'I swear that what is charged to me [believed of me] in the Sentence is
true; and now request to have the Jewels valued.' I have returned
him this Paper, with notice that it must be signed by an
Advocate.--COCCEJI." [Klein, 256.]

So wrote Chancellor Cocceji, on the Saturday, washing his hands of this
sorry business. Voltaire is ready to make desperate oath, if needful. We
said once, M. de Voltaire was not given to lying; far the reverse.
But yet, see, if you drive him into a corner with a sword at his
throat,--alas, yes, he will lie a little! Forgery lay still less in his
habits; but he can do a stroke that way, too (one stroke, unique in his
life, I do believe), if a wild boar, with frothy tusks, is upon him.
Tell it not in Gath,--except for scientific purposes! And be judicial,
arithmetical, in passing sentence on it; not shrieky, mobbish, and
flying off into the Infinite!

Berlin, of course, is loud on these matters. "The man whom the King
delighted to honor, this is he, then!" King Friedrich has quitted Town,
some while ago; returned to Potsdam "January 30th." Glad enough,
I suppose, to be out of all this unmusical blowing of catcalls and
indecent exposure. To Voltaire he has taken no notice; silently leaves
Voltaire, in his nook of the Berlin Schloss, till the foul business get
done. "VOLTAIRE FILOUTE LES JUIFS (picks Jew pockets)," writes he once
to Wilhelmina: "will get out of it by some GAMBADE (summerset),"
writes he another time; "but" ["31st December, 1750" (--OEuvres de
Frederic,--xxvii, i. 198); "3d February, 1751" (ib. 201).]--And takes
the matter with boundless contempt, doubtless with some vexation, but
with the minimum of noise, as a Royal gentleman might. Jew Hirsch is
busy preparing for his new desperate Action; getting together proof that
the Jewels have been changed. In proof Jew Hirsch will be weak; but in
pleading, in public pamphlets, and keeping a winged Apollo fluttering
disastrously in such a mud-bath, Jew Hirsch will be strong. Voltaire,
"out of magnanimous pity to him," consents next week to an Agreement.
Agreement is signed on Thursday, 26th February, 1751:--Papers all to
be returned, Jewels nearly all, except one or two, paid at Hirsch's own
price. Whereby, on the whole, as Klein computes, Voltaire lost about 150
pounds;--elsewhere I have seen it computed at 187 pounds: not the least
matter which. Old Hirsch has died in the interim ("Of broken heart!"
blubbers the Son); day not known.

And, on these terms, Voltaire gets out of the business; glad to close
the intolerable rumor, at some cost of money. For all tongues were
wagging; and, in defect of a TIMES Newspaper, it appears, there had
Pamphlets come out; printed Satires, bound or in broadside;--sapid,
exhilarative, for a season, and interesting to the idle mind. Of which,
TANTALE EN PROCES may still, for the sake of that PREFACE to it, be
considered to have an obscure existence. And such, reduced to its
authenticities, was the Adventure of the Steuer-Notes. A very bad
Adventure indeed; unspeakably the worst that Voltaire ever tried, who
had such talent in the finance line. On which poor History is really
ashamed to have spent so much time; sorting it into clearness, in the
disgust and sorrow of her soul. But perhaps it needed to be done. Let
us hope, at least, it may not now need to be done again. [Besides the
KLEIN, the TANTALE EN PROCES and the Voltaire LETTERS cited above, there
is (in--OEuvres de Voltaire,--lxiv. pp. 61-106, as SUPPLEMENT there),
written off-hand, in the very thick of the Hirsch Affair, a considerable
set of NOTES TO D'ARGET, which might have been still more elucidative;
but are, in their present dateless topsy-turvied condition; a very
wonder of confusion to the studious reader!]

This is the FIRST ACT of Voltaire's Tragic-Farce at the Court of Berlin:
readers may conceive to what a bleared frost-bitten condition it
has reduced the first Favonian efflorescence there. He considerably
recovered in the SECOND ACT, such the indelible charm of the Voltaire
genius to Friedrich. But it is well known, the First Act rules all
the others; and here, accordingly, the Third Act failed not to prove
tragical. Out of First Act into Second the following EXTRACTS OF
CORRESPONDENCE will guide the reader, without commentary of ours.

Voltaire, left languishing at Berlin, has fallen sick, now that all is
over;--no doubt, in part really sick, the unfortunate Phoenix-Peafowl,
with such a tremor in his bones;--and would fain be near Friedrich and
warmth again; fain persuade the outside world that all is sunshine with
him. Voltaire's Letters to Friedrich, if he wrote any, in this Jew time,
are lost; here are Friedrich's Answers to Two,--one lost, which had
been written from Berlin AFTER the Jew affair was out of Court; and to
another (not lost) after the Jew affair was done.


1. KING FRIEDRICH TO VOLTAIRE AT BERLIN.

"POTSDAM, 24th February, 1751. "I was glad to receive you in my house; I
esteemed your genius, your talents and acquirements; and I had reason to
think that a man of your age, wearied with fencing against Authors, and
exposing himself to the storm, came hither to take refuge as in a safe
harbor.

"But, on arriving, you exacted of me, in a rather singular manner, Not
to take Freron to write me news from Paris; and I had the weakness, or
the complaisance, to grant you this, though it is not for you to decide
what persons I shall take into my service. D'Arnaud had faults towards
you; a generous man would have pardoned them; a vindictive man hunts
down those whom he takes to hating. In a word, though to me D'Arnaud had
done nothing, it was on your account that he had to go. You were
with the Russian Minister, speaking of things you had no concern with
[Russian Excellency Gross, off home lately, in sudden dudgeon, like an
angry sky-rocket, nobody can guess why! Adelung, vii. 133 (about 1st
December, 1750).]--and it was thought I had given you Commission." "You
have had the most villanous affair in the world with a Jew. It has made
a frightful scandal all over Town. And that Steuer-Schein business is so
well known in Saxony, that they have made grievous complaints of it to
me.

"For my own share, I have preserved peace in my house till your
arrival: and I warn you, that if you have the passion of intriguing and
caballing, you have applied to the wrong hand. I like peaceable composed
people; who do not put into their conduct the violent passions of
Tragedy. In case you can resolve to live like a Philosopher, I shall
be glad to see you; but if you abandon yourself to all the violences of
your passions, and get into quarrels with all the world, you will do me
no good by coming hither, and you may as well stay in Berlin." [Preuss,
xxii. 262 (WANTING in the French Editions).]--F.

To which Voltaire sighing pathetically in response, "Wrong, ah yes, your
Majesty;--and sick to death" (see farther down),--here is Friedrich's
Second in Answer:--


2. FRIEDRICH TO VOLTAIRE AGAIN.

"POTSDAM, 28th February, 1751. "If you wish to come hither, you can do
so. I hear nothing of Lawsuits, not even of yours. Since you have gained
it, I congratulate you; and I am glad that this scurvy affair is done.
I hope you will have no more quarrels, neither with the OLD nor with the
New TESTAMENT. Such worryings (CES SORTES DE COMPROMIS) leave their mark
on a man; and with the talents of the finest genius in France, you will
not cover the stains which this conduct would fasten on your reputation
in the long-run. A Bookseller Gosse [read JORE, your Majesty? Nobody
ever heard of Gosse as an extant quantity: Jore, of Rouen, you mean, and
his celebrated Lawsuit, about printing the HENRIADE, or I know not what,
long since] [Unbounded details on the Jore Case, and from 1731 to 1738
continual LETTERS on it, in--OEuvres de Voltaire;----came to a head
in 1736 (ib. lxix. 375); Jore penitent, 1738 (ib. i. 262), &c. &c.], a
Bookseller Jore, an Opera Fiddler [poor Travenol, wrong dog pincered by
the ear], and a Jeweller Jew, these are, of a surety, names which in
no sort of business ought to appear by the side of yours. I write this
Letter with the rough common-sense of a German, who speaks what he
thinks, without employing equivocal terms, and loose assuagements which
disfigure the truth: it is for you to profit by it.--F." [--OEuvres de
Frederic,--xxii. 265.]

So that Voltaire will have to languish: "Wrong, yes;--and sick, nigh
dead, your Majesty! Ah, could not one get to some Country Lodge near
you, 'the MARQUISAT' for instance? Live silent there, and see your face
sometimes?" [In--OEuvres de Frederic--(xxii. 259-261, 263-266) are Four
lamenting and repenting, wheedling and ultimately whining, LETTERS from
Voltaire, none of them dated, which have much about "my dreadful state
of health," my passion" for reposing in that MARQUISAT," &c.;--to one
of which Four, or perhaps to the whole together, the above No. 2 of
Friedrich seems to have been Answer. Of that indisputable "MARQUISAT" no
Nicolai says a word; even careful Preuss passes "Gosse" and it with shut
lips.] Languishing very much;--gives cosy little dinners, however. Here
are two other Excerpts; and these will suffice:--

VOLTAIRE TO FORMEY ("BERLIN PALACE;" DATABLE, FIRST DAYS OF MARCH):
"Will you, Monsieur, come and eat the King's roast meat (ROT DU ROI),
to-day, Thursday, at two o'clock, in a philosophic, warm and comfortable
manner (PHILOSOPHIQUEMENT ET CHAUDEMENT ET DOUCEMENT). A couple of
philosophers, without being courtiers, may dine in the Palace of a
Philosopher-King: I should even take the liberty of sending one of his
Majesty's Carriages for you,-at two precise. After dinner, you would be
at hand for your Academy meeting." [Formey, i. 234.]--V. How cosy!--And
King Friedrich has relented, too; grants me the Marquisat; can refuse me
nothing!

VOLTAIRE TO D'ARGENTAL (POTSDAM, 15th MARCH 1751).... "I could not
accompany our Chamberlain [Von Ammon, gone as Envoy to Paris, on a small
matter ["Commercial Treaty;" which he got done. See LONGCHAMP, if any
one is curious otherwise about this Gentleman: "D'Hamon" they call
him, and sometimes "DAMON",--to whom Niece Denis wanted to be Phyllis,
according to Longchamp.]], through the muds and the snows,--where I
should have been buried; I was ill," and had to go to the MARQUISAT.
"D'Arnaud and the pack of Scribblers would have been too glad. D'Arnaud,
animated with the true love of glory, and not yet grown sufficiently
illustrious by his own immortal Works, has done ONE of that kind,"--by
his behavior here. Has behaved to me--oh, like a miserable, envious,
intriguing, lying little scoundrel; and made Berlin too hot for him:
seduced Tinois my Clerk, stole bits of the Pucelle (brief SIGHT of bits,
for Prince Henri's sake) to ruin me.

"D'Arnaud sent his lies to Freron for the Paris meridian [that is his
real crime]; delightful news from canaille to canaille: 'How Voltaire
had lost a great Lawsuit, respectable Jew Banker cheated by Voltaire;
that Voltaire was disgraced by the King,' who of course loves Jews;
'that Voltaire was ruined; was ill; nay at last, that Voltaire was
dead.'" To the joy of Freron, and the scoundrels that are printing one's
PUCELLE. "Voltaire is still in life, however, my angels; and the King
has been so good to me in my sickness, I should be the ungratefulest
of men if I didn't still pass some months with him. When he left Berlin
[30th January, six weeks ago], and I was too ill to follow him, I was
the sole animal of my species whom he lodged in his Palace there [what
a beautiful bit of color to lay on!]--He left me equipages, cooks ET
CETERA; and his mules and horses carted out my temporary furniture
(MEUBLES DE PASSADE) to a delicious House of his, close by Potsdam
[MARQUISAT to wit, where I now stretch myself at ease; Niece Denis
coming to live with me there,--talks of coming, if my angels knew
it],--and he has reserved for me a charming apartment in his Palace of
Potsdam, where I pass a part of the week.

"And, on close view, I still admire this Unique Genius; and he deigns to
communicate himself to me;--and if I were not 300 leagues from you, and
had a little health, I should be the happiest of men." [--OEuvres de
Voltaire,--lxxiv. 320.]... Oh, my angels--

And, in short, better or worse, my SECOND ACT is begun, as you
perceive!--And certain readers will be apt to look in again, before all
is over.




Chapter VIII. OST-FRIESLAND AND THE SHIPPING INTERESTS.

Two Foreign Events, following on the heel of the Hirsch Lawsuit, were of
interest to our Berlin friends, though not now of much to us or anybody.
April 5th, 1751, the old King of Sweden, Landgraf of Hessen-Cassel,
died; whereby not only our friend Wilhelm, the managing Landgraf,
becomes Landgraf indeed (if he should ever turn up on us again), but
Princess Ulrique is henceforth Queen of Sweden, her Husband the
new King. No doubt a welcome event to Princess Ulrique, the high
brave-minded Lady; but which proved intrinsically an empty one, not to
say worse than empty, to herself and her friends, in times following.
Friedrich's connection with Sweden, which he had been tightening lately
by a Treaty of Alliance, came in the long-run to nothing for him, on the
Swedish side; and on the Russian has already created umbrages, kindled
abstruse suspicions, indignations,--Russian Excellency Gross, abruptly,
at Berlin, demanding horses, not long since, and posting home without
other leave-taking, to the surprise of mankind;--Russian Czarina
evidently in the sullens against Friedrich, this long while; dull
impenetrable clouds of anger lodging yonder, boding him no good. All
which the Accession of Queen Ulrique will rather tend to aggravate than
otherwise. [Adelung, vii. 205 (Accession of Adolf Friedrich); ib. 133
(Gross's sudden Departure).]

The Second Foreign Event is English, about a week prior in date, and
is of still less moment: March 31st, 1751, Prince Fred, the Royal
Heir-Apparent, has suddenly died. Had been ill, more or less, for an
eight days past; was now thought better, though "still coughing, and
bringing up phlegm,"--when, on "Wednesday night between nine and ten,"
in some lengthier fit of that kind, he clapt his hand on his breast; and
the terrified valet heard him say, "JE SUIS MORT!"--and before his
poor Wife could run forward with a light, he lay verily dead. [Walpole,
GEORGE THE SECOND, i. 71.] The Rising Sun in England is vanished,
then. Yes; and with him his MOONS, and considerable moony workings, and
slushings hither and thither, which they have occasioned, in the muddy
tide-currents of that Constitutional Country. Without interest to us
here; or indeed elsewhere,--except perhaps that our dear Wilhelmina
would hear of it; and have her sad reflections and reminiscences
awakened by it; sad and many-voiced, perhaps of an almost doleful
nature, being on a sick-bed at this time, poor Lady. She quitted Berlin
months ago, as we observed,--her farewell Letter to Friedrich, written
from the first stage homewards, and melodious as the voice of sorrowful
true hearts to us and him, dates "November 24th," just while Voltaire
(whom she always likes, and in a beautiful way protects, "FRERE
VOLTAIRE," as she calls him) was despatching Hirsch on that ill-omened
Predatory STEUER-Mission. Her Brother is in real alarm for Wilhelmina,
about this time; sending out Cothenius his chief Doctor, and the like:
but our dear Princess re-emerges from her eclipse; and we shall see her
again, several times, if we be lucky.

And so poor Fred is ended;--and sulky people ask, in their cruel way,
"Why not?" A poor dissolute flabby fellow-creature; with a sad destiny,
and a sadly conspicuous too. Could write Madrigals; be set to make
Opposition cabals. Read this sudden Epitaph in doggerel; an uncommonly
successful Piece of its kind; which is now his main monument with
posterity. The "Brother" (hero of Culloden), the "Sister" (Amelia,
our Friedrich's first love, now growing gossipy and spiteful, poor
Princess), are old friends:--

    "Here lies Prince Fred,
     Who was alive and is dead:
     Had it been his Father,
     I had much rather;
     Had it been his Brother,
     Sooner than any other;


     Had it been his Sister,
     There's no one would have missed her;
     Had it been his whole generation,
     Best of all for the Nation:
     But since it's only Fred,
     There's no more to be said." [Walpole, i. 436.]




FRIEDRIAH VISITS OST-FRIESLAND.

A thing of more importance to us, two months after that catastrophe in
London, is Friedrich's first Visit to Ost-Friesland. May 31st, having
done his Berlin-Potsdam Reviews and other current affairs, Friedrich
sets out on this Excursion. With Ost-Friesland for goal, but much
business by the way. Towards Magdeburg, and a short visit to the
Brunswick Kindred, first of all. There is much reviewing in the
Magdeburg quarter, and thereafter in the Wesel; and reviewing and
visiting all along: through Minden, Bielfeld, Lingen: not till July
13th does he cross the Ost-Friesland Border, and enter Embden. His
three Brothers, and Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick, were with him.
[--Helden-Geschichte,--iii. 506; Seyfarth, ii. 145; Rodenbeck, i. 216
(who gives a foolish German myth, of Voltaire's being passed off for the
King's Baboon, &c.; Voltaire not being there at all).] On catching view
of Ost-Friesland Border, see, on the Border-Line, what an Arch got
on its feet: Triumphal Arch, of frondent ornaments, inscriptions and
insignia; "of quite extraordinary magnificence;" Arch which "sets
every one into the agreeablest admiration." Above a hundred such
Arches spanned the road at different points; multitudinous enthusiasm
reverently escorting, "more than 20,000" by count: till we enter Embden;
where all is cannon-salvo, and three-times-three; the thunder-shots
continuing, "above 2,000 of them from the walls, not to speak of
response from the ships in harbor." Embden glad enough, as would appear,
and Ost-Friesland glad enough, to see their new King. July 13th, 1751;
after waiting above six years.

Next day, his Majesty gave audience to the new "Asiatic Shipping
Company" (of which anon), to the Stande, and Magisterial persons;--with
many questions, I doubt not, about your new embankments, new
improvements, prospects; there being much procedure that way, in all
manner of kinds, since the new Dynasty came in, now six years ago.
Embankments on your River, wide spaces changed from ooze to meadow; on
the Dollart still more, which has lain 500 years hidden from the
sun. Does any reader know the Dollart? Ost-Friesland has awakened to
wonderful new industries within these six years; urged and guided by
the new King, who has great things in view for it, besides what are in
actual progress.

That of dikes, sea-embankments, for example; to Ost-Friesland, as to
Holland, they are the first condition of existence; and, in the past
times, of extreme Parliamentary vitality, have been slipping a good deal
out of repair. Ems River, in those flat rainy countries, has ploughed
out for itself a very wide embouchure, as boundary between Groningen
and Ost-Friesland. Muddy Ems, bickering with the German Ocean, does not
forget to act, if Parliamentary Commissioners do. These dikes, 120
miles of dike, mainly along both banks of this muddy Ems River, are now
water-tight again, to the comfort of flax and clover: and this is but
one item of the diking now on foot. Readers do not know the Dollart,
that uppermost round gulf, not far from Embden itself, in the waste
embouchure of Ems with its continents of mud and tide. Five hundred
years ago, that ugly whirl of muddy surf, 100 square miles in area, was
a fruitful field, "50 Villages upon it, one Town, several Monasteries
and 50,000 souls:" till on Christmas midnight A.D. 1277, the winds and
the storm-rains having got to their height, Ocean and Ems did, "about
midnight," undermine the place, folded it over like a friable bedquilt
or monstrous doomed griddle-cake, and swallowed it all away. Most of
it, they say, that night, the whole of it within ten years coming;
[Busching,--Erdbeschreibung,--v. 845, 846; Preuss, i. 308, 309.]--and
there it has hung, like an unlovely GOITRE at the throat of Embden,
ever since. One little dot of an Island, with six houses on it, near
the Embden shore, is all that is left. Where probably his Majesty landed
(July 15th, being in a Yacht that day); but did not see, afar off, the
"sunk steeple-top," which is fabled to be visible at low-water.

Upon this Dollart itself there is now to be diking tried; King's
Domain-Kammer showing the example. Which Official Body did accordingly
(without Blue-Books, but in good working case otherwise) break
ground, few months hence; and victoriously achieved a POLDER, or Diked
Territory, "worth about 2,000 pounds annually;" "which, in 1756, was
sold to the STANDE;" at twenty-five years purchase, let us say, or for
50,000 pounds. An example of a convincing nature; which many others, and
ever others, have followed since; to gradual considerable diminution of
the Dollart, and relief of Ost-Friesland on this side. Furtherance of
these things is much a concern of Friedrich's. The second day after his
arrival, those audiences and ceremonials done, Friedrich and suite got
on board a Yacht, and sailed about all over this Dollart, twenty miles
out to sea; dined on board; and would have, if the weather was bright
(which I hope), a pleasantly edifying day. The harbor is much in need
of dredging, the building docks considerably in disrepair; but shall
be refitted if this King live and prosper. He has declared Embden a
"Free-Haven," inviting trade to it from all peaceable Nations;--and
readers do not know (though Sir Jonas Hanway and the jealous mercantile
world well did) what magnificent Shipping Companies and Sea-Enterprises,
of his devising, are afoot there. Of which, one word, and no second
shall follow:

"September 1st, 1750, those Carrousel gayeties scarce done, 'The Asiatic
Trading Company' stept formally into existence; Embden the Head-quarters
of it; [Patent, or FREYHEITS-BRIEF in--Helden-Geschichte,--iii. 457,
458.] chief Manager a Ritter De la Touche; one of the Directors
our fantastic Bielfeld, thus turned to practical value. A Company
patronized, in all ways, by the King; but, for the rest, founded, not on
his money; founded on voluntary shares, which, to the regret of Hanway
and others, have had much popularity in commercial circles. Will trade
to China. A thing looked at with umbrage by the English, by the Dutch.
A shame that English people should encourage such schemes, says
Hanway. Which nevertheless many Dutch and many English private persons
do,--among the latter, one English Lady (name unknown, but I always
suspect 'Miss Barbara Wyndham, of the College, Salisbury'), concerning
whom there will be honorable notice by and by.

"At the time of Friedrich's visit, the Asiatic Company is in full vogue;
making ready its first ship for Canton. First ship, KONIG VON PREUSSEN
(tons burden not given), actually sailed 17th February next (1752); and
was followed by a second, named TOWN OF EMBDEN, on the 19th of September
following; both of which prosperously reached Canton, and prosperously
returned with cargoes of satisfactory profit. The first of them, KONIG
VON PREUSSEN, had been boarded in the Downs by an English Captain
Thomson and his Frigate, and detained some days,--till Thomson 'took
Seven English seamen out of her.' 'Act of Parliament, express!' said
his Grace of Newcastle. Which done, Thomson found that the English
jealousies would have to hold their hand; no farther, whatever one's
wishes may be.

"Nay within a year hence, January 24th, 1753, Friedrich founded another
Company for India: 'BENGALISCHE HANDELS-GESELLSCHAFT;' which also sent
out its pair of ships, perhaps oftener than once; and pointed, as the
other was doing, to wide fields of enterprise, for some time. But
luck was wanting. And, 'in part, mismanagement,' and, in whole, the
Seven-Years War put an end to both Companies before long. Friedrich is
full of these thoughts, among his other Industrialisms; and never quits
them for discouragement, but tries again, when the obstacles cease to
be insuperable. Ever since the acquisition of Ost-Friesland, the
furtherance of Sea-Commerce had been one of Friedrich's chosen objects.
'Let us carry our own goods at least, Silesian linens, Memel timbers,
stock-fish; what need of the Dutch to do it?' And in many branches his
progress had been remarkable,--especially in this carrying trade, while
the War lasted, and crippled all Anti-English belligerents. Upon which,
indeed, and the conduct of the English Privateers to him, there is a
Controversy going on with the English Court in those years (began
in 1747), most distressful to his Grace of Newcastle;--which in part
explains those stingy procedures of Captain Thomson ('Home, you
seven English sailors!') when the first Canton ship put to sea. That
Controversy is by no means ended after three years, but on the contrary,
after two years more, comes to a crisis quite shocking to his Grace
of Newcastle, and defying all solution on his Grace's side,--the other
Party, after such delays, five years waiting, having settled it for
himself!" Of which, were the crisis come, we will give some account.

On the third day of his Visit, Friedrich drove to Aurich, the seat
of Government, and official little capital of Ost-Friesland; where
triumphal arches, joyful reverences, concourses, demonstrations,
sumptuous Dinner one item, awaited his Majesty: I know not if, in the
way thither or back, he passed those "Three huge Oaks [or the rotted
stems or roots of them] under which the Ancient Frisians, Lords of all
between Weser and Rhine, were wont to assemble in Parliament" (WITHOUT
Fourth Estate, or any Eloquence except of the purely Business sort),--or
what his thoughts on the late Ost-Friesland Bandbox Parliaments may
have been! He returned to Embden that night; and on the morrow started
homewards; we may fancy, tolerably pleased with what he had seen.

"King Friedrich's main Objects of Pursuit in this Period," says a
certain Author, whom we often follow, "I define as being Three. 1.
Reform of the Law; 2. Furtherance of Husbandry and Industry in all
kinds, especially of Shipping from Embden; 3. Improvement of his own
Domesticities and Household Enjoyments,"--renewal of the Reinsberg
Program, in short.

"In the First of these objects," continues he, "King Friedrich's success
was very considerable, and got him great fame in the world. In his
Second head of efforts, that of improving the Industries and Husbandries
among his People, his success, though less noised of in foreign parts,
was to the near observer still more remarkable. A perennial business
with him, this; which, even in the time of War, he never neglects; and
which springs out like a stemmed flood, whenever Peace leaves him free
for it. His labors by all methods to awaken new branches of industry,
to cherish and further the old, are incessant, manifold, unwearied; and
will surprise the uninstructed reader, when he comes to study them.
An airy, poetizing, bantering, lightly brilliant King, supposed to be
serious mainly in things of War, how is he moiling and toiling, like
an ever-vigilant Land-Steward, like the most industrious City Merchant,
hardest-working Merchant's Clerk, to increase his industrial Capital by
any the smallest item!

"One day, these things will deserve to be studied to the bottom; and to
be set forth, by writing hands that are competent, for the instruction
and example of Workers,--that is to say, of all men, Kings most of all,
when there are again Kings. At present, I can only say they astonish me,
and put me to shame: the unresting diligence displayed in them, and the
immense sum-total of them,--what man, in any the noblest pursuit, can
say that he has stood to it, six-and-forty years long, in the style of
this man? Nor did the harvest fail; slow sure harvest, which sufficed
a patient Friedrich in his own day; harvest now, in our day, visible to
everybody: in a Prussia all shooting into manufactures, into commerces,
opulences,--I only hope, not TOO fast, and on more solid terms than are
universal at present! Those things might be didactic, truly, in various
points, to this Generation; and worth looking back upon, from its
high LAISSEZ-FAIRE altitudes, its triumphant Scrip-transactions and
continents of gold-nuggets,--pleasing, it doubts not, to all the gods.
To write well of what is called 'Political Economy' (meaning thereby
increase of money's-worth) is reckoned meritorious, and our nearest
approach to the rational sublime. But to accomplish said increase in
a high and indisputable degree; and indisputably very much by your own
endeavors wisely regulating those of others, does not that approach
still nearer the sublime?

"To prevent disappointment, I ought to add that Friedrich is the reverse
of orthodox in 'Political Economy;' that he had not faith in Free-Trade,
but the reverse;--nor had ever heard of those ultimate Evangels,
unlimited Competition, fair Start, and perfervid Race by all the world
(towards 'CHEAP-AND-NASTY,' as the likeliest winning-post for all the
world), which have since been vouchsafed us. Probably in the world there
was never less of a Free-Trader! Constraint, regulation, encouragement,
discouragement, reward, punishment; these he never doubted were the
method, and that government was good everywhere if wise, bad only if not
wise. And sure enough these methods, where human justice and the earnest
sense and insight of a Friedrich preside over them, have results, which
differ notably from opposite cases that can be imagined! The desperate
notion of giving up government altogether, as a relief from human
blockheadism in your governors, and their want even of a wish to be just
or wise, had not entered into the thoughts of Friedrich; nor driven
him upon trying to believe that such, in regard to any Human Interest
whatever, was, or could be except for a little while in extremely
developed cases, the true way of managing it. How disgusting,
accordingly, is the Prussia of Friedrich to a Hanbury Williams; who has
bad eyes and dirty spectacles, and hates Friedrich: how singular and
lamentable to a Mirabeau Junior, who has good eyes, and loves him!
No knave, no impertinent blockhead even, can follow his own beautiful
devices here; but is instantly had up, or comes upon a turnpike strictly
shut for him. 'Was the like ever heard of?' snarls Hanbury furiously (as
an angry dog might, in a labyrinth it sees not the least use for): 'What
unspeakable want of liberty!'--and reads to you as if he were lying
outright; but generally is not, only exaggerating, tumbling upside down,
to a furious degree; knocking against the labyrinth HE sees not the
least use for. Mirabeau's Gospel of Free-Trade, preached in 1788,
[MONARCHIE PRUSSIENNE he calls it (A LONDRES, privately Paris, 1788),
8 vols. 8vo; which is a Dead-Sea of Statistics, compiled by industrious
Major Mauvillon, with this fresh current of a "Gospel" shining through
it, very fresh and brisk, of few yards breadth;--dedicated to Papa, the
true PROTevangelist of the thing.]--a comparatively recent Performance,
though now some seventy or eighty years the senior of an English
(unconscious) Fac-simile, which we have all had the pleasure of
knowing,--will fall to be noticed afterwards [not by this Editor, we
hope!]

"Many of Friedrich's restrictive notions,--as that of watching with such
anxiety that 'money' (gold or silver coin) be not carried out of the
Country,--will be found mistakes, not in orthodox Dismal Science as now
taught, but in the nature of things; and indeed the Dismal Science will
generally excommunicate them in the lump,--too. heedless that Fact has
conspicuously vindicated the general sum-total of them, and declared it
to be much truer than it seems to the Dismal Science. Dismal Science
(if that were important to me) takes insufficient heed, and does not
discriminate between times past and times present, times here and times
there."

Certain it is, King Friedrich's success in National Husbandry was very
great. The details of the very many new Manufactures, new successful
ever-spreading Enterprises, fostered into existence by Friedrich; his
Canal-makings, Road-makings, Bog-drainings, Colonizings and unwearied
endeavorings in that kind, will require a Technical Philosopher one day;
and will well reward such study, and trouble of recording in a human
manner; but must lie massed up in mere outline on the present occasion.
Friedrich, as Land-Father, Shepherd of the People, was great on the
Husbandry side also; and we are to conceive him as a man of excellent
practical sense, doing unweariedly his best in that kind, all his life
long. Alone among modern Kings; his late Father the one exception; and
even his Father hardly surpassing him in that particular.

In regard to Embden and the Shipping interests, Ost-Friesland awakened
very ardent speculations, which were a novelty in Prussian affairs;
nothing of Foreign Trade, except into the limited Baltic, had been heard
of there since the Great Elector's time. The Great Elector had ships,
Forts on the Coast of Africa; and tried hard for Atlantic Trade,--out of
this same Embden; where, being summoned to protect in the troubles, he
had got some footing as Contingent Heir withal, and kept a "Prussian
Battalion" a good while. And now, on much fairer terms, not less
diligently turned to account, it is his Great-Grandson's turn.
Friedrich's successes in this department, the rather as Embden and
Ost-Friesland have in our time ceased to be Prussian, are not much worth
speaking of; but they connect themselves with some points still slightly
memorable to us. How, for example, his vigilantes and endeavors on this
score brought him into rubbings, not collisions, but jealousies and
gratings, with the English and Dutch, the reader will see anon.

Law-reform is gloriously prosperous; Husbandry the like, and Shipping
Interest itself as yet. But in the Third grand Head, that of realizing
the Reinsberg Program, beautifying his Domesticities, and bringing his
own Hearth and Household nearer the Ideal, Friedrich was nothing like
so successful; in fact had no success at all. That flattering Reinsberg
Program, it is singular how Friedrich cannot help trying it by every
new chance, nor cast the notion out of him that there must be a kind
of Muses'-Heaven realizable on Earth! That is the Biographic Phenomenon
which has survived of those Years; and to that we will almost
exclusively address ourselves, on behalf of ingenuous readers.




Chapter IX.--SECOND ACT OF THE VOLTAIRE VISIT.

Voltaire's Visit lasted, in all, about Thirty-two Months; and is
divisible into Three Acts or Stages. The first we have seen: how
it commenced in brightness as of the sun, and ended, by that Hirsch
business, in whirlwinds of smoke and soot,--Voltaire retiring, on his
passionate prayer, to that silent Country-house which he calls the
Marquisat; there to lie in hospital, and wash himself a little, and let
the skies wash themselves.

The Hirsch business having blown over, as all things do, Voltaire
resumed his place among the Court-Planets, and did his revolutions;
striving to forget that there ever was a Hirsch, or a soot-explosion of
that nature. In words nobody reminded him of it, the King least of all:
and by degrees matters were again tolerably glorious, and all might have
gone well enough; though the primal perfect splendor, such fuliginous
reminiscence being ineffaceable, never could be quite re-attained. The
diamond Cross of Merit, the Chamberlain gold Key, hung bright upon the
man; a man the admired of men. He had work to do: work of his own which
he reckoned priceless (that immortal SIECLE DE LOUIS QUATORZE; which
he stood by, and honestly did, while here; the one fixed axis in those
fooleries and whirlings of his);--work for the King, "two hours,
one hour, a day," which the King reckoned priceless in its sort. For
Friedrich himself Voltaire has, with touches of real love coming out
now and then, a very sincere admiration mixed with fear; and delights
in shining to him, and being well with him, as the greatest pleasure now
left in life. Besides the King, he had society enough, French in type,
and brilliant enough: plenty of society; or, at his wish, what was still
better, none at all. He was bedded, boarded, lodged, as if beneficent
fairies had done it for him; and for all these things no price asked,
you might say, but that he would not throw himself out of window! Had
the man been wise--But he was not wise. He had, if no big gloomy devil
in him among the bright angels that were there, a multitude of ravening
tumultuary imps, or little devils very ILL-CHAINED; and was lodged,
he and his restless little devils, in a skin far too thin for him and
them!--

Reckoning up the matter, one cannot find that Voltaire ever could have
been a blessing at Berlin, either for Friedrich or himself; and it is to
be owned that Friedrich was not wise in so longing for him, or clasping
him so frankly in his arms. As Friedrich, by this time, probably begins
to discover;--though indeed to Friedrich the thing is of finite moment;
by no means of infinite, as it was to Voltaire. "At worst, nothing but
a little money thrown away!" thinks Friedrich: "Sure enough, this is a
strange Trismegistus, this of mine: star fire-work shall we call him, or
terrestrial smoke-and-soot work? But one can fence oneself against the
blind vagaries of the man; and get a great deal of good by him, in the
lucid intervals." To Voltaire himself the position is most agitating;
but then its glories, were there nothing more! Besides he is always
thinking to quit it shortly; which is a great sedative in troubles.
What with intermittencies (safe hidings in one's MARQUISAT, or vacant
interlunar cave), with alternations of offence and reconcilement; what
with occasional actual flights to Paris (whitherward Voltaire is always
busy to keep a postern open; and of which there is frequent talk, and
almost continual thought, all along), flights to be called "visits,"
and privately intending to be final, but never proving so,--the
Voltaire-Friedrich relation, if left to itself, might perhaps long have
staggered about, and not ended as it did.

But, alas, no relation can be left to itself in this world,--especially
if you have a porous skin! There were other French here, as well as
Voltaire, revolving in the Court-circle; and that, beyond all others,
proved the fatal circumstance to him. "NE SAVEZ-VOUS PAS, Don't you
know," said he to Chancellor Jarriges one day, "that when there are two
Frenchmen in a Foreign Court or Country, one of them must die (FAUT QUE
L'UN DES DEUX PERISSE)?" [Seyfarth, ii. 191; &c. &c.] Which shocked the
mind of Jarriges; but had a kind of truth, too. Jew Hirsch, run into for
low smuggling purposes, had been a Cape of Storms, difficult to weather;
but the continual leeshore were those French,--with a heavy gale on, and
one of the rashest pilots! He did strike the breakers there, at last;
and it is well known, total shipwreck was the issue. Our Second Act,
holding out dubiously, in continual perils, till Autumn, 1752, will have
to pass then into a Third of darker complexion, and into a Catastrophe
very dark indeed.

Catastrophe which, by farther ill accident, proved noisy in the extreme;
producing world-wide shrieks from the one party, stone-silence from the
other; which were answered by unlimited hooting, catcalling and haha-ing
from all parts of the World-Theatre, upon both the shrieky and the
silent party; catcalling not fallen quite dead to this day. To Friedrich
the catcalling was not momentous (being used to such things); though to
poor Voltaire it was unlimitedly so:--and to readers interested in this
memorable Pair of Men, the rights and wrongs of the Affair ought to
be rendered authentically conceivable, now at last. Were it humanly
possible,--after so much catcalling at random! Smelfungus has a right to
say, speaking of this matter:--

"Never was such a jumble of loud-roaring ignorances, delusions and
confusions, as the current Records of it are. Editors, especially French
Editors, treating of a Hyperborean, Cimmerian subject, like this, are
easy-going creatures. And truly they have left it for us in a wonderful
state. Dateless, much of it, by nature; and, by the lazy Editors,
MISdated into very chaos; jumbling along there, in mad defiance of top
and bottom; often the very Year given wrong:--full everywhere of lazy
darkness, irradiated only by stupid rages, ill-directed mockeries:--and
for issue, cheerfully malicious hootings from the general mob of
mankind, with unbounded contempt of their betters; which is not
pleasant to see. When mobs do get together, round any signal object; and
editorial gentlemen, with talent for it, pour out from their respective
barrel-heads, in a persuasive manner, instead of knowledge, ignorance
set on fire, they are capable of carrying it far!--Will it be possible
to pick out the small glimmerings of real light, from this mad dance of
will-o'-wisps and fire-flies thrown into agitation?"

It will be very difficult, my friend;--why did not you yourself do it?
Most true, "those actual Voltaire-Friedrich LETTERS of the time are
a resource, and pretty much the sole one: Letters a good few, still
extant; which all HAD their bit of meaning; and have it still, if well
tortured till they give it out, or give some glimmer of it out:"--but
you have not tortured them; you have left it to me, if I would! As
I assuredly will not (never fear, reader!)--except in the thriftiest
degree.




DETACHED FEATURES (NOT FABULOUS) OF VOLTAIRE AND HIS BERLIN-POTSDAM
ENVIRONMENT IN 1751-1752.

To the outside crowd of observers, and to himself in good moments,
Voltaire represents his situation as the finest in the world:--

"Potsdam is Sparta and Athens joined in one; nothing but reviewing and
poetry day by day. The Algarottis, the Maupertuises, are here; have each
his work, serious for himself; then gay Supper with a King, who is a
great man and the soul of good company."... Sparta and Athens, I tell
you: "a Camp of Mars and the Garden of Epicurus; trumpets and violins,
War and Philosophy. I have my time all to myself; am at Court and in
freedom,--if I were not entirely free, neither an enormous Pension, nor
a Gold Key tearing out one's pocket, nor a halter (LICOU), which they
call CORDON of an ORDER, nor even the Suppers with a Philosopher who
has gained Five Battles, could yield me the least happiness."
[--OEuvres,--lxxiv. 325, 326, 333 (Letters, to D'Argental and others,
"27th April-8th May, 1751").] Looked at by you, my outside friends,--ah,
had I health and YOU here, what a situation!

But seen from within, it is far otherwise. Alongside of these warblings
of a heart grateful to the first of Kings, there goes on a series
of utterances to Niece Denis, remarkable for the misery driven into
meanness, that can be read in them. Ill-health, discontent, vague
terror, suspicion that dare not go to sleep; a strange vague terror,
shapeless or taking all shapes--a body diseased and a mind diseased.
Fear, quaking continually for nothing at all, is not to be borne in a
handsome manner. And it passes, often enough (in these poor LETTERS),
into transient malignity, into gusts of trembling hatred, with a
tendency to relieve oneself by private scandal of the house we are in.
Seldom was a miserabler wrong-side seen to a bit of royal tapestry. A
man hunted by the little devils that dwell unchained within himself;
like Pentheus by the Maenads, like Actaeon by his own Dogs. Nay, without
devils, with only those terrible bowels of mine, and scorbutic gums,
it is bad enough: "Glorious promotions to me here," sneers he bitterly;
"but one thing is indisputable, I have lost seven of my poor residue of
teeth since I came!" In truth, we are in a sadly scorbutic state; and
that, and the devils we lodge within ourselves, is the one real evil.
Could not Suspicion--why cannot she!--take her natural rest; and all
these terrors vanish? Oh, M. de Voltaire!--The practical purport, to
Niece Denis, always is: Keep my retreat to Paris open; in the name of
Heaven, no obstruction that way!

Miserable indeed; a man fatally unfit for his present element! But he
has Two considerable Sedatives, all along; two, and no third visible
to me. Sedative FIRST: that, he can, at any time, quit this illustrious
Tartarus-Elysium, the envy of mankind;--and indeed, practically, he is
always as if on the slip; thinking to be off shortly, for a time, or in
permanence; can be off at once, if things grow too bad. Sedative SECOND
is far better: His own labor on LOUIS QUATORZE, which is steadily going
on, and must have been a potent quietus in those Court-whirlwinds inward
and outward.

From Berlin, already in Autumn, 1750, Voltaire writes to D'Argental:
"I sha'n't go to Italy this Autumn [nor ever in my life], as I had
projected. But I will come to see YOU in the course of November" (far
from it, I got into STEUER-SCHEINE then!)--And again, after some
weeks: "I have put off my journey to Italy for a year. Next Winter too,
therefore, I shall see you," on the road thither. "To my Country, since
you live in it, I will make frequent visits," very!" Italy and the
King of Prussia are two old passions with me; but I cannot treat
Frederic-le-Grand as I can the Holy Father, with a mere look in
passing." [To D'Argental, "Berlin, 14th September,--Potsdam, 15th
October, 1750" (--OEuvres,--lxxiv. 220, 237).] Let this one, to which
many might be added, serve as sample of Sedative First, or the power and
intention to be off before long.

In regard to Sedative Second, again:... "The happiest circumstance is,
brought with me all my LOUIS-FOURTEENTH Papers and Excerpts. 'I get
from Leipzig, if no nearer, whatever Books are needed;'" and labor
faithfully at this immortal Production. Yes, day by day, to see growing,
by the cunning of one's own right hand, such perennial Solomon's-Temple
of a SIECLE DE LOUIS QUATORZE:--which of your Kings, or truculent,
Tiglath-Pilesers, could do that? To poor me, even in the Potsdam
tempests, it is possible: what ugliest day is not beautiful that sees
a stone or two added there!--Daily Voltaire sees himself at work on his
SIECLE, on those fine terms; trowel in one hand, weapon of war in the
other. And does actually accomplish it, in the course of this Year
1751,--with a great deal of punctuality and severe painstaking; which
readers of our day, fallen careless of the subject, are little aware of,
on Voltaire's behalf. Voltaire's reward was, that he did NOT go mad in
that Berlin element, but had throughout a bower-anchor to ride by. "The
King of France continues me as Gentleman of the Chamber, say you; but
has taken away my Title of Historiographer? That latter, however, shall
still be my function. 'My present independence has given weight to my
verdicts on matters. Probably I never could have written this Book at
Paris.' A consolation for one's exile, MON ENFANT." [To Niece Denis
(--OEuvres,--lxxiv. 247, &c. &c.), "28th October, 1750," and subsequent
dates.]

It is proper also to observe that, besides shining at the King's Suppers
like no other, Voltaire applies himself honestly to do for his Majesty
the small work required of him,--that of Verse-correcting now and then.
Two Specimens exist; two Pieces criticised, ODE AUX PRUSSIENS, and THE
ART OF WAR: portions of that Reprint now going on ("to the extent of
Twelve Copies,"--woe lies in one of them, most unexpected at this time!)
"AU DONJON DU CHATEAU;"--under benefit of Voltaire's remarks. Which
one reads curiously, not without some surprise. [In--OEuvres de
Frederic,--x. 276-303.] Surprise, first at Voltaire's official fidelity;
his frankness, rigorous strictness in this small duty: then at the kind
of correcting, instructing and lessoning, that had been demanded of him
by his Royal Pupil. Mere grammatical stylistic skin-deep work: nothing
(or, at least, in these Specimens nothing) of attempt upon the interior
structure, or the interior harmony even of utterance: solely the
Parisian niceties, graces, laws of poetic language, the FAS and the
NEFAS in regard to all that: this is what his Majesty would fain be
taught from the fountain-head;--one wonders his Majesty did not learn
to spell, which might have been got from a lower source!--And all this
Voltaire does teach with great strictness. For example, in the very
first line, in the very first word, set, before him:--

"PRUSSIENS, QUE LA VALEUR CONDUISIT A LA GLOIRE," so Friedrich had
written (ODE AUX PRUSSIENS, which is specimen First); and thus Voltaire
criticises: "The Hero here makes his PRUSSIENS of two syllables; and
afterwards, in another strophe, he grants them three. A King is master
of his favors. At the same time, one does require a little uniformity;
and the IENS are usually of two syllables, as LIENS, SILESIENS,
AUTRICHIENS; excepting the monosyllables BIEN, RIEN"--Enough, enough!--A
severe, punctual, painstaking Voltaire, sitting with the schoolmaster's
bonnet on head; ferula visible, if not actually in hand. For which, as
appears, his Majesty was very grateful to the Trismegistus of men.

Voltaire's flatteries to Friedrich, in those scattered little Billets
with their snatches of verse, are the prettiest in the world,--and
approach very near to sincerity, though seldom quite attaining it.
Something traceable of false, of suspicious, feline, nearly always, in
those seductive warblings; which otherwise are the most melodious
bits of idle ingenuity the human brain has ever spun from itself. For
instance, this heading of a Note sent from one room to another,--perhaps
with pieces of an ODE AUX PRUSSIENS accompanying:--

          --"Vou gui daignez me departir
          Les fruits d'une Muse divine,
          O roi! je ne puis consentir
          Que, sans daigner m'en avertir,
          Vous alliez prendre medecine.
          Je suis votre malade-ne,
          Et sur la casse et le sene,
          J'ai des notions non communes.
          Nous sommes de mene metier;
          Faut-il de moi vous defier,
          Et cacher vos bonnes fortunes?"--

Was there ever such a turn given to taking physic! Still better is this
other, the topic worse,--HAEMORRHOIDS (a kind of annual or periodical
affair with the Royal Patient, who used to feel improved after):--

... (Ten or twelve verses on another point; then suddenly--)

          --"Que la veine hemorroidale
          De votre personne royale
          Cesse de troubler le repos!
          Quand pourrai-je d'une style honnete
          Dire: 'Le cul de mon heros
          Va tout aussi bien que sa tete'?"--
         [In--OEuvres de Frederic,--xxii. 283, 267.]

A kittenish grace in these things, which is pleasant in so old a cat.

Smelfungus says: "He is a consummate Artist in Speech, our Voltaire:
that, if you take the word SPEECH in its widest sense, and consider the
much that can be spoken, and the infinitely more that cannot and should
not, is Voltaire's supreme excellency among his fellow-creatures; never
rivalled (to my poor judgment) anywhere before or since,--nor worth
rivalling, if we knew it well."

Another fine circumstance is, that Voltaire has frequent leave of
absence; and in effect passes a great deal of his time altogether by
himself, or in his own way otherwise. What with Friedrich's Review
Journeys and Business Circuits, considerable separations do occur of
themselves; and at any time, Voltaire has but to plead illness, which he
often does; with ground and without, and get away for weeks, safe
into the distance more or less remote. He is at the Marquisat (as
we laboriously make out); at Berlin, in the empty Palace, perhaps in
Lodgings of his own (though one would prefer the GRATIS method); nursing
his maladies, which are many; writing his LOUIS QUATORZE; "lonely
altogether, your Majesty, and sad of humor,"--yet giving his cosy
little dinners, and running out, pretty often, if well invited, into the
brilliancies and gayeties. No want of brilliant social life here,
which can shine, more or less, and appreciate one's shining. The King's
Supper-parties--Yes, and these, though the brightest, are not the only
bright things in our Potsdam-Berlin world. Take with you, reader, one
or two of the then and there Chief Figures; Voltaire's fellow-players;
strutting and fretting their hour on that Stage of Life. They are mostly
not quite strangers to you.

We know the sublime Perpetual President in his red wig, and sublime
supremacy of Pure Science. A gloomy set figure; affecting the
sententious, the emphatic and a composed impregnability,--like the Jove
of Science. With immensities of gloomy vanity, not compressible at all
times. Friedrich always strove to honor his Perpetual President, and
duly adore the Pure Sciences in him; but inwardly could not quite manage
it, though outwardly he failed in nothing. Impartial witnesses confess,
the King had a great deal of trouble with his gloomings and him. "Who is
this Voltaire?" gloomily thinks the Perpetual President to himself. "A
fellow with a nimble tongue, that is all. Knows nothing whatever of Pure
Sciences, except what fraction or tincture he has begged or stolen from
myself. And here is the King of the world in raptures with him!"

Voltaire from of old had faithfully done his kowtows to this King of
the Sciences; and, with a sort of terror, had suffered with incredible
patience a great deal from him. But there comes an end to all things;
Voltaire's patience not excepted. It lay in the fates that Maupertuis
should steadily accumulate, day after day, and now more than ever
heretofore, upon the sensitive Voltaire. Till, as will be seen, the
sensitive Voltaire could endure it no longer; but had to explode upon
this big Bully (accident lending a spark); to go off like a Vesuvius of
crackers, fire-serpents and sky-rockets; envelop the red wig, and much
else, in delirious conflagration;--and produce the catastrophe of this
Berlin Drama.

D'Argens, poor dissolute creature, is the best of the French lot. He has
married, after so many temporary marriages with Actresses, one Actress
in permanence, Mamsell Cochois, a patient kind being; and settled now,
at Potsdam here, into perfectly composed household life. Really loves
Friedrich, they say; the only Frenchman of them that does. Has abundance
of light sputtery wit, and Provencal fire and ingenuity; no ill-nature
against any man. Never injures anybody, nor lies at all about anything.
A great friend of fine weather; regrets, of his inheritances in
Provence, chiefly one item, and this not overmuch,--the bright southern
sun. Sits shivering in winter-time, wrapping himself in more and more
flannel, two dressing-gowns, two nightcaps:--loyal to this King, in good
times and in evil.

Was the King's friend for thirty years; helped several meritorious
people to his Majesty's notice; and never did any man a mischief in that
quarter. An erect, guileless figure; very tall; with vivid countenance,
chaotically vivid mind: full of bright sallies, irregular ingenuities;
had a hot temper too, which did not often run away with him, but
sometimes did. He thrice made a visit to Provence,--in fact ran away
from the King, feeling bantered and roasted to a merciless degree,--but
thrice came back. "At the end of the first stage, he had always
privately forgiven the King, and determined that the pretended visit
should really be a visit only." "Reads the King's Letters," which
are many to him, "always bare-headed, in spite of the draughts!"
[Nicolai,--Anekdoten,--i. 11-75, &c. &c.]

Algarotti is too prudent, politely egoistic and self-contained, to take
the trouble of hurting anybody, or get himself into trouble for love or
hatred. He fell into disfavor not long after that unsuccessful little
mission in the first Silesian War, of which the reader has lost
remembrance. Good for nothing in diplomacy, thought Friedrich, but
agreeable as company. "Company in tents, in the seat of War, has its
unpleasantness," thought Algarotti;--and began very privately sounding
the waters at Dresden for an eligible situation; so that there has
ensued a quarrel since; then humble apologies followed by profound
silence,--till now there is reconcilement. It is admitted Friedrich had
some real love for Algarotti; Algarotti, as we gather, none at all for
him; but only for his greatness. They parted again (February, 1753)
without quarrel, but for the last time; [Algarotti-Correspondence
(--OEuvres de Frederic,--xviii. 86).]--and I confess to a relief on the
occasion.

Friedrich, readers know by this time, had a great appetite for
conversation: he talked well, listened well; one of his chief enjoyments
was, to give and receive from his fellow-creatures in that way. I hope,
and indeed have evidence, that he required good sense as the staple;
but in the form, he allowed great latitude. He by no means affected
solemnity, rather the reverse; goes much upon the bantering vein; far
too much, according to the complaining parties. Took pleasure (cruel
mortal!) in stirring up his company by the whip, and even by the whip
applied to RAWS; for we find he had "established," like the Dublin
Hackney-Coachman, "raws for himself;" and habitually plied his implement
there, when desirous to get into the gallop. In an inhuman manner, said
the suffering Cattle; who used to rebel against it, and go off in the
sulks from time to time. It is certain he could, especially in his
younger years, put up with a great deal of zanyism, ingenious foolery
and rough tumbling, if it had any basis to tumble on; though with years
he became more saturnine.

By far his chief Artist in this kind, indeed properly the only one, was
La Mettrie, whom we once saw transiently as Army-Surgeon at Fontenoy: he
is now out of all that (flung out, with the dogs at his heels); has been
safe in Berlin for three years past. Friedrich not only tolerates the
poor madcap, but takes some pleasure in him: madcap we say, though poor
La Mettrie had remarkable gifts, exuberant laughter one of them, and
was far from intending to be mad. Not Zanyism, but Wisdom of the highest
nature, was what he drove at,--unluckily, with open mouth, and mind all
in tumult. La Mettrie had left the Army, soon after that busy Fontenoy
evening: Chivalrous Grammont, his patron and protector, who had saved
him from many scrapes, lay shot on the field. La Mettrie, rushing on
with mouth open and mind in tumult, had, from of old, been continually
getting into scrapes. Unorthodox to a degree; the Sorbonne greedy
for him long since; such his audacities in print, his heavy hits,
boisterous, quizzical, logical. And now he had set to attacking the
Medical Faculty, to quizzing Medicine in his wild way; Doctor Astruc,
Doctor This and That, of the first celebrity, taking it very ill. So
that La Mettrie had to demit; to get out of France rather in a hurry,
lest worse befell.

He had studied at Leyden, under Boerhaave. He had in fact considerable
medical and other talent, had he not been so tumultuous and
open-mouthed. He fled to Leyden; and shot forth, in safety there, his
fiery darts upon Sorbonne and Faculty, at his own discretion,--which was
always a MINIMUM quantity:--he had, before long, made Leyden also too
hot for him. His Books gained a kind of celebrity in the world; awoke
laughter and attention, among the adventurous of readers; astonishment
at the blazing madcap (a BON DIABLE, too, as one could see); and are
still known to Catalogue-makers,--though, with one exception, L'HOMME
MACHINE, not otherwise, nor read at all. L'HOMME MACHINE (Man a Machine)
is the exceptional Book; smallest of Duodecimos to have so much wildfire
in it, This MAN A MACHINE, though tumultuous La Mettrie meant nothing
but open-mouthed Wisdom by it, gave scandal in abundance; so that even
the Leyden Magistrates were scandalized; and had to burn the afflicting
little Duodecimo by the common hangman, and order La Mettrie to
disappear instantly from their City.

Which he had to do,--towards King Friedrich, usual refuge of the
persecuted; seldom inexorable, where there was worth, even under bad
forms, recognizable; and not a friend to burning poor men or their
books, if it could be helped. La Mettrie got some post, like D'Arget's,
or still more nominal; "readership;" some small pension to live upon;
and shelter to shoot forth his wildfire, when he could hold it no
longer: fire, not of a malignant incendiary kind, but pleasantly
lambent, though maddish, as Friedrich perceived. Thus had La Mettrie
found a Goshen;--and stood in considerable favor, at Court and in Berlin
Society in the years now current. According to Nicolai, Friedrich never
esteemed La Mettrie, which is easy to believe, but found him a jester
and ingenious madcap, out of whom a great deal of merriment could be
had, over wine or the like. To judge by Nicolai's authentic specimen,
their Colloquies ran sometimes pretty deep into the cynical, under
showers of wildfire playing about; and the high-jinks must have been
highish. [--Anekdoten,--vi. 197-227.] When there had been enough of
this, Friedrich would lend his La Mettrie to the French Excellency,
Milord Tyrconnel, to oblige his Excellency, and get La Mettrie out
of the way for a while. Milord is at Berlin; a Jacobite Irishman, of
blusterous Irish qualities, though with plenty of sagacity and rough
sense; likes La Mettrie; and is not much a favorite with Friedrich.

Tyrconnel had said, at first,--when Rothenburg, privately from
Friedrich, came to consult him, "What are, in practical form, those
'assistances from the Most Christian Majesty,' should we MAKE
Alliance with him, as your Excellency proposes, and chance to be
attacked?"--"MORBLEU, assistance enough [enumerating several]: MAIS
MORBLEU, SI VOUS NOUS TROMPEX, VOUS SEREZ ECRASES (if you deceive us,
you will be squelched)!" [Valori, ii. 130, &c.] "He had been chosen
for his rough tongue," says Valori; our French Court being piqued at
Friedrich and his sarcasms. Tyrconnel gives splendid dinners: Voltaire
often of them; does not love Potsdam, nor is loved by it. Nay, I
sometimes think a certain DEMON NEWSWRITER (of whom by and by), but do
not know, may be some hungry Attache of Tyrconnel's. Hungry Attache,
shut out from the divine Suppers and upper planetary movements, and
reduced to look on them from his cold hutch, in a dog-like angry and
hungry manner? His flying allusions to Voltaire, "SON (Friedrich's)
SQUELETTE D'APOLLON, skeleton of an Apollo," and the like, are barkings
almost rabid.

Of the military sort, about this time, Keith and Rothenburg appear
most frequently as guests or companions. Rothenburg had a great deal of
Friedrich's regard: Winterfeld is more a practical Counseller, and does
not shine in learned circles, as Rothenburg may. A fiery soldier too,
this Rothenburg, withal;--a man probably of many talents and qualities,
though of distinctly decipherable there is next to no record of him or
them. He had a Parisian Wife; who is sometimes on the point of
coming with Niece Denis to Berlin, and of setting up their two French
households there; but never did it, either of them, to make an Uncle
or a Husband happy. Rothenburg was bred a Catholic: "he headed the
subscription for the famous 'KATHOLISCHE KIRCHE,'" so delightful to the
Pope and liberal Christians in those years; "but never gave a sixpence
of money," says Voltaire once: Catholic KIRK was got completed with
difficulty; stands there yet, like a large washbowl set, bottom
uppermost, on the top of a narrowish tub; but none of Rothenburg's money
is in it. In Voltaire's Correspondence there is frequent mention of him;
not with any love, but with a certain secret respect, rather inclined
to be disrespectful, if it durst or could: the eloquent vocal individual
not quite at ease beside the more silent thinking and acting one. What
we know is, Friedrich greatly loved the man. There is some straggle of
CORRESPONDENCE between Friedrich and him left; but it is worth nothing;
gives no testimony of that, or of anything else noticeable:--and that is
the one fact now almost alone significant of Rothenburg. Much loved and
esteemed by the King; employed diplomatically, now and then; perhaps
talked with on such subjects, which was the highest distinction.
Poor man, he is in very bad health in these months; has never rightly
recovered of his wounds; and dies in the last days of 1751,--to the
bitter sorrow of the King, as is still on record. A highly respectable
dim figure, far more important in Friedrich's History than he looks. As
King's guest, he can in these months play no part.

Highly respectable too, and well worth talking to, though left very dim
to us in the Books, is Marshal Keith; who has been growing gradually
with the King, and with everybody, ever since he came to these parts
in 1747. A man of Scotch type; the broad accent, with its sagacities,
veracities, with its steadfastly fixed moderation, and its sly
twinkles of defensive humor, is still audible to us through the foreign
wrappages. Not given to talk, unless there is something to be said; but
well capable of it then. Friedrich, the more he knows him, likes him
the better. On all manner of subjects he can talk knowingly, and with
insight of his own. On Russian matters Friedrich likes especially to
hear him,--though they differ in regard to the worth of Russian troops.
"Very considerable military qualities in those Russians," thinks Keith:
"imperturbably obedient, patient; of a tough fibre, and are beautifully
strict to your order, on the parade-ground or off." "Pooh, mere rubbish,
MON CHER," thinks Friedrich always. To which Keith, unwilling to argue
too long, will answer: "Well, it is possible enough your Majesty may try
them, some day; if I am wrong, it will be all the better for us!" Which
Friedrich had occasion to remember by and by. Friedrich greatly respects
this sagacious gentleman with the broad accent: his Brother, the Lord
Marischal, is now in France: Ambassador at Paris, since September, 1751:
["Left Potsdam 28th August" (Rodenbeck, i. 220).] "Lord Marischal, a
Jacobite, for Prussian Ambassador in Paris; Tyrconnel, a Jacobite, for
French Ambassador in Berlin!" grumble the English.




FRACTIONS OF EVENTS AND INDICATIONS, FROM VOLTAIRE HIMSELF, IN THIS
TIME; MORE OR LESS ILLUMINATIVE WHEN REDUCED TO ORDER.

Here, selected from more, are a few "fire-flies,"--not dancing or
distracted, but authentic all, and stuck each on its spit; shedding a
feeble glimmer over the physiognomy of those Fifteen caliginous Months,
to an imagination that is diligent. Fractional utterances of Voltaire to
Friedrich and others (in abridged form, abridgment indicated): the
exact dates are oftenest irretrievably gone; but the glimmer of light
is indisputable, all the more as, on Voltaire's part, it is mostly
involuntary. Grouping and sequence must be other than that of Time.

POTSDAM, 5th JUNE, 1751.--King is off on that Ost-Friesland jaunt;
Voltaire at Potsdam, "at what they call the Marquisat," in complete
solitude,--preparing to die before long,--sends his Majesty some poor
trifles of Scribbling, proofs of my love, Sire: "since I live solitary,
when you are not at Potsdam, it would seem I came for you only" (note
that, your Majesty)!... "But in return for the rags here sent, I
expect the Sixth Canto of your ART [ART DE LA GUERRE, one of the Two
pupil-and-schoolmaster "Specimens" mentioned above]; I expect the
ROOF to the Temple of Mars. It is for you, alone of men, to build that
Temple; as it was for Ovid to sing of Love, and for Horace to give an
ART OF POETRY." (Laying it on pretty thick!)...

Then again, later (after severe study, ferula in hand): "Sire, I return
your Majesty your Six Cantos; I surrender at discretion (LUI LAISSE
CARTE-BLANCHE) on that question of 'VICTOIRE.' The whole Poem is worthy
of you: if I had made this Journey only to see a thing so unique, I
ought not to regret my Country."... And again (still no date): "GRAND
DIEU! is not all that [HISTORY OF THE GREAT ELECTOR, by your Majesty,
which I am devouring with such appetite] neat, elegant, precise, and,
above all, philosophical!"--"Sire, you are adorable; I will pass my days
at your feet. Oh, never make game of me (DES NICHES)!" Has he been at
that, say you! "If the Kings of Denmark, Portugal, Spain, &c. did it, I
should not care a pin; they are only Kings. But you are the greatest man
that perhaps ever reigned." [[In--OEuvres de Frederic,--xxii. 271, 273.]

IS ON LEAVE OF ABSENCE, NEAR BY; WISHES TO BE CALLED AGAIN (No
date).--"Sire, if you like free criticism, if you tolerate sincere
praises, if you wish to perfect a Work [ART DE LA GUERRE, or some other
as sublime], which you alone in Europe are capable of doing, you have
only to bid a Hermit come upstairs. At your orders for all his life."
[Ib. 261.]

IN BERLIN PALACE: PLEASE DON'T TURN ME OUT! (No date)--... "Next to you,
I love work and retirement. Nobody whatever complains of me. I ask of
your Majesty, in order to keep unaltered the happiness I owe to you,
this favor, Not to turn me out of the Apartment you deigned to give me
at Berlin, till I go for Paris [always talking of that]. If I were to
leave it, they would put in the Gazettes that I"--Oh, what would n't
they put in, of one that, belonging to King Friedrich, lives as it were
in the Disc of the Sun, conspicuous to everybody!--"I will go out [of
the Apartment] when some Prince, with a Suite needing it to lodge in,
comes; and then the thing will be honorable. Chasot [gone to Paris]
has been talking"--unguarded things of me!"I have not uttered the least
complaint of Chasot: I never will of Chasot, nor of those who have set
him on [Maupertuis belike]: I forgive everything, I!" [Ib. 270.]

ROTHENBURG IS ILL; VOLTAIRE HAS BEEN TO SEE HIM ("Berlin, 14th,"
no month; year, too surely, 1751, as we shall find! Letter is IN
VERSE).--"Lieberkuhn was going to kill poor Rothenburg; to send him off
to Pluto,--for liking his dish a little;--monster Lieberkuhn! But
Doctor Joyous," your reader, La Mettrie,--led by, need I say whom?--"has
brought him back to us:--think of Lieberkuhn's solemn stare! Pretty
contrasts, those, of sublime Quacksalverism, with Sense under the mask
of Folly. May the haemorrhoidal vein"--follows HERE, note it, exquisite
reader, that of "CUL DE MON HEROS," cited above!--...

And then (a day or two after; King too haemorrhoidal to come twenty
miles, but anxious to know): "Sire, no doubt Doctor Joyous (LE MEDECIN
JOYEUX) has informed your Majesty that when we arrived, the Patient was
sleeping tranquil; and Cothenius assured us, in Latin, that there was
no danger. I know not what has passed since, but I am persuaded your
Majesty approves my journey" (of a street or two),--MUST you speak of
it, then!

GOES TO AN EVENING-PARTY NOW AND THEN (To Niece Denis).--... "Madame
Tyrconnel [French Excellency's Wife] has plenty of fine people at her
house on an evening; perhaps too many" (one of the first houses in
Berlin, this of my Lord Tyrcannel's, which we frequent a good deal)....
"Madame got very well through her part of ANDROMAQUE [in those old
play-acting times of ours]: never saw actresses with finer eyes,"--how
should you!

"As to Milord Tyrconnel, he is an Anglais of dignity,"--Irish in
reality, and a thought blusterous. "He has a condensed (SERRE) caustic
way of talk; and I know not what of frank which one finds in the
English, and does not usually find in persons of his trade. French
Tragedies played at Berlin, I myself taking part; an Englishman Envoy of
France there: strange circumstances these, are n't they?" [To D'Argental
this (--OEuvres de Voltaire,--lxxiv. 289).] Yes, that latter especially;
and Milord Marischal our Prussian Envoy with you! Which the English
note, sulkily, as a weather-symptom.

AT POTSDAM, BIG DEVILS OF GRENADIERS (No date).--... "But, Sire, one is
n't always perched on the summit of Parnassus; one is a man. There are
sicknesses about; I did not bring an athlete's health to these parts;
and the scorbutic humor which is eating my life renders me truly, of
all that are sick, the sickest. I am absolutely alone from morning till
night. My one solace is the necessary pleasure of taking the air, I
bethink me of walking, and clearing my head a little, in your Gardens at
Potsdam. I fancy it is a permitted thing; I present myself, musing;--I
find huge devils of Grenadiers, who clap bayonets in my belly, who
cry FURT, SACRAMENT, and DER KONIG [OFF, SACKERMENT, THE KING, quite
tolerably spelt]! And I take to my heels, as Austrians and Saxons would
do before them. Have you ever read, that in Titus's or Marcus-Aurelius's
Gardens, a poor devil of a Gaulish Poet"--In short, it shall be mended.
[--OEuvres de Frederic,--xxii. 273.]

HAVE BEEN LAYING IT ON TOO THICK (No date; IN VERSE).--"Marcus Aurelius
was wont to"--(Well, we know who that is: What of Marcus, then?)--"A
certain lover of his glory [STILL IN VERSE] spoke once, at Supper, of
a magnanimity of Marcus's;--at which Marcus [flattery too thick] rather
gloomed, and sat quite silent,--which was another fine saying of his
[ENDS VERSE, STARTS PROSE]:--

"Pardon, Sire, some hearts that are full of you! To justify myself, I
dare supplicate your Majesty to give one glance at this Letter (lines
pencil-marked), which has just come from M. de Chauvelin, Nephew of the
famous GARDE-DES-SCEAUX. Your Majesty cannot gloom at him, writing these
from the fulness of his heart; nor at me, who"--Pooh; no, then! Perhaps
do you a NICHE again,--poor restless fellow! [Ib. 280.]

POTSDAM PALACE (No date): SIRE, NZAY I CHANGE MY ROOM?... "I ascend
to your antechambers, to find some one by whom I may ask permission to
speak with you. I find nobody: I have to return:" and what I wanted was
this, "your protection for my SIECLE DE LOUIS QUATORZE, which I am about
to print in Berlin." Surely,--but also this:--

"I am unwell, I am a sick man born. And withal I am obliged to work,
almost as much as your Majesty. I pass the whole day alone. If you would
permit that I might shift to the Apartment next the one I have,--to
that where General Bredow slept last winter,--I should work more
commodiously. My Secretary (Collini) and I could work together there. I
should have a little more sun, which is a great point for me.--Only the
whim of a sick man, perhaps! Well, even so, your Majesty will have pity
on it. You promised to make me happy." [--OEuvres de Frederic,--xxii.
277.]

I SUSPECT THAT I AM SUSPECTED (No date).--"Sire, if I am not brief,
forgive me. Yesterday the faithful D'Arget told me with sorrow that in
Paris people were talking of your Poem." Horrible; but, O Sire,--me?--"I
showed him the eighteen Letters that I received yesterday. They are from
Cadiz," all about Finance, no blabbing there! "Permit me to send you now
the last six from my Niece, numbered by her own hand [no forgery, no
suppression]; deign to cast your eyes on the places I have underlined,
where she speaks of your Majesty, of D'Argens, of Potsdam, of D'Ammon"
(to whom she can't be Phyllis, innocent being)!-MON CHER VOLTAIRE, must
I again do some NICHE upon you, then? Tie some tin-canister to your
too-sensitive tail? What an element you inhabit within that poor skin of
yours! [Ib. 269.]

MAJESTY INVITES US TO A LITERARY CHRISTENING, POTSDAM (No date. These
"Six Twins" are the "ART DE LA GUERRE," in Six Chants; part of that
revised Edition which is getting printed "AU DONJON DU CHATEAU;" time
must be, well on in 1751). Friedrich writes to Voltaire:--

"I have just been brought to bed of Six Twins; which require to be
baptized, in the name of Apollo, in the waters of Hippocrene. LA
HENRIADE is requested to become godmother: you will have the goodness
to bring her, this evening at five, to the Father's Apartment. D'Arget
LUCINA will be there; and the Imagination of MAN-A-MACHINE will hold the
poor infants over the Font." [Ib. 266.]

DEIGN TO SAY IF I HAVE OFFENDED.--... "As they write to me from Paris
that I am in disgrace with you, I dare to beg very earnestly that you
will deign to say if I have displeased in anything! May go wrong by
ignorance or from over-zeal; but with my heart never! I live in the
profoundest retreat; giving to study my whole"--"Your assurances once
vouchsafed [famous Document of August 23d]. I write only to my Niece.
I" (a page more of this)--have my sorrows and merits, and absolutely
no silence at all! [--OEuvres de Frederic,--xxii. 289.] "In the gift of
Speech he is the most brilliant of mankind," said Smelfungus; but in the
gift of Silence what a deficiency! Friedrich will have to do that for
Two, it would seem.

BERLIN, 28th DECEMBER, 1751: LOUIS QUATORZE; AND DEATH OF
ROTHENBURG.--"Our LOUIS QUATORZE is out. But, Heavens, see, your
Majesty: a Pirate Printer, at Frankfurt-on-Oder, has been going on
parallel with us, all the while; and here is his foul blotch of an
Edition on sale, too! Bielfeld," fantastic fellow, "had proof-sheets;
Bielfeld sent them to a Professor there, though I don't blame Bielfeld:
result too evident. Protect me, your Majesty; Order all wagons,
especially wagons for Leipzig, to be stopped, to be searched, and the
Books thrown out,--it costs you but a word!"

Quite a simple thing: "All Prussia to the rescue!" thinks an ardent
Proprietor of these Proof-sheets. But then, next day, hears that
Rothenburg is dead. That the silent Rothenburg lay dying, while the
vocal Voltaire was writing these fooleries, to a King sunk in grief.
"Repent, be sorry, be ashamed!" he says to himself; and does instantly
try;--but with little success; Frankfurt-on-Oder, with its Bielfeld
proof-sheets, still jangling along, contemptibly audible, for some time.
[Ib. 285-287.] And afterwards, from Frankfurt-on-Mayn new sorrow rises
on LOUIS QUATORZE, as will be seen.--Friedrich's grief for Rothenburg
was deep and severe; "he had visited him that last night," say the
Books; "and quitted his bedside, silent, and all in tears." It is mainly
what of Biography the silent Rothenburg now has.

From the current Narratives, as they are called, readers will recollect,
out of this Voltaire Period, two small particles of Event amid such an
ocean of noisy froth,--two and hardly more: that of the "Orange-Skin,"
and that of the "Dirty Linen." Let us put these two on their basis; and
pass on:--

THE ORANGE-SKIN (Potsdam, 2d September, 1751, to Niece Denis)--Good
Heavens, MON ENFANT, what is this I hear (through the great
Dionysius' Ear I maintain, at such expense to myself)!... "La Mettrie,
a man of no consequence, who talks familiarly with the King after their
reading; and with me too, now and then: La Mettrie swore to me, that,
speaking to the King, one of those days, of my supposed favor, and the
bit of jealousy it excites, the King answered him: "I shall want him
still about a year:--you squeeze the orange, you throw away the skin (ON
EN JETTE LECORCE)!'" Here is a pretty bit of babble (lie, most likely,
and bit of mischievous fun) from Dr. Joyous. "It cannot be true, No!
And yet--and yet--?" Words cannot express the agonizing doubts, the
questionings, occasionally the horror of Voltaire: poor sick soul,
keeping a Dionysius'-Ear to boot! This blurt of La Mettrie's goes
through him like a shot of electricity through an elderly sick
Household-Cat; and he speaks of it again and ever again,--though we will
not farther.

DIRTY LINEN (Potsdam, 24th July, 1752, To Niece Denis).--... "Maupertuis
has discreetly set the rumor going, that I found the King's Works very
bad; that I said to some one, on Verses from the King coming in,
'Will he never tire, then, of sending me his dirty linen to wash?' You
obliging Maupertuis!"

Rumor says, it was General Mannstein, once Aide-de-Camp in Russia,
who had come to have his WORK ON RUSSIA revised (excellent Work, often
quoted by us [Did get out at last,--in England, through Lord Marischal
and David Hume: see PREFACE to it (London, 1760).]), when the
unfortunate Royal Verses came. Perhaps M. de Voltaire did say it:--why
not, had it only been prudent? He really likes those Verses much more
than I; but knows well enough, SUB ROSA, what kind of Verses they
are. This also is a horrible suspicion; that the King should hear of
this,--as doubtless the King did, though without going delirious upon
it at all. ["To Niece Denis," dates as above (--OEuvres de
Voltaire,--lxxiv. 408, lxxv. 17).] Thank YOU, my Perpetual President,
not the less!--

OF MAUPERTUIS, IN SUCCESSIVE PHASES.--... "Maupertuis is not of very
engaging ways; he takes my dimensions harshly with his quadrant: it is
said there enters something of envy into his DATA. ... A somewhat surly
gentleman; not too sociable; and, truth to say, considerably sunk here
[ASSEZ BAISSE, my D'Argental].

... "I endure Maupertuis, not having been able to soften him. In all
countries there are insociable fellows, with whom you are obliged to
live, though it is difficult. He has never forgiven me for"--omitting to
cite him, &c.--At Paris he had got the Academy of Sciences into trouble,
and himself into general dislike (DETESTER); then came this Berlin
offer. "Old Fleuri, when Maupertuis called to take leave, repeated that
verse of Virgil, NEC TIBI REGNANDI VENIAT TAM DIRA CUPIDO. Fleuri might
have whispered as much to himself: but he was a mild sovereign lord, and
reigned in a gentle polite manner. I swear to you, Maupertuis does not,
in his shop [the Academy here]--where, God be thanked, I never go.

"He has printed a little Pamphlet on Happiness (SUR LE BONHEUR); it
is very dry and miserable. Reminds you of Advertisements for things
lost,--so poor a chance of finding them again. Happiness is not what
he gives to those who read him, to those who live with him; he is not
himself happy, and would be sorry that others were [to Niece Denis
this].

... "A very sweet life here, Madame [Madame d'Argental, an outside
party]: it would have been more so, if Maupertuis had liked. The wish
to please, is no part of his geometrical studies; the problem of
being agreeable to live with, is not one he has solved." [--OEuvres de
Voltaire,--lxxiv. 330, 504 (4th May, 1751, and 14th March, 1752), to the
D'Argentals; to Niece Denis (6th November, 1750, and 24th August, 1751),
lxxiv. 250, 385.]--Add this Anecdote, which is probably D'Arget's, and
worth credit:--

"Voltaire had dinner-party, Maupertuis one of them; party still in the
drawing-room, dinner just coming up. 'President, your Book, SUR LE
BONHEUR, has given me pleasure,' said Voltaire, politely [very politely,
considering what we have just read]; given me pleasure,--a few
obscurities excepted, of which we will talk together some evening.'
'Obscurities?' said Maupertuis, in a gloomy arbitrary tone: 'There may
be such for you, Monsieur!' Voltaire laid his hand on the President's
shoulder [yellow wig near by], looked at him in silence, with
many-twinkling glance, gayety the topmost expression, but by no means
the sole one: 'President, I esteem you, JE VOUS ESTIME, MON PRESIDENT:
you are brave; you want war: we will have it. But, in the mean while,
let us eat the King's roast meat.'" [Duvernet (2d FORM of him, always,
p. 176.]

Friedrich's Answers to these Voltaire Letters, if he wrote any, are all
gone. Probably he answered almost nothing; what we have of his relates
always to specific business, receipt of LOUIS QUATORZE, and the like;
and is always in friendly tone. Handsomely keeping Silence for Two! Here
is a snatch from him, on neutral figures and movements of the time:--

FRIEDRICH TO WIILHELMINA (November 17th, 1751).--"I think the Margraf of
Anspach will not have stayed long with you. He is not made to taste the
sweets of society: his passion for hunting, and the tippling life he
leads this long time, throw him out when he comes among reasonable
persons.... "I expect my Sister of Brunswick, with the Duke and their
eldest Girl, the 4th of next month,"--to Carnival here. "It is seven
years since the Queen (our Mamma) has seen her. She holds a small
Board of Wit at Brunswick; of which your Doctor [Doctor Superville,
Dutch-French, whose perennial merit now is, That he did not burn
Wilhelmina's MEMOIRS, but left them safe to posterity, for long
centuries],--of which your Doctor is the director and oracle. You would
burst outright into laughing when she speaks of those matters. Her
natural vivacity and haste has not left her time to get to the bottom of
anything; she skips continually from one subject to the other, and
gives twenty decisions in a minute." [--OEuvres de Frederic,--xxvii. i.
202:--On Superville, see Preuss's Note, ib. 56.]

About a month before Rothenburg's death, which was so tragical to
Friedrich, there had fallen out, with a hideous dash of farce in it, the
death of La Mettrie. Here are Two Accounts, by different hands,--which
represent to us an immensity of babble in the then Voltaire circle.

LA METTRIE DIES.--Two Accounts: 1. King Friedrich's: to Wilhelmina.
"21st November, 1751.... We have lost poor La Mettrie. He died for a
piece of fun: ate, out of banter, a whole pheasant-pie; had a horrible
indigestion; took it into his head to have blood let, and convince the
German Doctors that bleeding was good in indigestion. But it succeeded
ill with him: he took a violent fever, which passed into putrid; and
carried him off. He is regretted by all that knew him. He was gay; BON
DIABLE, good Doctor, and very bad Author: by avoiding to read his Books,
one could manage to be well content with himself." [Ib. xxvii. i. 203.]

2. Voltaire's: to Niece Denis (NOT his first to her): Potsdam, 24th
December, 1751.... "No end to my astonishment. Milord Tyrconnel," always
ailing (died here himself), "sends to ask La Mettrie to come and see
him, to cure him or amuse him. The King grudges to part with his Reader,
who makes him laugh. La Mettrie sets out; arrives at his Patient's just
when Madame Tyrconnel is sitting down to table: he eats and drinks,
talks and laughs more than all the guests; when he has got crammed (EN A
JUSQU'AU MENTON), they bring him a pie, of eagle disguised as pheasant,
which had arrived from the North, plenty of bad lard, pork-hash and
ginger in it; my gentleman eats the whole pie, and dies next day at Lord
Tyrconnel's, assisted by two Doctors," Cothenius and Lieberkuhn, "whom
he used to mock at.... How I should have liked to ask him, at
the article of death, about that Orange-skin!" [--OEuvres de
Voltaire,--lxxiv. 439, 450.]

Add this trait too, from authentic Nicolai, to complete the matter: "An
Irish Priest, Father Macmahon, Tyrconnel's Chaplain [more power to him],
wanted to convert La Mettrie: he pushed into the sick-room;--encouraged
by some who wished to make La Mettrie contemptible to Friedrich [the
charitable souls]. La Mettrie would have nothing to do with this Priest
and his talk; who, however, still sat and waited. La Mettrie, in
a twinge of agony, cried out, 'JESUS MARIE!' 'AH, VOUS VOILA ENFIN
RETOURNE A CES NOMS CONSOLATEURS!' exclaimed the Irishman. To which La
Mettrie answered (in polite language, to the effect), 'Bother you!' and
expired a few minutes after." [Nicolai,--Anekdoten,--i. 20 n.]

Enough of this poor madcap. Friedrich's ELOGE of him, read to the
Academy some time after, it was generally thought (and with great
justice), might as well have been spared. The Piece has nothing noisy,
nothing untrue; but what has it of importance? And surely the subject
was questionable, or more. La Mettrie might have done without Eulogy
from a King of men.

... "He had been used to put himself at once on the most familiar
footing with the King [says Thiebault, UNbelievable]. Entered the King's
apartment as he would that of a friend; plunged down whenever he liked,
which was often, and lay upon the sofas; if it was warm, took off
his stock, unbuttoned his waistcoat, flung his periwig on the
floor;" [Thiebault, v. 405 (calls him "La Metherie;" knows, as usual,
nothing).]--highly probable, thinks stupid Thiebault!

"The truth is," says Nicolai, "the King put no real value on La Mettrie.
He considered him as a merry-andrew fellow, who might amuse you, when
half seas-over (ENTRE DEUX VINS). De la Mettrie showed himself unworthy
of any favor he had. Not only did he babble, and repeat about Town what
he heard at the King's table; but he told everything in a false way,
and with malicious twists and additions. This he especially did at Lord
Tyrconnel, the then French Ambassador's table, where at last he died."
[Nicolai,--Anekdoten,--i. 20.] But could not take the ORANGE-SKIN along
with him; alas, no!--

On the whole, be not too severe on poor Voltaire! He is very fidgety,
noisy; something of a pickthank, of a wheedler; but, above all, he
is scorbutic, dyspeptic; hag-ridden, as soul seldom was; and (in his
oblique way) APPEALS to Friedrich and us,--not in vain. And, in
short, we perceive, after the First Act of the Piece, beginning in
preternatural radiances, ending in whirlwinds of flaming soot, he has
been getting on with his Second Act better than could be expected.
Gyrating again among the bright planets, circum-jovial moons, in
the Court Firmament; is again in favor, and might--Alas, he had his
FELLOW-moons, his Maupertuis above all! Incurable that Maupertuis
misery; gets worse and worse, steadily from the first day. No smallest
entity that intervenes, not even a wandering La Beaumelle with his Book
of PENSEES, but is capable of worsening it. Take this of Smelfungus;
this Pair of Cabinet Sketches,--"hasty outlines; extant chiefly," he
declares, "by Voltaire's blame:"--

LA BEAUMELLE.--"Voltaire has a fatal talent of getting into I quarrels
with insignificant accidental people; and instead of silently, with
cautious finger, disengaging any bramble that catches to him, and
thankfully passing on, attacks it indignantly with potent steel
implements, wood-axes, war-axes; brandishing and hewing;--till he
has stirred up a whole wilderness of bramble-bush, and is himself
bramble-chips all over. M. Angliviel de la Beaumelle, for example,
was nothing but a bramble: some conceited Licentiate of Theology,
who, finding the Presbytery of Geneva too narrow a field, had gone to
Copenhagen, as Professor of Rhetoric or some such thing; and, finding
that field also too narrow, and not to be widened by attempts at
Literature, MES PENSEES and the like, in such barbarous Country",--had