*       *       *       *


THE BAND

[Music:
  Oh I can play on a big bass drum,
  And this is the way I do it.
  Boom, Boom, Boom goes the big bass drum,
  Boom, Boom, Boom goes the big bass drum,
  And this is the way I do it.]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth.+

Formation;-- Children seated in their seats.


1st Line;-- Oh I can play on a big bass drum,

  Interpretation;-- No activity.

2nd Line;-- And this is the way I do it.

  Inter.;-- No activity.

3rd Line;-- Boom, Boom, Boom goes the big bass drum,

  Inter.;-- Beat hands vigorously upon top of desks, suiting action
  to the words.

4th Line;-- Boom, Boom, Boom goes the big bass drum.

  Inter.;-- Repeat the activity of the third line.

5th Line;-- And this is the way I do it.

  Inter.;-- Repeat the activity of the fourth line.


Introduce the following activities, suiting the action to the words in
imitation of the suggested activity.

  Little Snare Drum ("Trum")
  Big Brass Horn ("Toot")
  Little Gay Flute ("Whistle")


[Illustration: OH I CAN PLAY ON A BIG BRASS HORN]




LITTLE JACK HORNER


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Little Jack Horner sat in a corner,
  Eating a Christmas pie;
  He put in his thumb, and pulled out a plum,
  And said, "What a good boy am I!"
  Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum!]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Children remain seated and move to the right side of seat.


1st Line;-- Little Jack Horner sat in a corner,

  Interpretation;-- Upon the word, "sat," pupils move to the left side
  of seat.

2nd Line;-- Eating a Christmas pie;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "eating," pupils encircle imaginary plate
  with the left arm and imitate eating with the right hand.

3rd Line;-- He put in his thumb, And pulled out a plum,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "put," pupil imitates the action of putting
  thumb in pie and pulling out a plum, making the action vigorous upon
  the word, "pulled," stretching the arm overhead. Looks at the plum.

4th Line;-- And said, "What a good boy am I!"

  Inter.;-- Proudly pats the chest with the left hand.

Conclusion;-- Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum!

  Inter.;-- Lowers plum until it disappears in the mouth, imitating
  eating, tapping his chest the while.


[Illustration: HE PUT IN HIS THUMB, AND PULLED OUT A PLUM]




ROCK-A-BYE, BABY


_Permission to use words and music:-- D. Appleton and Co._

[Music:
  Rockabye, baby in the tree top,
  When the wind blows the cradle will rock;
  When the bough breaks the cradle will fall,
  And down will come baby cradle and all.]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Rock-a-bye, baby in the tree top,

  Interpretation;-- Hold baby in the arms, looking down at it, and sway
  gently to and fro. (Right; left; right and left.)

2nd Line;-- When the wind blows the cradle will rock;

  Inter.;-- Rock more vigorously.

3rd Line;-- When the bough breaks the cradle will fall,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "breaks," children clap hands overhead--
  partially dropping the baby.

4th Line;-- And down will come baby, cradle and all.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "down," children spring into the air and
  immediately assume deep knee bending position.

Position.


[Illustration: ROCKING THE BABY]




JACK BE NIMBLE-- No. 1


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Jack be nimble, Jack be quick;
  Jack jump'd over the candle stick.]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle with hands on hips.


1st Line;-- Jack be nimble, Jack be quick;

  Interpretation;-- Marking time, in place. (Seven counts.)

2nd Line;-- Jack jumped over the candle stick.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "jumped," the children face to the left and
  vault over their own seats; finish facing the front of room with hands
  on hips.

Repeat rhyme and activity back to former aisle.


[Illustration: JACK JUMPED OVER THE CANDLE STICK]




JACK BE NIMBLE-- No. 2

Music-- _See Jack Be Nimble-- No. 1_


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle with hands on hips.


1st Line;-- Jack be

  Interpretation;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left.

nimble

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right. (Front.)

2nd Line;-- Jack be

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right.

quick;

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left. (Front.)

3rd Line;-- Jack

  Inter.;-- One-quarter turn to the left, placing hands on the near
  edge of desk and back of seat, bending knees slightly.

jumped over

  Inter.;-- Vault over the seat; replace hands to hips and execute
  1/4 turn to the right (Front.)

4th Line;-- The candle stick.

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place, three counts. (Left; right and left.)

Repeat back to original position.




HUMPTY DUMPTY


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,
  Humpty Dumpty had a great fall;
  All the King's horses and all the King's men,
  Couldn't put Humpty Dumpty together again.]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,

  Interpretation;-- Upon the word, "sat," pupils sit upon own desks;
  feet hanging in aisle.

2nd Line;-- Humpty Dumpty had a great fall;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "fall," pupils jump into the right aisles;
  bending knees deeply, facing the front of the room.

3rd Line;-- All the King's horses and all the King's men,

  Inter.;-- Assume position of attention with arms stretched forward
  holding imaginary reins, at the same time "marking time" (ten counts),
  raising knees waist high.

4th Line;-- Couldn't put Humpty Dumpty together again.

  Inter.;-- Shaking the head in sorrow; right, left, right and front.
  Hands are placed upon hips during this movement.


[Illustration: HUMPTY DUMPTY SAT ON A WALL]




DICKORY, DICKORY, DOCK


_First Verse_

_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Dickory, dickory, dock;
  The mouse ran up the clock;
  The clock struck, One.
    The mouse ran down;
  Dickory, dickory, dock.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Dickory, dickory, dock;

  Interpretation;-- Hands clasped overhead; swaying right, left and
  erect.

2nd Line;-- The mouse ran up the clock;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "ran," stand in own seats with the arms
  stretched sideward.

3rd Line;-- The clock struck, One,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "One," clap hands overhead and lower arms
  sideward.

The mouse ran down;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "ran," jump into the left aisle with hands
  clasped overhead.

4th Line;-- Dickory, dickory, dock.

  Inter.;-- Swaying right, left and erect.

Repeat activity to the right, bringing all pupils back to former aisles.


[Illustration: THE PENDULUM]


_Second Verse-- Music on Page 25_


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Dickory, dickory, dock,

  Interpretation;-- Hands clasped overhead; swaying right, left and
  erect.

2nd Line;-- "Why scamper," said the clock.

  Inter.;-- Place hands on hips; execute six running steps forward.
  (Seven counts.) (Left; right; left; right; left; right; close left
  to right, completing the movement.)

3rd Line;-- You

scared

  Inter.;-- Execute 1/2 turn right about.

me so,

I'll

have to go;

  Inter.;-- Execute three running steps forward. (Four counts.)
  (Left; right; left, and close right to left, completing the movement.)

4th Line;-- Dickory, dickory, dock.

  Inter.;-- Hands clasped overhead; swaying right, left and erect.

Repeat to bring the class back to the original position.




LITTLE MISS MUFFET


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Little Miss Muffet sat on a tuffet,
    eating of curds and whey,
  Along came a spider
  And sat down beside her;
  And frighten'd Miss Muffet away.
  Dear me! Dear me! Dear me! Dear me!]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention. Alternate aisles
act as Miss Muffet; other aisles act as the Spider. (Count off from left
flank by twos. No. 1-- Miss Muffet. No. 2-- The Spider.)


1st Line;-- Little Miss Muffet sat on a tuffet, eating of curds and
whey.

  Interpretation;-- Upon the word, "sat," Little Miss Muffet climbs
  into her own seat, faces back of room and sits upon the right side
  of desk. Hold imaginary plate in left arm and imitate eating.

2nd Line;-- Along came a spider

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "Along," the Spider hastens over own seat
  and Miss Muffet's aisle; climbs upon seat and sits with Miss Muffet.

3rd Line;-- And sat down beside her;

  Inter.;-- Completion of second line activity.

4th Line;-- And frighten'd Miss Muffet away.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "frighten'd," children return to own seats.

Upon returning to their own seats the children sing--
  Dear me! Dear me! Dear me! Dear me!


[Illustration: ALONG CAME A SPIDER (Spiders vaulting seats)]




JACK AND JILL


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Jack and Jill went up the hill,
  to fetch a pail of water;
  Jack fell down and broke his crown,
  And Jill came tumbling after,
  Boohoo! Boohoo! Boohoo! Boohoo!]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention. Alternate aisles
act as Jack. (Girls and boys.) Other aisles act as Jill. (Girls and
boys.) Count off from left flank by twos. No. 1-- Jill. No. 2-- Jack.


1st Line;-- Jack and Jill went up the hill,

  Interpretation;-- Upon the word, "up," Jack and Jill take hold of
  hands and climb into same seats. (The climbing of the hill.)

2nd Line;-- To fetch a pail of water;

  Inter.;-- No activity.

3rd Line;-- Jack fell down and broke his crown,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "fell," Jack falls (jumps) into own aisle,
  bends knees, deeply covering his face with his hands, imitating
  crying.

4th Line;-- And Jill came tumbling after.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "tumbling," Jill falls (jumps) into the same
  aisle as Jack; bends knees, deeply covering her face with her hands,
  imitating crying.


Upon completion of the song all children return to their own seats,
singing--

  Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo!


[Illustration: JACK AND JILL WENT UP THE HILL]




BYE O BABY BUNTING


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Bye O Baby Bunting,
  Daddy's gone a-hunting;
  To fetch a little rabbit skin
  To wrap the Baby Bunting in.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Bye O

  Interpretation;-- Hold the baby in the arms, looking down at it,
  and sway gently to the right.

Baby-

  Inter.;-- Sway gently to the left.

Bunt-

  Inter.;-- Sway gently to the right.

ing

  Inter.;-- Assume stationary position.

2nd Line;-- Daddy's gone a-hunting;

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place, seven counts; carry gun over the
  right shoulder (flex right arm; place hand on shoulder with fingers
  clenched, forefinger extended to represent barrel of gun.)

3rd Line;-- To fetch a little rabbit skin

  Inter.;-- Kneel on left knee and extend the right arm forward,
  representing the aiming of a gun. (Fingers of the right hand clenched,
  with forefinger extended; left hand resting on right upper arm.)

4th Line;-- To wrap the Baby Bunting in.

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position; bend forward and encircle body with
  arms and return hands to hips upon completion of the sentence.


[Illustration: AIMING THE GUN]




LITTLE BOY BLUE


_Permission to use words and music:-- D. Appleton and Co._

[Music:
  Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn,
  There's sheep in the meadow and cows in the corn;
  Where is the boy that looks after the sheep?
  He's under the haycock fast asleep.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


1st Line;-- Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn,

  Interpretation;-- Mark time, in place. (Four counts.) Upon the word,
  "blow," hands clenched, elbows raised high, imitate the blowing of
  the horn. Finish with hands on hips.

2nd Line;-- There's sheep in the meadow and cows in the corn;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "sheep," point to the right and look in
  direction pointed. Upon the word, "cows," replace right hand to hip;
  point to the left and look in direction pointed. Finish with hands on
  hips and eyes front.

3rd Line;-- Where is the boy that looks after the sheep?

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "where," shade the eyes with the right hand
  and look to the right. Upon the word, "looks," replace right hand to
  hip; shade the eyes with the left hand and look to the left. Finish
  with left hand on hip and eyes front.

4th Line;-- He's under the haycock fast asleep.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "under," resume seats and lower head to
  desks upon folded arms.


[Illustration: THERE'S SHEEP IN THE MEADOW]




WEE WILLIE WINKIE


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Wee Willie Winkie runs thru the town,
  Upstairs and downstairs in his nightgown;
  Rapping at the window,
    Crying thru the lock:--
  Are all the children in their beds?
    Now 'tis eight o'clock.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle with hands on hips.


1st Line;-- Wee Willie Winkie runs through the town,

  Interpretation;-- Mark time, in place. (Knees waist high.) (Seven
  counts.)

2nd Line;-- Upstairs and

  Inter.;-- Heels raised.

downstairs

  Inter.;-- Bend knees deeply.

in his night-

  Inter.;-- Stretch knees, lower heels and bow.

gown;

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position.

3rd Line;-- Rapping at the window,

  Inter.;-- With hands clenched, stretch arms upward and tap imaginary
  window. (Four times.)

Crying through the lock:--

  Inter.;-- Cup hands and carry to mouth as if calling, bending knees
  deeply.

4th Line;-- "Are all the children

  Inter.;-- Turn head to the right.

in their beds?

  Inter.;-- Turn head to the left.

Now 'tis eight o'clock."

  Inter.;-- Stretch the knees and lower heels.




HEY, DIDDLE, DIDDLE


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Hey, diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle,
  The cow jump'd over the moon;
  The little dog laughed to see such sport,
  And the dish ran away with the spoon.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


1st Line;-- Hey, diddle, diddle,

  Interpretation;-- Mark time, in place, five counts.

the cat and

  Inter.;-- Imitate the action of playing the fiddle. One upward stroke
  of the bow.

the fiddle,

  Inter.;-- One downward stroke of the bow.

2nd Line;-- The cow

  Inter.;-- Turn to the left; place hands on edge of desk and back of
  seat and bend knees slightly.

jumped over

  Inter.;-- Vault over the seat.

the moon;

  Inter.;-- Turn to the right (front); stretch knees, lower heels and
  place hands on hips.

3rd Line;-- The little dog

laughed to see

  Inter.;-- Bend trunk forward, hugging self, imitating great hilarity.

such sport,

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position with hands on hips.

4th Line;-- And the

dish ran away with the spoon.

  Inter.;-- Execute a complete turn to the right with seven running
  steps, terminating action upon the word, "spoon."

Stamp feet twice, in place, at the completion of the entire activity.




WHERE HAS MY LITTLE DOG GONE?


_Permission to use words and music:--
Miss Lydia Clark and Benj. H. Sanborn & Co._

Arr. by +Fannie Robertson+

[Music:
  Oh where, oh where has my little dog gone?
  Oh where, oh where has he gone?
  With his tail cut short and his ears cut long,
  Oh where, oh where has he gone?]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


1st Line;-- Oh where,

  Interpretation;-- Shade eyes with the right hand and with a jump
  execute 1/4 turn to the right.

oh where

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left. (Front.)

has my little

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left.

dog gone?

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right. (Front.)

2nd Line;-- Oh where

  Inter.;-- Replace right hand to hip; shade eyes with the left hand
  and with a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left.

oh where

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right (Front.)

has he g-

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right.

one?

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left (Front.)

3rd Line;-- With his tail cut short and his ears cut long,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "tail," bend forward, placing hands behind
  back (palms together; fingers extended.)

  Upon the words, "and his," assume erect position with hands at sides.

  Upon the word, "ears," raise arms sideward, placing thumbs in ears
  (fingers extended.)

4th Line;-- Oh where,

  Inter.;-- Replace left hand to hip; shade eyes with the right hand
  and with a jump execute 1/2 turn right about.

oh where has he

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/2 turn right about. (Front.)

gone?

  Inter.;-- Replace right hand to hip, bow and assume erect position.


[Illustration: LOOKING FOR THE DOG]




RIDE A COCK-HORSE


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Ride a Cock-horse to Banbury Cross,
  To see a fine lady upon a white horse,
  Rings on her fingers and bells on her toes,
  She shall have music wherever she goes.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


1st Line;-- Ride a Cock-horse to Banbury Cross,

  Interpretation;-- Stretch arms forward, holding imaginary reins;
  bending and stretching knees. (Three times.)

2nd Line;-- To see a fine lady upon a white horse,

  Inter.;-- Replace left hand to hip; shade the eyes with the right
  hand and rotate the body to the right upon the word, "To." Replace
  the right hand to hip; shade the eyes with the left hand and rotate
  the body to the left upon the word, "upon." Replace the left hand to
  hip and turn the body forward upon the word, "horse."

3rd Line;-- Rings on her fingers and bells on her toes,

  Inter.;-- Raise arms forward, palms forward, fingers and thumbs
  extended upon the word, "Rings." Bend the trunk slightly forward and
  lower arms (palms forward), looking at the toes, upon the word,
  "bells." Assume erect position with hands on hips, upon the word,
  "toes."

4th Line;-- She shall have music wherever she goes.

  Inter.;-- Wave the baton with the right hand (forefinger extended;
  thumb and remaining fingers clenched) to the left, right, left, right
  and left, upon the words, "She shall have music." (Five counts.)

  Replace the right hand to hip, bow and assume erect position upon the
  words, "wherever she goes."


[Illustration: THE SALUTE (_See page 35_)]


[Illustration: THE RIDING OF THE HORSE]




YANKEE DOODLE


[Music:
  Yankee Doodle came to town,
  A riding on a pony,
  He stuck a feather in his hat,
  And called it Macaroni.
  Yankee Doodle, Ha! Ha! Ha!
  Yankee Doodle Dandy;
  Mind the music and your step
  And round the house be handy.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


Verse

1st Line;-- Yankee Doodle came to town,

  Interpretation;-- Children mark time, in place. (Seven counts.)

2nd Line;-- A riding on a pony,

  Inter.;-- Stretching arms forward as if holding imaginary reins;
  bend and stretch knees (four times), finishing with hands on hips.

3rd Line;-- He stuck a feather in his hat,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "stuck," take off the hat with the left hand
  and upon the word, "in," insert the feather. Finish with hands on
  hips.

4th Line;-- And called it Macaroni.

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place. (Eight counts.)


Chorus

1st Line;-- Yankee Doodle,

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place. (Four counts.)

Ha! Ha! Ha!

  Inter.;-- Clap hands, three times. Finish with hands on hips.

2nd Line;-- Yankee Doodle

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place. (Four counts.)

Dandy.

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.

3rd Line;-- Mind the music

  Inter.;-- Wave the baton with right hand (forefinger extended) left,
  right, left and right. (Four counts.) Finish with hands on hips.

and your step

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place. (Three counts.)

4th Line;-- And round the house be handy.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "round," execute a half turn to the right
  about by jumping. Upon the word, "house," execute a half turn to the
  right about by jumping. Upon the word, "handy," jump, in place, three
  times and salute with the right hand.




PAT-A-CAKE


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Pat-a-cake, Pat-a-cake, Baker's Man,
  Stir it and stir it as fast as you can;
  Roll it and prick it and mark it with "B,"
  And put in the oven for baby and me.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips. Count off by twos from left to right and have "ones" face to the
right and "twos" face to the left. (Open line formation; partners facing
each other.)


1st Line;-- Pat-a-cake,

  Interpretation;-- Clap own hands three times.

Pat-a-cake,

  Inter.;-- Clap partner's hands three times.

Baker's Man,

  Inter.;-- Hands hips; bow and assume erect position.

2nd Line;-- Stir it and stir it as fast as you can;

  Inter.;-- Hold imaginary bowl in the left arm (shoulder high),
  stirring with the right hand, increasing revolutions upon the word,
  "fast." Upon the word, "can," the hands return to hips.

3rd Line;-- Roll it and prick it and mark it with "B";

  Inter.;-- Upon the words, "roll it," raise hands (palms together;
  right hand on top) shoulder height, and roll it by a sliding movement.

  Upon the words, "prick it," suit action to the words and prick cake,
  using forefinger of right hand, pressing same into left palm.

  Upon the words, "mark it," join forefingers with thumbs, raising to
  eye height and form letter "B." (Deaf and dumb alphabet.)

4th Line;-- And put in the oven for baby and me.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "put," imitate the action of placing the cake
  in the oven by extending arms forward (palms up) and bending knees.
  Assume erect position with hands on hips upon the word, "oven."

  Upon the word, "baby," bow and assume erect position.

  Upon the word, "me," raise the right arm (shoulder height) and place
  forefinger on chest.

Position.


[Illustration: PAT-A-CAKE]




BEAN PORRIDGE


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Bean porridge hot,
    Bean porridge cold,
  Bean porridge in the pot,
    Nine days old;
  Some like it hot,
    And some like it cold,
  Some like it in the pot,
    Nine days old.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle in partner formation
(open line formation; partners facing), with hands on hips.

Files numbered from the left flank by twos. No. Ones face to the right;
No. Twos face to the left.


1st Line;-- Bean

  Interpretation;-- Clap hands to thighs.

porridge

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

hot,

  Inter.;-- Clap partner's hands.

Bean

  Inter.;-- Clap hands to thighs.

porridge

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

cold,

  Inter.;-- Clap partner's hands.

2nd Line;-- Bean

  Inter.;-- Clap hands to thighs.

porridge

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

in the

  Inter.;-- With right hand clap partner's right hand.

pot,

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

Nine

  Inter.;-- With left hand clap partner's left hand.

days

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

old;

  Inter.;-- Clap partner's hands.

  Description of pupil;-- Number Two. Number One;-- Counterlike.

3rd Line;-- Some

  Inter.;-- Clasp partner's hands and raise arms to shoulder height.
  Step sideward right.

like it

  Inter.;-- Close left to right.

hot, And

  Inter.;-- Step dip, right.

some

  Inter.;-- Step sideward left.

like it

  Inter.;-- Close right to left.

cold,

  Inter.;-- Step dip, left.

4th Line;-- Some

  Inter.;-- Face to the right; place right hand on hip, inner hands
  joined and raised shoulder height. Step forward, right.

like it

  Inter.;-- Step forward, left.

in the

  Inter.;-- Step forward, right.

pot,

  Inter.;-- Close left to right and place left hand on hip.

Nine days

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute a half turn right about.

old.

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute a half turn right about.




FLY AWAY JACK AND JILL


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Two little blackbirds,
  Sitting on a hill,
  One named Jack,
  And the other named Jill;
  Fly away Jack
    And fly away Jill;
  Come again Jack
    And come again Jill.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle in partner formation (open line
formation; partners facing each other); arms raised forward (shoulder
height) and clasp partner's hands.

NOTE.-- If desk width is too great have pupils place hands on hips.

"Count off" from the left flank by twos.

  No. 1:-- Jack. No. 2:-- Jill.


1st Line;-- Two

  Interpretation;-- Left file (Jack); Step sideward, left.
  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); Step sideward, right.

little

  Inter.;-- Close right to left,
  Inter.;-- Close left to right.

black-

  Inter.;-- Step sideward, left.
  Inter.;-- Step sideward, right.

birds

  Inter.;-- Close right to left.
  Inter.;-- Close left to right.

2nd Line;-- Sitting

  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); Stamp left.
  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); Stamp right.

on

  Inter.;-- Stamp right.
  Inter.;-- Stamp left.

a hill,

  Inter.;-- Replace hands to hips and bend knees deeply.
  Inter.;-- Replace hands to hips and bend knees deeply.

3rd Line;-- One named

  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); Stretch knees and turn to the left.
  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); No activity.

Jack,

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.
  Inter.;-- No activity.

4th Line;-- And the

  Inter.;-- No activity for either files.

other named

  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); Stretch knees and turn to the right.
  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); No activity.

Jill;

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.
  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); No activity.

5th Line;-- Fly away, Jack

  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); face to the right and execute three
  chasses to the left.
  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); No activity.

And

fly away, Jill,

  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); face to the left and execute three
  chasses to the right.
  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); No activity.

6th Line;-- Come again, Jack

  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); Three chasses to the right.
  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); No activity.

And

come again, Jill.

  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); Three chasses to the left.
  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); No activity.




DIDDLE, DIDDLE DUMPLING


[Music:
  Diddle, Diddle Dumpling, my son John;
  Went to bed with his trousers on.
  One shoe off and one shoe on.
  Diddle, Diddle Dumpling, my son John.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle in partner formation. Open line
formation; partners facing each other; arms raised forward (shoulder
height) and clasp partner's hands.

NOTE.-- If desk width is too great have pupils place hands on hips.

NOTE.-- Description of movement of pupil facing to the left. Movements
of partner;-- reverse.


1st Line;-- Diddle, Diddle Dumpling,

  Interpretation;-- Step throw, right and left. (Four counts.)

my son John;

  Inter.;-- Stamp feet; right, left, right and hold. (Four counts.)

2nd Line;-- Went to bed with his

  Inter.;-- Step throw, left and right. (Four counts.)

trousers on.

  Inter.;-- Replace left foot, bend knees deeply; lower arms with hands
  clenched. Stretch knees, pulling trousers on and place hands on hips.
  (Two counts per movement; four counts in all.)

3rd Line;-- One shoe off and

  Inter.;-- Arms raised forward (shoulder height) and clasp partner's
  hands. Step right sideward and close left to right and step throw,
  right. (Schottische.) (Four counts.)

one shoe on,

  Inter.;-- Step left sideward and close right to left and step throw,
  left. (Schottische.) (Four counts.)

4th Line;-- Diddle, Diddle

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, once. (Two counts.)

Dumpling

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, once. (Two counts.)

my son John.

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, three times and hold. (Four counts.)


[Illustration: SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE (_See page 40_)]




SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliot+

_1st Verse._

[Music:
  Sing a song of sixpence,
  A pocket full of Rye;
  Four and twenty Blackbirds bak'd in a Pie.
  When the Pie was open'd,
  The Birds began to sing;
  Wasn't that a dainty dish to set before a King!]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle facing each other with hands
on hips. (Open line formation; partners facing each other.)


1st Line;-- Sing a song of sixpence,

  Interpretation;-- Step to the right, place left toe behind right heel,
  bending both knees slightly. Repeat to the left. (Cues:-- Step and
  bend and step and bend.)

2nd Line;-- A pocket full of Rye;

  Inter.;-- Execute three slides to the right and bring heels together
  on the fourth count. (Cues; Slide, slide, slide and heels.)

3rd Line;-- Four and twenty Blackbirds,

  Inter.;-- Repeat the activity of the first line, starting to the left.

4th Line;-- Bak'd in a Pie.

  Inter.;-- Repeat activity of the second line to the left.

5th Line;-- When the Pie was open'd,

  Inter.;-- Pupils face forward; raise arms forward (shoulder height)
  in circle form and then extend sideward, imitating the opening of
  the pie.

6th Line;-- The Birds began to sing;

  Inter.;-- Fluttering of arms up and down, imitating the flying of
  birds.

7th Line;-- Wasn't that a dainty dish

  Inter.;-- Replace both hands to hips on the word, "dainty." Upon the
  word, "dish," stretch the right hand forward as if holding the dish
  and nod the head in approval.

8th Line;-- To set before a King!

  Inter.;-- Step sideward to the right, close feet and bow with arms
  stretched sideward.


_2nd Verse._

[Music:
  The King was in the counting house,
    Counting out his money;
  The Queen was in the parlour,
    Eating bread and honey;
  The maid was in the garden,
    Hanging out the clothes;
  There came a little Dicky Bird
    And popp'd upon her nose.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle with hands on hips, facing the
front of room.


1st Line;-- The King

  Interpretation;-- Jump, in place, with a quarter turn to the right.

was in

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, with a quarter turn to the left. (Front.)

the counting

  Inter.;-- Place left foot in seat area.

house,

  Inter.;-- Sit in seat.

Counting out his money;

  Inter.;-- Suit activity to words, holding imaginary coins in palm of
  left hand and count with the right hand.

2nd Line;-- The Queen

  Inter.;-- Stand in the right aisle; face to the left and immediately
  place hands in support on back of seat and edge of desk.

was in

  Inter.;-- Vault over seat, (Upon completion of vault, the hands assume
  normal position.)

the parlour,

  Inter.;-- Face to the right; place right foot in seat area and become
  seated.

Eating bread and honey;

  Inter.;-- Suit activity to words, encircling imaginary plate with left
  arm and imitate eating with the right hand.

3rd Line;-- The maid

  Inter.;-- Place right foot in right aisle.

was in

  Inter.;-- Stand in right aisle and place hands on hips.

the garden,

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.

Hanging

  Inter.;-- Bend trunk forward downward; stretch arms downward,
  grasping clothes.

out

  Inter.;-- Raise trunk, stretch arms upward and grasp imaginary
  clothesline.

the clothes;

  Inter.;-- Using right hand, take clothes-pin out of mouth and pin
  clothes on the line.

4th Line;-- There came a little Dicky Bird,

  Inter.;-- Replace hands to hips and mark time, in place.
  (Left, right, left and right.)

And popped

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, and clap hands once.

upon her

  Inter.;-- Replace hands to hips; step right sideward and close
  left to right.

nose!

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.




SEE SAW, MARJORY DAW


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Seesaw, Marjory Daw,
  Jack shall have a new master,
  He shall have but a penny a day,
  Because he won't work any faster.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Arrange class so that three aisles may work together.

Center aisle;-- Jump to stride stand with arms raised sideward.

Outer aisles;-- Face the center and grasp with both hands the
outstretched hand of pupil in center.

The center player acts as the Board; outer players as riders.


1st Line;-- See Saw, Marjory Daw,

  Interpretation;-- Center activity;-- Pupil bends trunk to the right,
  left, right and left.

Outer aisles;-- When center pupils bend to the right, the children on
  the right act as riders on board, bending and stretching knees. In
  reversing the movement, similar activity for those on the left.

2nd Line;-- Jack shall have a new master,

  Inter.;-- Center and outer aisles activity;-- Continue movement as
  described for the first line, finishing in erect position with hands
  on hips.

3rd Line;-- He shall have but a penny a day,

  Inter.;-- Outer aisles;-- Placing left hand to right elbow, shake
  index finger three times upon the words, "he shall have"; repeat
  motion with the left hand upon the words, "but a penny a day."
  Finish with hands on hips.

  Center activity;-- Nod to the right upon the words, "he shall have";
  assume erect position and nod to the left upon the words, "but a penny
  a day." Finish with hands on hips.

4th Line;-- Because he won't work any faster.

  Inter.;-- Repeat activity of first line. (Center and outer aisles.)



           *       *       *       *


_Circle_

(Outer aisles of classroom or in open area.)