THE MENTOR 1917.11.01, No. 142,
                                Bolivia




                            LEARN ONE THING
                               EVERY DAY

                  NOVEMBER 1 1917      SERIAL NO. 142

                                  THE
                                MENTOR

                                BOLIVIA

                            By E. M. NEWMAN
                         Lecturer and Traveler

                      DEPARTMENT OF      VOLUME 5
                     TRAVEL             NUMBER 18

                          TWENTY CENTS A COPY




The Native Bolivian

[Illustration]


The Indian of the Bolivian plateau is still only a half-civilized man
and less than half a Christian. He retains his primeval Nature worship,
which groups together the spirits that dwell in mountains, rivers, and
rocks with the spirits of his ancestors, revering and propitiating all
as _Achachilas_. In the same ceremony his medicine man invokes the
Christian “_Dios_” to favor the building of a house, or whatever he
undertakes, and simultaneously invokes the _Achachilas_, propitiating
them also by offerings, the gift made to the Earth Spirit being buried
in the soil. Similarly he retains the ceremonial dances of heathendom,
and has secret dancing guilds, of whose mysteries the white man can
learn nothing.



His morality is what it was, in theory and practice, four centuries
ago. He neither loves nor hates, but fears, the white man, and the
white man neither loves nor hates, but despises him; there being some
fear mingled with the contempt. Intermarriage between pure Indians
and pure Europeans is very uncommon. They are held together neither
by social relations nor by political, but by the need which the white
landowner has for the Indian’s labor and by the power of long habit,
which has made the Indian acquiesce in his subjection as a rent payer.



Neither of them ever refers to the Spanish Conquest. The white man
does not honor the memory of Pizarro; to the Indian the story is too
dim and distant to affect his mind. Nor is it the least remarkable
feature of the situation that the mestizo, or half-breed, forms no
link between the races. He prefers to speak Spanish which the Indian
rarely understands. He is held to belong to the upper race, which is,
for social and political purpose, though not by right of numbers, the
Peruvian or Bolivian nation.

                                                       JAMES BRYCE.

From “South America, Observations and Impressions.”




[Illustration: PHOTOGRAPH BY E. M. NEWMAN

INCA TEMPLE OF THE SUN--ON THE SHORE OF LAKE TITICACA, BOLIVIA]




_BOLIVIA_

_The Story of Bolivia_

ONE


With the exception of Paraguay, Bolivia is the only entirely inland
State in South America. It is really a manufactured nation. When
the War of Independence of that part of South America ended, the
revolutionary leaders set up this country as an independent State, and
gave it the name of Bolivia, in honor of Simon Bolivar, the Liberator,
himself a native of Venezuela. Bolivia is bounded on the north and east
by Brazil, on the south by Paraguay and Argentina, and on the west by
Chile and Peru.

In its early days Bolivia was simply a part of the empire of the Incas
of Peru. The story of the Incas has been given in Mentor No. 132,
“Peru.” After the conquest of Peru by the Spaniards in the sixteenth
century, the natives were subjected to a great deal of tyranny and
oppression. They were compelled to work in the mines, and endured so
many hardships and cruelties that their numbers rapidly diminished.

During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries there were many
struggles between the native-born inhabitants and their Spanish
rulers. The Indian revolt in Cuzco (koos´-ko or kooth´-ko), Peru,
which was led by the Inca Tupac Amaru (too´-pahk ah-mah-roo´), stirred
up the Bolivian Indians to further efforts. For three months Ayoayo
(ei-o-ei´-o) with 80,000 men, besieged the city of La Paz (lah pahth;
local pronunciation, lah pahs´). Finally his army was dispersed and the
insurrection was crushed.

Injustice had been worked not only upon the Indians, but upon the
native born Spanish-Americans. These grew restless at last, and on
July 16, 1809, conspirators at La Paz deposed and put into prison the
governor, and then proclaimed the independence of the country. One of
the leaders, Pedro Domingo Murillo (pay´-dro do-min´-go myr-ril´-o
or moo-reel´-yo), was elected president. This was the first effort
in South America toward democratic government. The Spanish Viceroy,
however, sent a trained army which soon overcame that of the patriots.
On January 29, 1810, Murillo perished on the scaffold. In the face of
death, however, he exclaimed: “The torch which I have lighted shall
never be extinguished.”

From then on until 1825 there was almost uninterrupted warfare. Success
was equally divided at first between the Spanish and the revolutionary
forces. On December 9, 1824, the Battle of Ayacucho (i-ah-koo´-cho), in
lower Peru, finally ended Spanish dominion in South America. General
Sucre (soo´-kray) was the victorious general. On January 29, 1825, the
last Spanish authorities vacated La Paz. General Sucre and his army
made a triumphal entry there on February 7, 1825. This general now
assumed supreme command in upper Peru. The first national assembly
met in June at the city of Chuquisaca (choo-kee-sah´-kah), now called
Sucre. They decided that the part of the country hitherto known as
upper Peru should be made a separate and independent nation, with the
name of Bolivia. The Act of Independence bears the date of August 6,
1825.

Simon Bolivar (bo-lee´-var) was elected the first president; and
Chuquisaca was made the capital under the name of Sucre. When General
Bolivar arrived in the city of La Paz on August 18th, he was greeted
with wild enthusiasm. He was inaugurated at Sucre in November; but
resigned in January, 1826, to return to Lima (lee´-mah) in Peru.

There was no peace for the people of Bolivia yet, however. Troublous
times followed, and finally came the war with Chile. This war arose
over the collection of an export tax on nitrate. Chile sent troops to
occupy Bolivian territory; and then Peru, linked to Bolivia by secret
treaty, together with that country, declared war on Chile on April 5,
1879. Both Peru and Bolivia were entirely unprepared, and Chile was
completely victorious in this war. As a result Bolivia lost what little
coastline the country had previously possessed.

During the last thirty years internal dissensions in Bolivia have for
the most part ceased. There was a brief time of trouble in 1898 over
the question of the capital city. It had been the custom for the cities
of Sucre, La Paz, Cochabamba (ko-chah-bahm´-bah), and Oruro (o-roo-ro)
to take turns in being the seat of government. In December, 1898,
however, the Bolivian Congress attempted to pass a law making Sucre the
permanent residence of the president and cabinet. La Paz protested,
and the people of the city rose in open revolt. On January 17, 1899, a
battle was fought between the insurgents and the government forces. The
insurgents were completely victorious. As a result, La Paz was made the
real seat of government, although Sucre retains the name of capital.
General Pando, (pahn´-do), commander of the revolutionary forces, was
elected president. In 1903 a boundary dispute with Brazil over some
rich rubber country was settled by the cession by Bolivia of a part
of the province of Acre, (ah´-kray), in return for a cash payment of
$10,000,000.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 5, No. 18, SERIAL No. 142
    COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: PHOTOGRAPH BY E. M. NEWMAN

HOUSE OF CONGRESS, LA PAZ, BOLIVIA]




_BOLIVIA_

_Government and Institutions_

TWO


Bolivia is a centralized republic. Its government is representative in
form, but to a great extent it is autocratic in effect. The Bolivian
constitution was adopted on October 28, 1880, and is a model of its
kind. The executive branch of the government consists of a president
and two vice-presidents. They are elected by direct popular vote for
a period of four years, and are ineligible for election for the next
succeeding term. The president has a cabinet of six ministers: Foreign
Relations and Worship, Treasury, Government and Promotion (Fomento),
Justice and Industry, Public Instruction and Agriculture, War and
Colonization.

The legislative branch consists of a national Congress of two houses--a
Senate and a Chamber of Deputies. The Senate is composed of sixteen
members, two from each department, who are elected by direct popular
vote for a period of six years. The Chamber of Deputies is composed of
seventy members, who are elected for a period of four years. Congress
meets annually and its sessions are for sixty days, which may be
extended to ninety days. All male citizens twenty-one years of age
or over, who can read and write and have a fixed independent income,
may vote. The number of citizens who vote, therefore, is very small,
and the country is for that reason under the control of a political
oligarchy.

The judiciary consists of a national supreme court, eight superior
district courts, and many lower district courts. The supreme court is
composed of seven justices, elected by the Chamber of Deputies.

In each department or State a prefect appointed by the president has
supreme power. The government of these departments rests with the
national congress.

The military forces of Bolivia include about 3,000 regulars and
an enrolled force of 80,000 men. This enrolled force, however, is
both unorganized and unarmed. In 1894 a conscription law was passed
providing for compulsory military service for all males between the
ages of twenty-one and fifty years, with two years’ actual service in
the regulars for those between twenty-one and twenty-five. This law is
practically a dead letter. There is a military school with sixty cadets
and an arsenal at the city of La Paz. Naturally Bolivia, having no
coast line, is not provided with a navy.

Bolivia has a free and compulsory school system, but education has
made little progress there. Very few of the people can read and
write. Spanish is the official language, but Quichua (kee-choo´-ah
or kee´-chwah). Aymará (i-mah-rah´), and Guarani (gwah-rah´-nee) are
the languages of the natives, who form a majority of the population.
A great part of the Indians do not understand Spanish at all and will
not learn it. The school enrollment is about one in forty-four. There
are universities at Sucre, La Paz, Cochabamba, Tarija (tah-ree´-hah),
Potosí (po-to-see´), Santa Cruz (san´-tah kroos), and Oruro. The
university at Sucre, which dates from colonial times, and that of La
Paz, are the only ones well enough equipped to merit the title.

The Constitution of Bolivia says: “The State recognizes and supports
the Roman Apostolic Catholic religion, the public exercise of any
other worship being prohibited, except in the colonies, where it is
tolerated.” However, this toleration is extended to resident foreigners
belonging to other religious sects. The Indians profess the Roman
Catholic faith, but this is tinged with the superstitions of their
ancestors.

At this point it will be interesting to consider the Indians of
Bolivia. The population of the country is composed of Indians and
Caucasians of European origin, and a mixture of the two races,
generally described as _mestizos_ (mes-tee´zos). There is also a small
percentage of Africans, descendants of the negro slaves introduced
in colonial times. Naturally, the Indians are in great majority. The
Bolivian Indian is essentially a farmer. Scarcely any of these Indians
are educated.

Of the various tribes of Indians, the Aymaras are the most civilized.
The Mojos (mo´-hos) and Chiquitos (chee-kee´-tose) tribes are peaceable
and industrious. They have little ambition, and are held almost in a
state of peonage. Inhabiting the southern part of the Bolivian plains
are the Chiraguanos (chee-rah-gwah´-nos), a detached tribe of the
Guarani race which drifted westward, to the vicinity of the Andes, long
ago. They are of a superior physical and mental type, and have made a
great deal of progress toward civilization. Of the wild Indians very
little is known in regard to either their numbers or customs.

The _mestizos_, or half-breeds, sometimes called Cholos, are the
connecting link between the whites and the Indians. It has been said
of the _mestizos_ that they inherit the vices of both races and the
virtues of neither.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 5, No. 18, SERIAL No. 142
    COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: PHOTOGRAPH BY E. M. NEWMAN

A PACK TRAIN OF LLAMAS IN LA PAZ, BOLIVIA--TWILIGHT]




_BOLIVIA_

_Resources and Industries_

THREE


“Imagine,” says James Bryce, “a country as big as the German and
Austrian dominions put together, with a population less than that of
Denmark, four-fifths of it consisting of semi-civilized or uncivilized
Indians, and a few educated men of European and mixed stock, scattered
here and there in half a dozen towns, none of which has more than
a small number of capable citizens of that stock.” That country is
Bolivia.

The popular idea of Bolivia is that it is an extremely rugged,
mountainous country. In fact, only two-fifths of the total area of
Bolivia is comprised within the Andine Cordilleras, which cross its
southwest corner. Three-fifths of the country is composed of low,
alluvial plains, great swamps and flooded bottom lands, and gently
undulating forest regions. There are also considerable areas that
afford rich grazing lands.

Bolivia lies wholly within the torrid zone. The only variations in
temperature, therefore, are due to elevation. For this reason the
country possesses every degree of temperature, from that of the
tropical lowlands to the Arctic cold of the snow-capped peaks directly
above.

Bolivia has many interesting animals. There are numerous species of
monkeys that inhabit the forests of the tropical region, together with
the puma, jaguar, wild cat, tapir, and sloth. A rare bear, the _Ursus
ornatus_ (spectacled bear) inhabits the wooded Indian foothills. The
chinchilla lives in the colder plateau regions of the country. The
most interesting of all the Bolivian animals, however, are the guanaco
(gwah-na´ko) and its relatives, the llama (lyah´ma), alpaca (al-pak´ah)
and vicuña (vi-koon´yah). These animals have the structure and habits
of the African camel, but are smaller and have no hump. They are able
to go without food and drink for long periods. The llama and the alpaca
have been domesticated for centuries; but the guanaco and vicuña are
found in a wild state only. The llama is used as a pack animal; and the
alpaca is highly prized for its fine wool. The slaughter of the guanaco
and the vicuña is rapidly diminishing their number.

Of birds the species in Bolivia are very numerous. The high mountains
are frequented by condors and eagles of the largest size; while the
American ostrich and a species of large stork inhabit the tropical
plains and valleys. The common vulture is scattered throughout the
whole country.

All sorts of plants, flowers and vegetation are to be found in Bolivia.
Coca (a shrub of the flax family, the dry leaves of which are chewed by
the native Indians as a stimulant) is one of the most important plants
of the country. The most important of the forest products, however,
is rubber. Sugar cane, rice, and tobacco are cultivated in the warm
districts.

The most important industry in Bolivia is mining. The lofty and
desert part of the country finds its only natural source of wealth
in minerals. The Western Cordillera is especially rich in copper and
silver, the Eastern in gold and tin. It has been said that one-third of
all the world’s production of tin now comes from Bolivia. It was from
the east Andine regions that the Incas obtained those vast stores of
gold which so excited the Spaniards. Legend has it that the gold that
the Spanish took out of the country was much less than that which the
Indians buried or threw into the lakes to keep it from the conquerors.

Next to mining, stock raising is one of the chief industries of the
country. Horses and, to a greater extent, cattle, are raised there.
Goats and sheep are also a source of profit.

Although the agricultural resources of Bolivia are of great value,
their development has been slow. Sugar cane is grown, but chiefly for
the manufacture of rum. Rice is also raised, but the quantity is not
great. Tobacco and coffee of fair quality grow readily. The product
that receives most attention, however, is coca. This plant is highly
esteemed by the natives, who chew the leaf. It is also used for
medicinal purposes.

It is from her forests, however, that Bolivia derives the greatest
immediate profit. The most prominent and profitable industry is that
of rubber collecting. This was begun in Bolivia between 1880 and 1890.
In 1903 Bolivia’s best rubber forests were transferred to Brazil, but
there still remain extensive areas where good rubber is collected.

The industrial activities of the Bolivian people are still of a very
primitive character. Spinning and weaving are done in the home. The
Indian women are expert weavers. Other industries of some importance
are the manufacture of cigars and cigarettes, soap, candles, hats,
gloves, starch, cheese and pottery. The foreign trade of Bolivia is
comparatively unimportant, with the exception of the products of its
mines.

One difficulty that Bolivia has to contend with is the lack of
transportation facilities. Railways have never been developed to any
extent, but great plans are on foot to remedy this. With communications
improved and extended, the future of Bolivia appears bright.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 5, No. 18, SERIAL No. 142
    COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: PHOTOGRAPH BY E. M. NEWMAN

LA PAZ, BOLIVIA--FROM THE RIM OF THE HEIGHTS]




_BOLIVIA_

_La Paz_

FOUR


La Paz (lah pahth; local pronunciation, lah pahs´) is a most unusual
city. It is the highest capital city in the world--for although Sucre
is the official capital, La Paz is really the capital city of Bolivia.
It lies in a great mountain hollow nearly 13,000 feet above the sea.
This altitude closely approaches that of Pike’s Peak; but whereas such
an altitude in our country would mean perpetual snow, here it brings
only a temperate climate, where flowers blossom throughout the year and
the little snow that falls quickly vanishes in the morning sunlight.

The city’s official name is La Paz de Ayacucho (eiah-koo´cho). It
is built in a deeply worn valley of the Cordillera Real, which is
believed to have formed an outlet of Lake Titicaca (tee-tee-kah´kah).
La Paz is built on both banks of the Rio de La Paz, or Rio Chuquiapu,
thirty miles southeast of Lake Titicaca. The valley in which the
city lies is about ten miles long and three miles wide. It is very
barren and forbidding, and its precipitous sides, gullied by rains
and colored by mineral ores, rise 1,500 feet above the city. Above
Illimani (eel-yee-mah´-nee) and other giant mountains of the Bolivian
Cordilleras rear their snow-capped peaks. The upper edge of the valley
is called the Alto de La Paz, or Heights of La Paz.

The city is surprisingly large, its population being about 80,000.
Two-thirds of the population consists of Indians. They give a
picturesqueness to the place, the women of the Cholos (cho´los), or
half-breeds, being especially gaily attired.

The greater part of La Paz lies on the left bank of the river. Both
banks rise steeply from the stream, and the streets at right angles to
the river are very precipitous. All the streets are narrow, and paved
with small cobblestones. The sidewalks also are so narrow that only two
may go abreast. Many of the inhabitants prefer to walk in the middle of
the street. The only things likely to be met are either pedestrians or
llamas, the latter used in great numbers in this part of the country as
pack animals.

La Paz was founded in 1548 by the Spaniard, Alonzo de Mendoza
(ahlon´tho day men-do´-thah), on the site of an Indian village called
Chuquiapu (choo-ku-ah´-poo). It soon became an important colony. At
the end of the war of independence, in 1825, it was re-named La Paz de
Ayacucho, in honor of the last decisive battle of the revolution. La
Paz was then made one of the four capitals of the Bolivian republic.
When the Bolivian Congress, however, attempted to designate Sucre as
the permanent capital, the citizens of La Paz revolted; and by this
revolution of 1898 the seat of government was permanently established
there.

One of the most interesting parts of the city to visitors is the
Alameda (ah-lah-may´-dah). This is a handsome thoroughfare, with rows
of trees, shrubs and flowers. It also has a wide central walk with
pools, in which are swans and goldfish. Along the Alameda are many new
and rather pretty residences. Most of the houses are painted in tints
of pale blue, green, yellow and strawberry, giving the street a gay and
pleasing appearance.

The Plaza Murillo is so named from the patriot Pedro Domingo Murillo,
who was executed there in 1810. This spot is also the place where
independence was first declared in 1809. It has been the scene of many
turbulent episodes. On one side of the plaza is the Government Palace,
erected in 1885. This contains the offices of many state officials,
and, in the upper story, the office and residence of the president and
his family.

The Cathedral of La Paz, on the same side of the plaza as the
Government Palace, is still in process of construction. The foundations
were laid in 1843. When finished it will be one of the largest and
most expensive cathedrals in South America. It is to be built in the
Græco-Roman style, will have towers nearly 200 feet high, a dome the
top of which will be 150 feet above the floor, and will be capable of
seating 12,000 persons.

Across the corner from the Government Palace is the Hall of Congress.
Another interesting spot is the market place. Here come thousands of
Indians to buy and sell.

Other buildings of note are the old University of San Andrés
(ahn-dres´), the Church of San Francisco, the Church of Santo Domingo,
the Museum of Natural History, rich in relics of the Inca and colonial
periods, the very much up-to-date theater, and the Municipal Library.

The houses of the poorer classes in La Paz are usually built with mud
walls and covered with tiles. The better class dwellings, however, are
constructed of stone and brick.

La Paz is an important commercial center. It is connected with the
Pacific coast by the Bolivian Railway from Mollendo (mol-yen´-do), to
Puno (poo´-no) and a Bolivian extension from Guaqui (gwah´-kee) to Alto
de La Paz--the two lines being connected by a steamship service across
Lake Titicaca. An electric railway, five miles long, runs from the Alto
de La Paz to the city.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 5, No. 18, SERIAL No. 142
    COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: PHOTOGRAPH BY I. F. SCHEELER

STREET SCENE AND MARKET, SUCRE, BOLIVIA]




_BOLIVIA_

_Sucre_

FIVE


On May 25, 1809, the first city of Spanish South America revolted
against the rule of Spain. That city was Sucre (soo´-kray). This
town was originally the site of an Indian village called Chuquisaca
(choo-kee-sah´-kah) or Chuquichaca, which means “golden bridge.” In
1538 the Spaniards under Captain Pedro Angules (pay´-dro ahn-goo´lace)
settled there and called the place Charcas (chahr´-kahs) and Ciudad
de la Plata (thee-oo-thath´ day lah plah´tah), but the natives always
clung to the original Indian name. In time the town became the favorite
residence and health resort of the rich mine owners of Potosí, some
distance away. After the South Americans had won their independence,
the name of Chuquisaca was changed to Sucre, in honor of the general
who won the last decisive battle of the war and then became the first
president of Bolivia. Since that time the city has suffered much from
quarrels between the various factions of Bolivia. It is now the nominal
capital of the republic, but the seat of government for Bolivia is
located in La Paz. Since the government was removed there, Sucre has
greatly diminished in importance.

The city is in an elevated valley, being about 8,839 feet above the
sea. For this reason it has an exceptionally agreeable climate. In the
vicinity are fertile valleys which provide the city markets with fruits
and vegetables. The population of the city is about 25,000.

Sucre is laid out regularly. It has broad streets, a large central
plaza and a public garden, or promenade, called the Prado. There are
nine plazas altogether. That called the “25 de Mayo” has a stream
on each side. One of these flows northward and joins the Mamoré
(mah-mo-ray´) and so reaches the Amazon. The other turns southeast,
going on to the Pilcomayo (peel-ko-my´-o) and at last to the estuary
of La Plata (lah-plah´-tah). The Cathedral of Sucre, called the
Metropolitan Cathedral, is the richest in Bolivia. It dates from 1553,
and possesses an image of solid gold with a rich adornment of jewels,
called “The Virgin of Guadalupe (gwah-dah-loo´-pay).” This is said to
be worth a million dollars. The legislative palace of Sucre contains
handsomely decorated halls; but this building is no longer occupied
as such by the national government. Other important buildings are the
Cabildo (kah-beel´do), or town hall; the mint, dating from 1572; the
courts of justice; and the University of San Francisco Xavier (sahn
frahn-this-ko zav´-ih-er; Spanish, hahvee-air´), which was founded in
1624 and has faculties of law, medicine and theology.

At the lower end of the central plaza, or Prado (prah´do) is a pretty
chapel called the “Rotunda.” This was erected in 1852 by President
Belzu (bale´-thoo), on the spot where an unsuccessful attempt had been
made to assassinate him.

Sucre is the seat of the supreme court of Bolivia, and also of the
archbishop of La Plata and Charcas, the primate of Bolivia.

The city is not a commercial one. Its only noteworthy manufacture is
the “clay dumplings” which are eaten with potatoes by the inhabitants
of the Bolivian uplands. In spite of being the capital of the country,
it is one of its most isolated towns, because of the difficult
character of the roads leading to it. It is reached from the Pacific
by way of Challapata (chahl-ya-pah´tah), a station on the Antofagasta
(ahn-toe-fah-gahs´-tah) and Oruro Railroad. The city will soon be
connected by rail with the region of the west.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 5, No. 18, SERIAL No. 142
    COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: PHOTOGRAPH BY E. M. NEWMAN

ORURO, BOLIVIA]




_BOLIVIA_

_Cities of Bolivia_

SIX


Cochabamba (ko-chah-bahm´bah) is called the Garden City of Bolivia.
It was founded in 1574 in a beautiful valley on the east side of the
mountains, which are here called the Royal Range. For a time the town
was known as Oropesa (o-ro-pay´sah). During the war of independence,
the people of the city took an active part; the women especially
distinguished themselves in an attack on the Spanish camp in 1815.
Three years later some of them were put to death by the Spanish forces.
In general, the isolated situation of Cochabamba has been a protection
against the disorders which have from time to time upset Bolivia.

Cochabamba stands on the Rocha (ro´cha), a small tributary of the
Guapai (gwah-pie´) River. Its population is about 30,000, mostly
Indians and _mestizos_. The city is 8,400 feet above the sea, 291
miles north-northwest of Sucre, and 132 miles east-northeast of Oruro
(o-roo´-ro). A newly constructed railway runs from Oruro to Cochabamba.

The climate is mild and temperate, and the surrounding country fertile
and cultivated. Trade is active; and in fact the city is one of the
most progressive in Bolivia, in spite of its isolated situation. It is
laid out regularly and contains many attractive buildings. The city has
a university and two colleges, but they are poorly equipped.

The name of the city of Potosí (po-to-see´) has become proverbial and
“smacks of almost magical and unearthly wealth.” It possesses some of
the most wonderful silver mines in the world. Founded in 1547, shortly
after the first discovery of silver there by an Indian herder, it has
since produced an enormous amount of the precious metal. One writer
estimates the yield of the mines there as having been worth one billion
dollars. Seven thousand mines have been started, of which seven hundred
are being worked for silver and tin today. At one time the city had a
population of 150,000, which has now dwindled to about 25,000.

Potosí stands on a barren terrace about 13,000 feet above sea level,
and is one of the highest towns in the world. It is 47 miles southwest
of Sucre in a direct line. The famous Cerro Gordo (ser´-ro gor´-do;
Spanish, ther´-ro gor´-do) de Potosí rises above the town to a height
of 15,381 feet, a barren, white capped mountain, honeycombed with
mining shafts. The town itself is laid out regularly. A large plaza
forms the center, around which are grouped various buildings, such as
the government house, national college, the old “Royal Mint,” dating
from 1585, and the treasury. The city has a cathedral, which in part
dates from early colonial times. The water supply is derived from a
system of twenty-seven artificial lakes, or reservoirs, and aqueducts
constructed by the Spanish government during the years of the city’s
greatest prosperity.

Oruro (o-roo´-ro) is an important mining town of about 20,000 people.
During the colonial period this town was noted next to Potosí, for the
richness and productiveness of its mines. The mines in the neighborhood
are now worked principally, though not entirely, for tin.

Oruro is 115 miles south-southeast in a direct line from La Paz. It
stands 12,250 feet above sea level, and its climate is characterized by
a short, cool summer and a cold, rainy winter. Oruro is the Bolivian
terminus of the Antofagasta (ahn-toe-fah-gahs´-tah) Railway, the first
constructed in Bolivia. In time the city promises to be one of the most
important railway centers in the country.

Oruro contains many foreign residents, and several clubs. The
government palace and the university building face the principal
plaza. Besides these, the city has a theater, a public library and a
mineralogical museum, as well as the usual churches, hospitals and
schools.

There is one other region in Bolivia that should be visited by all
travelers interested in the mysterious past of the country. This region
is called Tiahuanacu (tee-ah-wah-nah´-koo). It is not far from La Paz,
and the ruins there were believed by Sir Clements Markham to indicate
the former existence of a large city of the Incas. One huge gateway,
broken and apparently not in its original position, is especially
interesting. This great piece of stone is 13 feet wide, 7 feet above
the ground, and 3 feet thick. It is curiously and elaborately carved.
In the center is a human head, supposed to represent the creator of the
universe. To this, other figures, partly human and some with heads of
condors, seem to be offering worship.

Other stones in this region are remarkable for their size and for the
ornamental carving that appears upon them. All the ruins are apparently
of great age. It is not difficult to imagine a time when the city was
the home of thousands of human beings in a very advanced stage of
civilization.

    PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
    ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 5, No. 18, SERIAL No. 142
    COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




_THE MENTOR · DEPARTMENT OF TRAVEL_

_NOVEMBER 1, 1917_

BOLIVIA

By E. M. NEWMAN

_Lecturer and Traveler_

Entered as second-class matter March 10, 1913, at the post-office at
New York, N. Y., under the act of March 3, 1879. Copyright, 1917, by
The Mentor Association, Inc.

    _MENTOR GRAVURES_

    A PACK TRAIN OF LLAMAS IN LA PAZ

    LA PAZ--FROM THE RIM OF THE HEIGHTS

    HOUSE OF CONGRESS LA PAZ

    [Illustration]

    _MENTOR GRAVURES_

    INCA TEMPLE OF THE SUN, ON LAKE TITICACA

    ORURO

    STREET SCENE AND MARKET, SUCRE

    [Illustration]

[Illustration: THE NATIVE BOLIVIAN INDIAN]


Bolivia is another Thibet; one of the highest inhabited plateaus in the
world. It is one of the richest mineral sections, as it now produces
about one-third of the world’s supply of tin, and contains vast wealth
in its rich copper, gold, and silver mines. Nearly ninety per cent. of
its population is of Indian origin, and to this fact may be attributed
its slow progress; as outside of its capital city, almost everything is
still in a primitive state.

Since its last war with Chile, it has been shut off from the sea-coast;
and to get to Bolivia one must now cross either Chile or Peru, which
necessitates a long journey by rail; and if the entrance be by way of
the Peruvian gateway, Mollendo, Lake Titicaca must also be crossed.

[Illustration: STEAMER ON LAKE TITICACA

The parts of this steamer were carried to the lake by rail and put
together there]

Lying in a valley, at an altitude of more than 12,000 feet above the
level of the sea, is the Bolivian capital, La Paz, the City of Peace.
It is picturesquely situated in a huge bowl, cut into the plateau;
and to reach it one must descend in an electric car, 1,300 feet down
the steep slope, where, at the bottom of the cup, lies a city of
more than 150,000 people. In its situation, it is probably the most
remarkable of all capitals. Although called the City of Peace, it has
been the scene of turmoil and strife ever since the Spaniards invaded
these solitudes. Rising high above the city is beautiful Illimani,
one of the highest peaks of the Andes. Perpetually clad in snow,
this magnificent mountain dominates the view, and is one of the most
striking scenic features of Bolivia.

In the central square of La Paz rises the cathedral, which has been in
process of building for forty years, and at the rate it is progressing
it will probably not be completed for another century. On this same
central square is the Bolivian House of Congress, nearly all of its
members of Indian origin. This plaza is the center of political life,
and radiating from it are the principal business thoroughfares.

Plaza San Francisco is another of the important squares of the city,
and takes its name from the magnificent church, one of the most
artistic structures in South America. Upon this square, at all hours
of the day, there is a fascinating panorama of life; for, passing
constantly, are picturesque Indians, clad in grotesque costumes, many
of them driving burros or the Andean beast of burden, the llama.


_Native Costumes_

In no other city of the world are the costumes worn by Indians as
elaborate as those seen in the streets of La Paz. The Cholo or
half-breed is resplendent in garments of the brightest colors. The
women in particular are gorgeously arrayed in silk skirts, kid boots
and straw hats.

There is a curious custom which is rigidly observed. Full blooded
Indians must wear felt hats, and are looked upon as inferior in social
standing. The Cholos may always be distinguished by their straw hats,
which are never worn by the others. Having married a Bolivian, or
perhaps a white man, a Cholo woman considers herself quite a superior
being. She delights in patronizing the best shops, where she seeks only
the costliest silks, the gayest of shawls, and kid boots with high
heels, which are imported from France or from the United States.

When fully attired, she is a sight to behold. Arrayed in all her
finery, she promenades like a queen through the streets of the city;
and yet, back of it all, the influence of blood is evident. She may
dress ever so elaborately, but the old customs still cling; she still
insists upon carrying her baby on her back in good old Indian fashion,
and she is not averse to carrying her market basket when she goes to
the market to make her purchases. Most numerous among the Indians
are the Aymaras, who, unlike the Quichua Indians of Peru, are surly
and inclined to hold aloof from the white man. They are seemingly
indifferent to the white man’s influence. For clothing, the Aymará men
wear shirts and trousers of a coarse cotton material; and over their
shoulders is thrown a poncho of heavy woolen cloth. Aside from their
poncho, the most attractive part of their costume is a curious woolen
head-covering, beautifully embroidered with beads in gay colors. In
a climate where it is always cold except at midday, these caps with
their long ear-muffs are very serviceable. Women who are wives of
full-blooded Indians make no pretension in the way of attire, and they
accept without question their social status, which relegates them to an
inferior position.

[Illustration: ON LAKE TITICACA]

[Illustration: BALSA BOAT

Native making the boat of reeds]


_Customs and Laws_

Much of the trading carried on with the Indians is done by barter; they
bring their farm and garden produce to the city, and exchange it with
dealers for groceries or wearing apparel. Very few of them accumulate
money, and wealth is very rare.

Many of their laws are unique, and are no doubt born of tribal customs
which have been handed down for generations, and yet are usually
rigidly observed. If, for instance, a doctor loses seven patients,
Indian law decrees that the career of the doctor must terminate, and
that his life must be a forfeit for his failure to save the lives of
his patients. After the Indian doctor has lost his sixth patient, he
usually departs for some unknown place.

Although the Bolivian capital is overwhelmingly Indian in point of
population, in appearance it is decidedly modern. Its streets are
paved with cobblestones, but as a rule are clean and kept in good
condition. The pavements may be rough, but it must be borne in mind
that there are very few level thoroughfares; most of the streets are
very hilly, and would be almost impossible to navigate were it not for
the cobblestones, which permit men and beasts to maintain a foothold.
Municipal laws will not permit Indians to make use of the thoroughfares
for their llamas during business hours; they are brought into the city
early in the morning, remaining in some patio or courtyard awaiting the
evening hours, when their owners drive them home. At sunset one may see
long trains of these quaint animals driven through the streets on their
way back to the farms. The llama lends picturesqueness to one of the
most unusual cities on the face of the globe.

[Illustration: LA PAZ, VIEWED FROM THE RIM--MT. ILLIMANI IN THE
DISTANCE]

[Illustration: THE EVENINGS ARE COLD IN LA PAZ]

Little or no coal is burned, as it costs $60 per ton, and only the
very wealthy could afford to use it. There is no wood, so few of the
houses are heated. Most of the English and American residents use oil
burners or electric heaters in their homes; but even the principal
hotel is so cold that men usually go to dinner in their overcoats and
the women enveloped in furs. Most visitors usually retire immediately
after dining, as the night air is so cold that it can be endured only
by those acclimated. It is no uncommon thing for a guest at the hotel
to pile upon his bed all the available covering that he can obtain,
including the carpet on the floor of his room.

One might imagine that Cholo women are unusually corpulent; but this
is apparent only because of the fact that they don from twelve to
twenty skirts. At times, contests are held between Indian belles as to
which has the more gorgeous petticoats, and also the greater number.
A winner is said to have displayed as many as twenty-four, disclosing
a collection of brilliantly colored petticoats unequaled elsewhere for
variety.

[Illustration: A LEADING CITIZEN]


_Religion in Bolivia_

Both Bolivians and Indians are, as a rule, Catholics. On Corpus Christi
day, which is religiously celebrated, there is a curious procession
in which thousands of people take part, and a strange combination of
Cholos, Aymaras and native Bolivians wend their way through the various
thoroughfares. In this parade, the Cholo women discard their straw hats
and wear their shawls instead. Most of them belong to church societies,
and these organizations are indicated by ribbons worn around the neck,
the color denoting the society to which the wearer belongs.

[Illustration: THE FAITHFUL, HARDWORKING LLAMAS]

All the dignitaries of the church take part in the Corpus Christi day
procession. Business is practically suspended, and the President of the
Republic, accompanied by the members of the Houses of Congress and all
the officials of the Government, march to the cathedral, where services
are held. On various thoroughfares, altars are erected, and these are
usually decorated by the members of the different ladies’ societies.

Religion has a strong hold on the people of Bolivia. One not affiliated
with the church is looked upon with suspicion and becomes a social
outcast. In no other country are the churches better attended.


_Streets of La Paz_

The most attractive of the thoroughfares in the Bolivian capital is
the Alameda, a wide avenue lined with trees, and having in its center
a promenade. It is on this thoroughfare that the various legation
buildings are situated. As usual, one may walk along this street and
seek for the most unattractive building and be quite sure that it
is the American legation building. Almost every government is here
represented, so that the Alameda might be said to be the center of
diplomatic life.

[Illustration: A HILLY STREET IN LA PAZ]

[Illustration: ALAMEDA, LA PAZ

Where the foreign Legation buildings are]

[Illustration: CHURCH OF SAN FRANCISCO, LA PAZ]

La Paz is surprisingly modern in the architecture of its business
structures. Most of the buildings are of brick, plastered over and
painted. Many of its shops would be a credit to an American city. They
are by no means mere country stores, but carry an astonishingly good
class of merchandise, and many of the products of France and the United
States are displayed for sale in the various shop windows. To leave
the capital city, one must ascend by electric railway to the plateau,
where is situated the railway depot. One may go directly south by rail
all the way to Antofagasta, Chile, where steamer connections are made
for Valparaiso. On this journey, one obtains a wonderful view of the
back-bone of the Andes, traveling along a plateau averaging in height
about 14,000 feet above sea level. The snow-clad summits of this mighty
range of mountains are constantly in sight. There are few cities along
the railway. Perhaps the most important of the Bolivian towns is Oruro,
which is in the center of a very rich salt country, and as the railroad
approaches the Chilean boundary there are rich deposits of borax and
nitrate.

[Illustration: LOOKING DOWN THE ALAMEDA, LA PAZ]

Many travelers experience all the terrors of soroche or mountain
sickness when traveling on the high Bolivian plateau. The altitude is
dangerous for some people, and in a few cases results fatally. One
whose heart is weak should not attempt the journey, as it is trying
even upon the strongest constitution, and such evidences of altitude
as nose-bleed and dizzy spells afflict even those who are accustomed to
high altitudes.


_Sucre_

During the cold winter months, many Bolivians descend the eastern slope
of the Andes to Sucre, which has become a favorite winter resort for
diplomatic representatives. Sucre is several thousand feet lower than
La Paz, and its climate is somewhat milder. Lower down, toward the
Brazilian boundary, there are tropical forests and a wild, uninhabited
country where disease lurks; and here are great jungles and swamps,
making human habitation almost impossible except for the aboriginal
tribes, which seem to be immune to the fevers that infest this
low-lying country. Among other important cities in Bolivia are Potosí,
and Cochabamba, where there is an American school, a branch of the
American Institute of La Paz. A number of young American men and women
have voluntarily left home and friends and have gone to Bolivia to
teach the youth of that country. The best families send their children
to the American schools, and the Bolivian boys and girls are not only
taught the English language, but they are made familiar with the
history of the United States. It is the ambition of many of the sons of
Bolivian parents to acquire the language, so that they may make their
future home in America. The American teachers are unusually capable
young men and women, and the standard of efficiency that one finds in
the American Institute is a credit to the young people who have made
the sacrifice of leaving home and living in Bolivia.

The military system is patterned after that of Germany, as the
soldiers of the country have been drilled by German officers, and their
influence is plainly evident in the familiar goose-step and the various
manœuvers that one may observe in military camps. The Bolivian soldiers
have not the fighting qualities of the Chileans, and in past wars have
proved anything but a match for their neighbors to the south.


_Lake Titicaca and Guaqui_

In going from La Paz to Lake Titicaca, one travels over a level
plateau, nearly three miles above the sea. Little or nothing grows at
this altitude, and the few Indians living on this plain must have their
food supply brought up from the valleys below on the backs of llamas.
Other than mines, there is no inducement for even an Indian to make his
home on this lofty plateau. There is no source of income other than
working in some of the gold, silver and copper mines which abound in
these altitudes.

[Illustration: BOLIVIAN INDIAN MOTHER]

[Illustration: BOLIVIAN FARMERS]

[Illustration: BOLIVIAN CHILDREN OF THE MOUNTAIN COUNTRY]

Guaqui, a little town on the shores of Lake Titicaca, is the terminus
of the railway. A regiment of cavalry is stationed at this port, as
it in reality forms the boundary line of the country. In this little
place, one obtains his final glimpse of the picturesquely attired
Cholo women, as they are rarely seen outside of Bolivia. In their
native country, their appearance excites no unusual interest; but even
in Peru they are subjected to a certain amount of ridicule, which is
displeasing to these haughty belles.

Because of the intense cold, school children are often seen seated in
the open air, where they may enjoy the benefit of the warm sun. This
applies largely to the smaller towns and villages, as in the larger
cities the school houses are now quite comfortable.

[Illustration: STREET ALTAR, CORPUS CHRISTI DAY, LA PAZ]

Lake Titicaca is a great inland sea, lying between the two ranges of
the Cordillera, and is very high above the ocean. Its area is about
one-third that of Lake Erie, and its present length is about 120 miles,
while its greatest width is about 41 miles. It is, without doubt, one
of the highest navigable bodies of water in the world.

Among the water plants that one sees growing in the lake is a sort of
rush, which abounds in shallow water from two to six feet in depth, and
rises several feet above the surface.

It is this material which the Indians, having no wood, use to construct
their boats. In these apparently frail craft, propelled by sails of the
same material, they traverse the lake, carrying with them two or three
men, and in addition, a heavy load of merchandise.


_Balsa Boats_

There is considerable skill exercised in the making of the balsa, as
these reed-boats are called. Centuries of experience have taught the
Indians the process, which has been developed to a remarkable stage of
perfection, enabling them to defy the storms which are so frequent. The
short, heavy waves make navigation dangerous even for much larger boats
than the native balsa.

[Illustration: CAPITOL BUILDING IN SUCRE]

Like the waters of Lake Superior, these are too cold for the swimmer;
but the lack of bathing facilities gives the Indian but little concern.
The greatest depth of the lake is said to be about 600 feet. Fish
are plentiful, and the few Indians who live around the shores of the
lake devote themselves principally to fishing. As far as habitation
is concerned, other than Puno on the Peruvian side and Guaqui on the
Bolivian, there are but a few scattered villages.

[Illustration: OPEN-AIR SCHOOL--GUAQUI, BOLIVIA]

Four steamers ply to and fro between these ports, connecting with the
train service. These boats were brought from England, taken in sections
by railway and put together on the shores of the lake. They are today
used to transfer freight, which arrives by sea at a Peruvian or Chilean
port, and is carried by rail to Puno, then across the lake to Bolivia.

[Illustration: ON THE STATE ROAD FROM POTOSÍ TO SUCRE]

Numerous islands dot the surface of the lake. One is of real interest.
It is known as Titicaca Island. It has a population of about 300, but
of that number there is but one man who can read and write. In all
Bolivia, only 30,000 children attend school, out of a total population
of 2,000,000. The aborigines do not seem to care for education, and the
Bolivians of European race are few in number.


_Inca Ruins_

On a small island in Lake Titicaca is the ruined Temple of the
Sun, another reminder of the days of the Incas. When that empire
flourished, this portion of Bolivia was also under the domination of
the Inca ruler; and even today, in some parts of Bolivia, one still
comes upon numerous evidences of Inca rule, such as the ruins of
buildings, temples and stone images, which plainly indicate that they
were the work of that remarkable, ancient people. Inaccessible as is
the country, for one who can stand the journey it affords much of
interest. If there were nothing more in Bolivia than the view afforded
in looking down from the rim of the cup upon La Paz, this alone would
tempt one to visit the country. The buildings of this city have the
appearance of so many tea leaves left in the bottom of a cup, so
tiny do they seem from above. Another glorious scene is that of the
encircling mountains that surround Lake Titicaca, crowning it with a
diadem of snow-covered peaks--a view that is unsurpassed among the
world’s natural wonders.


_The Interior Waterways_

Although Bolivia has no seaport, the country has a great network of
rivers. The entire length of Bolivia’s navigable streams is about
12,000 miles. These naturally provide excellent means of transportation
and communication. The Paraguay River is navigable for about 1,100
miles for steamers of from eight to ten feet draft. The Itenes has
about 1,000 miles of navigable water. Another river, the Beni, is
navigable for 1,000 miles for steamers of six feet draft only. Other
streams, such as the Pilcomayo, Mamoré, Sara, and Paragua Rivers can
accommodate light draft vessels for distances varying from 200 to 1,000
miles.

From the ocean Bolivia can be approached through the ports of Mollendo,
in Peru, or Arica and Antofagasta in Chile. These are all regular ports
of call of the steamers between Panama and Valparaiso. From these ports
there is railroad communication to Bolivia.

[Illustration: CITY ADMINISTRATION BUILDING, SUCRE]

[Illustration: THE PLAZA IN SUCRE]


_SUPPLEMENTARY READING_

    BOLIVIA, THE CENTRAL HIGHWAY OF SOUTH AMERICA _By M. R. Wright_
    BOLIVIA                                       _By P. Walle_
    PLATEAU PEOPLES OF SOUTH AMERICA              _By A. A. Adams_
    ACROSS THE ANDES                              _By C. J. Post_
    THE SOUTH AMERICANS                           _By W. H. Koebel_
    A SEARCH FOR THE APEX OF AMERICA              _By Annie S. Peck_
    THE SOUTH AMERICAN TOUR                       _By Annie S. Peck_
    SOUTH AMERICA                                 _By James Bryce_
    THE BOLIVIAN ANDES                            _By Sir Martin Conway_

⁂ Information concerning the above books may be had on application to
the Editor of The Mentor.




_THE OPEN LETTER_


Let me tell you about our daily mail. We get letters of appreciation
and letters of suggestion--hundreds of both kinds. Many of them
are addressed to the “Editor of The Mentor,” others to “Dear Mr.
Editor”--and some to “Mr. Moffat.” I like the last form best, for I
know that when a member of The Mentor Association writes in a personal
way, with a message of encouragement or a valuable suggestion, The
Mentor has found a real friend. I like to see the spirit of personal
interest growing in our daily mail. It is the best assurance of the
vitality of The Mentor Idea that we could have. Fellowship spirit is
the soul of all mutual endeavor.



It is pleasing to see how close an interest some of our members take in
the details of The Mentor work. The following letter came to me a day
or so ago--and it is too good to keep to myself.

    “_My dear Mr. Moffat_: When I opened the Hawaiian number of The
    Mentor, I was delighted to find a greeting from you on the inside
    of the front cover page. Now that you have moved over there, why
    don’t you stay? Of course, I don’t know anything about the workings
    of an editorial office, and it may mean a furious amount of
    trouble. You might have to move your desk and your whole staff, and
    even have to get out a new copyright, but from an outsider’s point
    of view the move looks easy. And to my way of thinking the front
    of the magazine is the place for you anyway--if you will permit
    me to say so. There you seem to stand as a host at the threshold,
    offering a welcome to guests before they enter.”

                                                          _SYLVIA._



“Who is Sylvia? What is she?”--so Shakespeare and Schubert sang. And
if they couldn’t tell who Sylvia was, how can I? Of one thing I feel
sure: she is a faithful reader of The Mentor, for she has taken note of
our goings and comings, and our varied forms of editorial expression.
The notion of my being the “host” is an inviting one. It is a role that
one should be proud to fill, especially when the feast to which he
invites his guests is the wealth of the world’s knowledge. The thought
of assuming that role, however, is a bit staggering. Thanks, Miss
Sylvia, but perhaps I had better play the more generally useful part of
planning, preparing and making up The Mentor feast. Your welcome to the
second cover page is appreciated. I have been there many times before,
however, when the page has borne no signature. No number of The Mentor
appears, Miss Sylvia, without my being around somewhere. I have no
preference for one particular page. I find occupation and joy on every
page of The Mentor from cover to cover.



Here are some of the things that we do in reply to letters.

    We answer questions in the various fields of knowledge. We look
    up sources of information for our readers and give them full
    replies. We have just mailed a letter in which answers were made to
    historical questions that called for a morning’s research by one of
    our staff.

    We supply programs for reading clubs and lay out schedules for a
    whole season of meetings.

    We supply material extracted from reference works for the benefit
    of members who are pursuing courses of reading.

    We occasionally read essays or papers that have been prepared by
    members, and offer helpful editorial suggestions. Aside from club
    work, we lay out reading courses for private individuals who are
    pursuing special studies.

    In some cases, where a member lives in a remote spot and cannot
    conveniently obtain books, we get them for the member at
    publisher’s prices. Occasionally, where books could not be had in
    the market, we have lent copies from our library.

    We give full information and service in art, telling our readers
    where and how to get good pictures--we also give travel information.

These are but a few of the things that we do. We have a booklet in
which we describe The Mentor Service. Send for it. If you have not had
the benefit of our service, you will be surprised to see how wide and
varied it is.



The Prize Contest Letters have been coming in fast. There are so many
good ones that it will be difficult to make a choice. I am going to
print extracts from some of them. A part of the first letter appears on
the opposite page. It tells of The Mentor as a _friend_. Could there be
any happier note to begin with than that? Other letters will tell of
the many ways in which The Mentor is or can be made valuable in home,
school and social life. The story of one reader will help another, and
the sum total of the information will be of benefit to all.

[Illustration: W. D. Moffat

EDITOR]




A FRIEND IN THE HOUSE

A MESSAGE FROM A MENTOR READER


“Some time ago a very neat stranger called at my home and made the hour
so pleasant, that he at once became my friend. Now this friend has a
permanent place in my home, and is known throughout the vicinity as
‘The Mentor.’

“The reason why so many are acquainted with this friend of mine is
because of his value and usefulness manifested in every subject and
service. The Mentor has a permanent personal and social value. There
might be added that also of inspiration. The Mentor has a message of
interest and importance. It has a voice with a true ring, that speaks,
as it were, from personal experience.

“In company with this companion and friend, one may be charmed as the
story of the distant past or that of unfamiliar and remote things,
people and places is being unfolded. Hardly can there be found any one
so generous, considerate and tactful.

“The Mentor calls twice a month to inform, enlarge the vision, to
inspire and encourage old and young, men and women, in all walks of
life.

“The social value is vital. Whether it be in the home or elsewhere,
The Mentor furnishes food for intelligent conversation that has weight
and depth. The personal value is realized more and more as the weeks
come and go. Impressions are left on the mind which in time ripen into
principles.

“If I wished to make a friend more friendly, I would give him The
Mentor. If I had an enemy--well--I would send him The Mentor. It might
make him my friend.”



THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

ESTABLISHED FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF A POPULAR INTEREST IN ART,
LITERATURE, SCIENCE, HISTORY, NATURE, AND TRAVEL

THE MENTOR IS PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH

BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC., AT 222 FOURTH AVENUE, NEW YORK, N.
Y. SUBSCRIPTION, FOUR DOLLARS A YEAR. FOREIGN POSTAGE 75 CENTS EXTRA.
CANADIAN POSTAGE 50 CENTS EXTRA. SINGLE COPIES TWENTY CENTS. PRESIDENT,
THOMAS H. BECK; VICE-PRESIDENT, WALTER P. TEN EYCK; SECRETARY, W. D.
MOFFAT; TREASURER, J. S. CAMPBELL; ASSISTANT TREASURER AND ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, H. A. CROWE.



THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, Inc., 222 Fourth Avenue, New York, N. Y.

Statement of the ownership, management, circulation, etc., required
by the Act of Congress of August 24, 1912, of The Mentor, published
semi-monthly at New York, N. Y., for October 1, 1917. State of New
York, County of New York. Before me, a Notary Public, in and for the
State and county aforesaid, personally appeared Thomas H. Beck, who,
having been duly sworn according to law, deposes and says that he
is the Publisher of The Mentor, and that the following is, to the
best of his knowledge and belief, a true statement of the ownership,
management, etc., of the aforesaid publication for the date shown in
the above caption, required by the Act of August 24, 1912, embodied
in section 443, Postal Laws and Regulations, to wit: (1) That the
names and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing editor, and
business manager are: Publisher, Thomas H. Beck, 52 East 19th Street,
New York; Editor, W. D. Moffat, 222 Fourth Avenue, New York; Managing
Editor, W. D. Moffat, 222 Fourth Avenue, New York; Business Manager,
Thomas H. Beck, 52 East 19th Street, New York. (2) That the owners
are: American Lithographic Company, 52 East 19th Street, New York; C.
Eddy, L. Ettlinger, J. P. Knapp, C. K. Mills, 52 East 19th Street,
New York; M. C. Herczog, 28 West 10th Street, New York; William T.
Harris, Villa Nova, Pa.; Mrs. M. E. Heppenheimer, 51 East 58th Street,
New York; Emilie Schumacher, Executrix for Luise E. Schumacher and
Walter L. Schumacher, Mount Vernon, N. Y.; Samuel Untermyer, 120
Broadway, New York. (3) That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and
other security holders owning or holding 1 per cent. or more of total
amount of bonds, mortgages, or other securities, are: None. (4)
That the two paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owners,
stockholders, and security holders, if any, contain not only the list
of stockholders and security holders as they appear upon the books
of the Company, but also, in cases where the stockholder or security
holder appears upon the books of the Company as trustee or in any other
fiduciary relation, the name of the person or corporation for whom
such trustee is acting, is given; also that the said two paragraphs
contain statements embracing affiant’s full knowledge and belief as to
the circumstances and conditions under which stockholders and security
holders who do not appear upon the books of the Company as trustees,
hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that of a bona fide
owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any other person,
association, or corporation has any interest direct or indirect in
the said stock, bonds, or other securities than as so stated by him.
Thomas H. Beck, Publisher. Sworn to and subscribed before me this 18th
day of September, 1917. J. S. Campbell, Notary Public, Queens County.
Certificate filed in New York County. My commission expires March 30,
1918.

THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, Inc., 222 Fourth Avenue, New York, N. Y.




THE MENTOR


How the Mentor Club Service Helps Clubwomen and Women Who Wish to
Organize Literary Clubs

The success and pleasure of a woman’s club depends on the year’s
program, which should be based on subjects that fascinate and interest,
as well as instruct.

The planning of an interesting and helpful club program is a difficult
matter, as you who have served on program committees know, and can
really be done successfully only by experts.

The Mentor Club Service Plans the Programs for Hundreds of Clubs, Free
of Charge

The Mentor Service Editors, men and women of high intellectual
attainments and broad experience, will be glad at any time to help
_you_ with suggestions or a completely worked out plan for _your_ club
program, based on any desired subject. They will also supply lists of
reference books for help in the preparation of club papers, and will
be glad to assist further by procuring any necessary books not in your
library, at cost, postage prepaid.

_Remember--The Mentor Club Service Is Free_

ADDRESS ALL INQUIRIES TO

Editor, The Mentor Association 222 Fourth Avenue, New York City

MAKE THE SPARE MOMENT COUNT