"Now," I said, lifting my right hand in the manner of judges, "I am
going to administer an oath to you, and when you have taken it all will
be well and you shall go your way."

"What sort o' oath," he asked; "what has it to do wi' me, who's only
concern't wi' the Black Cornel's oaths?  Tell it to me, first."

"Very well, listen," and with as much solemnity as I could muster I
repeated the words of the oath:

"I do swear, as I shall answer to God at the Great Day of Judgment, I
have not, nor shall have, in my possession, any gun, sword or arm
whatsoever, and never use tartan, plaid, or any part of the Highland
garb; and if I do so, may I be cursed in my undertakings, family and
property; may I never see my wife and children, father, mother or
relations; may I be killed in battle as a coward, and lie without
Christian burial, in a strange land, far from the graves of my
forefathers and kindred: may all this come across me if I break my
oath."

Red Murdo kept looking at me, mute, perhaps impressed; anyhow, he
presently asked, "What if I refuse?"

"The penalties laid down by law," I told him, still solemnly, "are six
months in prison for a first offence and transportation beyond the seas
for a second."

"A device o' the devil and King George," grunted Red Murdo, and I
should have been glad to agree with him, only I had to play the game
out.

"Will you take the legal oath?"

"Never.  It's what I suppose the sergeant was goin' to cram doon my
throat an' he could, the same infernal thing.  Never, frae you, or him,
or the pair o' ye."

This was a turn I had not expected, and I was wondering what to do next
when Red Murdo said, "I'll tell ye what I'll dae.  I'll wrestle the
sergeant which o's will eat a copy of that ugly oath, and that'll also
satisfy him who's the better man."

The sergeant did not show an instant keenness for this challenge, but
it got me round a corner, and must be accepted.  I declared to that
effect, and desired both men to get ready, saying I would be umpire.  I
added that there should be only one bout because, secretly, I had no
wish to see them hurt one another.

Red Murdo and the sergeant put their plaids, their jackets, their
bonnets, their sporans, and their brogues, in little heaps, with each
man's weapons above each man's things.  Neither spoke, for action,
which naturally has the effect of sealing the tongue, had now arrived,
and I chose a level piece of sward where they might fall with
comparative softness.

When I saw how nearly they were matched in physique, the spirit of
primitive combat in me began to be interested, to calculate who would
win.  True to the fighting tactics he knew Red Murdo rushed to grips,
but the sergeant drove him off, and they manoeuvred round each other
for the next effort.  It was pretty to see them, that bright morning,
with the whole picturesque valley for arena and I for the only
spectator of their prowess.  Moreover, they were warming to the fight,
which was one between the disciplined strength and skill of the soldier
and the wild agility of Red Murdo.

Those different qualities met so evenly that feint, and catch and heave
as each combatant would, the other remained unthrown.  Once Red Murdo
got his antagonist by the waist, lifted him clean off the ground and
whirled him round like a totum, only to have him alight on his feet.
Once, also, the sergeant, by a supple twist of arm and leg, working
together, got Red Murdo half down and no more.  Really it was a toss-up
who should win, or whether there would be a winner at all.

My only ground of interference would be foul play, and although they
went at each other almost savagely there was no absolute act of that
kind.  But the strain was telling on both men, for they took no rest,
and hardly waited to get fresh breath.  The sinews of their legs stood
out like whip-cord, their chest heaved like bellows in distress, their
necks were scarlet with the tumult of the blood there.  Only the
unexpected would make a victor or a loser, and the unexpected did not
happen, as it does sometimes.

Red Murdo tried a last torrential rush, but the sergeant withstood it,
and they merely locked themselves together.  Nay, they were now so
exhausted that they could only hang on to each other for support, a
spectacle which brought me to their side.  Their bulging eyes stared at
me with the pleading look which a horse has after being driven too far
and too fast.  When I divided them by a touch of my hand they both fell
to the ground like logs and so lay.

Honour was satisfied, the hated oath of the kilt had not to be eaten by
anybody, and I was glad.




_X.--The Way of a Woman_

Between you and me, I fancy that the average, natural woman likes to
think any man who is after her a bit of the devil.  It makes her pulse
beat, if not her heart; it gives a fine spice to the pursuit, and she
is confident there will be no capture, unless she wills it.  Anyhow, I
was not going to help the Black Colonel in his schemes by holding him
up as a hero of that order, and he would have made the comment that he
needed not the service from me.

Marget Forbes and I had fallen into the pleasant custom of lending each
other such books as came the way of our remote land, and I called at
the Dower House to leave her one, a newly imprinted volume entitled
"Robinson Crusoe."  I did not seem to wish to make meetings with her,
though I was glad of them, so I chose a time, the mid-afternoon, at
which she and her mother usually walked out.  However, Marget was at
home, and she called to me from the parlour, would I not enter and rest
a minute?  Necessarily I must step inside to say I would not wait, and
necessarily I found myself sitting down near her.

"Mother," she said, "is on her weekly round among the sick and old, to
whom a kind word from her is like gold, of which we now have none to
give.  Usually I go with her, but to-day she would have it that I
looked tired, and she bade me stay indoors and rest.  I'm glad you
called and brought me a book, especially this wonderful 'Robinson
Crusoe,' of which I have heard vaguely, and which they say is founded
on the adventure of a Scotsman, Alexander Selkirk.  You are always
thoughtful, or shall I say sometimes?" and Marget looked as if she
expected me to understand the qualification.

Was it a reproach that I did not come into her company often enough;
was it a playful invitation to do so oftener; or was it the woman's
primal instinct, old as Eve in the Garden of Eden, just to tease the
man?  I scarcely asked myself those questions.  They ran through my
mind with the kind of physical impulse which you feel in the presence
of the possible woman.  You are aware, then, of feelings and shadows of
feeling which cannot be expressed.  There is something in you which
goes on speaking to the something in her, and you let it speak, glad,
wondering, expectant, never sure, never sorry.  Odd, isn't it, this
language of sex which says most when it says nothing by speech, which
needs not speech, because it is spiritual, though springing, maybe,
from the call of the blood.

Marget had been reading, and when she invited me in, and I went, she
put the open book face downward on a little table, beside a half-made
sampler.  She saw my eye wandering to the volume, a mere mechanical
curiosity on my part, and she picked it up with a laugh, saying, "There
is no need to hide those pages, unless it be that they are dull."

"What is the book all about?" I asked idly.

"It is a French romance," she said, "in which a lovely heroine treads
her way through an endless maze of difficult paths and a brigade of
villains to what, I have no doubt, when I get there with her, if ever I
do, will be endless wedded bliss.  It is an over-sentimental story, for
the French young girl, but, then, one must try to keep up what French
one has, because it is a delightful language."

Marget had learned it as a girl in France, for she had lived there a
while, seen something of the Stuart Court over the water, of the Court
of King Louis also, and even heard the passing rustle of the skirts of
"the Pompadour" and Madame du Barry.  Already the breath of a freer day
to come was blowing across that fair land, and her stay in it
definitely influenced Marget's character, ripened it quickly on broadly
beautiful lines, without hurting its pure scent of Scottish heather.

Hospitality was a duty as well as a pleasure in every Highland home,
and, after our trifles of a few minutes, she rose and went to give some
order.  When she returned she said she had a small treat in store for
me, and it came into the room almost with herself.  What do you think
it was?  Why, tea!

It was a beverage then almost unknown in the Scottish Highlands, but
Marget's family, as she said, had at intervals received packets of it
from their friends in the south.  Those gifts were hoarded as if they
contained treasure, and only dipped into for very special reasons.

"It flatters me," I remarked airily, "to think I am a special reason,
because that must come near being a special friend."

"Oh," quoth Marget, "but you are an official enemy, so how could you be
a special friend?  And still such things are possible, you know, but I
shall not tell you how they are possible.  You would not understand a
bit"; and, as she spoke, her eyes and hands were arranging the
tea-table.

"I should, I assure you, try very hard," said I, "and it would be odd
if I did not succeed, with a dish of tea for stimulant.  I don't
remember when I tasted tea last," I added laconically, as Marget poured
it out of a quaint old pot into dwarfy cups of French mould.  Most of
the dainty things, the bric-à-brac of households in the Jacobite
Highlands were from France, just as we had come to say "ashets" and
"gigots" of mutton, and generally to graft French cookery into our
Scottish meals, for the "Auld Alliance" had various harvests.

As we talked over the tea-cups, Marget and I, I thought how quickly in
that Nature's cradle of Corgarff she had ripened to woman's estate.
She had, at times, been in touch with the artificialities of social
life, but they had not dulled her free, strong character.  She had
drawn her instincts, as she had drawn her blood, from the long hills,
and she had no self-consciousness to dim her lights.  But when I rose
to leave she said merrily, "We have spoken much foolish nonsense, have
we not, Captain Gordon?"

"Wise nonsense, Mistress Forbes," I answered.

"Thank you, but wise nonsense is most becoming when it is expressed as
a parable."

"Then let us have the parable."

"Oh! parables are not in fashion with so many hard realities about, and
there should not be three people in one.  Three's never company, they
say, good company, even in a parable."

"Then, dear lady, why put in three?"

"This parable, dear Captain, would need three; first, a high-minded
young man who wears arms and dreams dreams, who is beloved by everybody
for his good nature and qualities, who is on the other side of where he
would be most welcome, and who will probably never summon courage to
get there; secondly, an older man of more picturesque, more risky
qualities, an adventurer in love and war, never afraid to strike, even
if the stroke might wound, a personality able, on occasion, to
commandeer what could not be secured by affection, thanks to an
understanding of woman's nature and the imperfections of man's
government; and, thirdly, between those personal forces a woman who
might, to her undoing, be captured by the force of family and state
circumstances, instead of by the man of her tell-tale heart's desire."

"A very subtle parable!" I remarked, for no reason whatever, but the
tone of it held more than this banality, although she showed no heed of
that, but remarked:

"No; a very common parable; it's what every woman knows by instinct or
experience, if few would care to reveal it, even in a parable."

We said good-bye without more ado, and I set off for the castle,
troubled for my unreadiness in woman nature, the most puzzling,
calling, captivating skein in all the universe, because it holds,
behind the silken veil of its treasure-house, the eternal mystery of
creation, that something divine which is nearest to God Himself.

When in trouble, my trouble, anyhow, one sighs for a song, and my
heart-quaking carried me to a ballad, very familiar in our countryside,
which tells of an unbridled lover laying siege to a woman he covets.
Her men were absent, and she and her domestics were the only garrison
of the castle when he knocked roysterously at its gates:

  "The lady ran up to her towe-head,
    As fast as she could drie,
  To see if by her fair speeches
    She could with him agree.

  "As soon he saw the lady fair,
    And her yates all locked fast,
  He fell into a rage of wrath,
    And his heart was aghast.

  "Cum doon to me, ye lady fair;
    Cum doon to me; let's see;
  This nigh ye's ly by my ain side
    The morn my bride sall be!"


It was pagan wooing, but it has often won the day, only why should I
let it disturb me, whose cause stood by itself?  What I must realize
was that powers above me were at work, for "state reasons," on affairs
in which I was concerned, privately.  I must try to meet this influence
without letting as much be known outwardly, because I was an officer
bound by my commission to serve his Majesty's desires and commands.

Now I am no good schemer, and I merely drifted to those conclusions as
a swimmer goes with a tide in which he happens to find himself.  He
feels that he is in its custody, but, on the instinct for life, he
makes a stroke now and then and their cumulative effect probably bears
him somewhere safe to land.  Might it be so with me!

Unfortunately I was a swimmer in the dark, for I did not know, however
I might guess, what Marget and her mother were thinking.  Perhaps my
heart really assured my mind as to Marget, or so I was fain to
conclude.  Her mother, however, might take a mother's view, the
far-carrying view which thinks of daughters settled in such a manner as
will continue the old line.

Every man has, deep down in him, the desire to own a little bit of
land, even though most of us only get six feet for a grave.  It is
man's form of ancestor-worship, and in woman it finds expression in the
home, and continuous olive branches to fill that home.  The man likes
to have his foot securely on a rood of Mother Earth, a patch to call
his very own.  The woman supplements that by peopling a house; and is
not this service of the maternal instinct the greater, the finer of the
two?

One placed in circumstances which need strong action, should not think
too much, because by doing that he raises a wall of difficulties around
him.  Mental ghosts are no use to anybody, although, to be sure, they
weren't unknown to me.  So I welcomed a letter that reached me next
morning from Marget's mother, but I opened it with a dread.  It
addressed me as "Dear Captain Gordon," and it read:

"I am troubling you for advice, because there is nobody else whom I can
ask, and because the matter may interest you, both as a relative, far
removed I admit, and as a soldier of the reigning king.  You will guess
what it is, and that makes it easier for me to explain.

"It has been made known to us in a round-about, but authoritative way,
that it would give King George and his ministers satisfaction to see
our house and people established again, and that Jock Farquharson, the
laird of Inverey, would be confirmed in the chiefship, if as much were
agreeable to my daughter and myself.

"They don't ask me will I give my daughter in ransom for the house and
possessions of our ancestors, but that is what is meant, and you can
judge how the idea has concerned me.  You may also, however, concern
and interest a mother at the same time, and I have hesitated to return
a 'No,' especially as Marget said, about the letter, when I showed it
to her, 'Well, the sons of the house have sacrificed enough for it.  It
may now be the turn of the daughter to sacrifice something . . .!"

"That was dutifully said, but what she expects, I'm certain, is that I
shall say the 'No' of my own accord, and I want your advice as to the
manner in which it can best be done.  I want it at once, because news
comes to me, through the early channel of our domestics, that the Black
Colonel means to ride over upon us one of these evenings, a friendly
call, I suppose.  Marget does not know of this intention on his part,
and I am not going to tell her, for a mother's instinct naturally
wishes to shield a daughter from disturbance.

"If you would advise me how to say 'No' without bringing further
displeasure from high places upon our ruined house, you would be doing
us a service.  If, besides that, you were to find a means of keeping
the Black Colonel away, why, you would be doing a further service."

As I read that last sentence an idea struck me, and I at once sent a
note to the dear lady, saying I would solve her difficulty.  Then I
dispatched a pair of trusty scouts in quest of certain information I
needed, and in eight hours they were back with it.  After that, I felt
more myself than I had done for some time, just because I was now
committed to definite, perhaps even dangerous, action.




_XI--The Crack of Thunder_

It is fine how the spur of danger, especially danger to somebody else,
dear if not near, helps a man's spirits upward.  The blood flows more
quickly in him, his hand is surer, his brain works better.  He feels
that the die has been cast, that nothing more matters, except the
reckoning, and, so feeling, he sheds all timorous self-consciousness
and is himself.

That, at all events, was how I felt as I took the road southward,
across the hills towards Deeside, with a cracking wind to walk against.
I would intercept the Black Colonel's raid on Marget and her mother,
and break the whole scheme behind it--if I could!

So we scheme, we glorious little fellows of this world, bent on love or
hatred, and the Great Beneficence smiles at us, at our cleverness, or
it may be the Great Furies, however you will have it.  Anyway, Nature
has merely to move and our grandest plans may crinkle up like a feather
held to a "cruisie," the rude lamp, fed with dried splinters of
fir-wood, or mutton tallow and a wick, which our Highlanders used for
lighting.

But that was not in my thoughts when I came to the top of the last hill
dividing our strath from the Black Colonel's.  My estimate was that if
I got there by break of day and waited I should, being in a high eyrie
with a wide view, see him come from the opposite direction.  My
information from my scouts was that he would travel alone, a fit thing,
having regard to his mission at the Dower House, Corgarff.

Tired and hungry, I looked about for a rock which would shield me from
the wind, and got out my fodder.  It consisted only of "whisky bukky,"
oatmeal rolled with whisky, not delicate stuff to eat, but easily
carried and sustaining.  Haggis is better food for the march, because
it is tastier and still harder to digest, so even more lasting, as the
Highlanders, for whose war sustenance it was, perhaps, invented, knew,
but on leaving Corgarff Castle I had just taken what I could lay my
hand upon.

While I ate I half-marvelled at the splendour of the scene about me,
half-rehearsed my catechism with the Black Colonel, when he should
appear.  I would put it to him as a gentleman that he must not intrude
upon the Forbes ladies, and, indeed, must frankly abandon his designs
there.  If reason failed, then we might be driven to solve the knot by
a single combat, as the custom of the Highlands permitted, and, indeed,
sometimes ordered, very much like the duel in the land of France.  Why
not such a combat, because the test was an honest if barbaric tribute
to plain manliness?  Give me that rather than the snivel, the chicane,
the shake-you-by-the-hand and stab-you-in-the-gloaming, which passes by
the name of diplomacy, high diplomacy, I believe.

The tradition of single combat went back into the very mists of time in
the Highlands; and merely the form varied.  There was Cam-Ruadh, the
early red-haired man of tradition, who, fallen prisoner among a batch
of hostile "kern," or outlaws, was offered his liberty if he could make
so many good arrow-shots.  He drew and drew, with much seeming
innocence, on the arrows of his captors, and wove a circle of stabs in
the ground about the target, but never did he hit it; oh, no!

They jeered at him when he came to the last arrow possessed by the
company, saying he had better reserve it for himself and save them the
trouble of making an end to him.  Instead, he sent it, as he could have
sent the others, straight into the middle of the target, and flew there
almost with it.  Before the outlaws could realize the logic of events
he had gathered all the arrows under his arm, put one to the string of
the bow and cried, "I am Cam-Ruadh, who never misses, never before
until now, and you who are without arrows had better take leg-bail,"
which they quickly did.

Nearer in time was the duel of valiant Donald Oig with the chief of a
band of "broken men" who had a grudge against him.  Donald was a famous
swordsman, and the chief had no active relish to try skill with him.
But, again, it was the custom of the country, and the invitation could
not be refused if the chiefship of the "broken men" was to be held,
because here was a test of both courage and honour.

He was a slim fellow, however, this head raider, one with the false
doctrine, as ancient as human nature, that if you succeed it matters
little how.  When, then, he and Donald Oig stood up to fight he
exclaimed, "Shake hands on it, first!"  But he gripped the extended
right hand hard, intending, with it thus prisoned, to strike a foul
blow and close, in his own favour, a duel which had not begun.  Swift
of instinct and eye, Donald saw this, caught out his dagger with his
left hand, and stabbed the foul fighter.  The rest of the "broken men,"
being witnesses of it all, had nothing to complain about, and Donald
went his way.

While my thoughts wandered like that, and I ate and, from my pocket
flask, washed my dry eating down, the weather changed with a swiftness
familiar enough among the Scottish mountains.  The heavens passed
behind a veil of drifting clouds, through which the sun flared in red,
angry bursts.  The elements had declared hostilities, and when I looked
down into the valley, two thousand feet beneath me, I saw a great
thunderstorm on the march, the very panoply of havoc.

It moved as if it were an army going to war, with scout-like horns
thrust out in front and on either side.  These were constantly shot by
fangs from the mass of lightning in the clouds, themselves a hell of
angry colours, There was the inky black of the outer sheath, next a
seam of half-black, half-orange, then a depth of iridescence which
constantly changed its hues, and, finally, a molten pot boiling and
rolling in august wrath.

Ah! it was a spectacle to watch, those thunder-clouds come through the
glack, or rift, dividing the falling hill on which I stood, from the
rising one beyond.  Down in the valley ran a stream and a track used by
cattle-drovers, and, as my eye went there, I thought I saw a tall
figure.  Certainly, for he looked up and, during a moment, we were both
silhouetted in the radiance of light which the thunder-clouds, now
massed into one huge bank, drove before it.  If I saw that solitary
figure it was likely he would see me, as we were the only living things
in the landscape, and like turns to like, even making mutual
communication, although witchcraft was the word for that then, and the
mention of it dangerous.

Presently the terrific cloud ate up the spot where I had seen the man,
for its base was in the valley and its top above my altitude.  Never
had I beheld such a thunder-cloud, but it was awe, a worship of the
forces of Nature, which filled me, not fear.  Why should I, a young,
healthy man, with good nerves, be afraid, since the excessive tumult
was below me, and I was a privileged spectator.  Quickly, however, the
cloud must burst, and then the sluices of heaven would indeed be open.
How would it fare with myself and the figure lost in the valley?

That thunderstorm and the consequent flood became events in our local
history, and to me a quick personal adventure.  The rain came down,
first in a thick shower, then in torrents, finally in sheets.  The fall
was so solid that it seemed to half-scotch the lightning and half-dull
the roar of the thunder.  Actually, for I record truly, the drops leapt
up again in splashes as they struck the ground beside me, and in an
instant I was soaked, though that was no unusual experience in our
adventurous climate.

The thunder-cloud had now taken command of the whole firmament, so
swiftly had its violence of contagion spread.  Here, verily, was a
rainfall on a great scale, and as it settled to business a sort of
darkness spread over the land.  I must seek shelter, and I would find
it on the levels rather than on the exposed heights.

Therefore, I started for the valley, picking my way as best I could in
the black deluge.  You will scarce believe me if I again tell you that
the rain-water ran down the hill-side with me, inches deep.  It took
gravel and stones with it, and scoured away the bedding of large rocks
which, thus released, joined in the downward plunge.  Some folk thought
it was the Flood of the Bible come again as prophesied, and, at all
events, the comparison gives a notion of it.  The stream, which I had
seen an insignificant stripe below, met me, a roaring river.  Its
waters had already overflowed the whole valley.  Now you only saw the
tops of hillocks or trees, for all else was a gurgling waste of waters.

Over those waters came a cry which caught me, even in my sorry plight,
because it was human.  Wild birds, beaten to the ground by the storm
and then engulfed in the waters, were screeching as they drowned.
Hares and rabbits, and a fox, wherever he came from, all went past me
on a floating tree, and they were squealing for mercy, not from each
other, but from the elements.  The other sound I had heard, however,
was quite different, and I listened for it again.

Ah! there it was!  And as I bent to the level of the flowing waters and
looked towards its source, I saw a man marooned on one of the hillocks
which the flood had left unsubmerged.  Evidently he had seen me first,
for he was waving his hands and making signs with them.  He was in keen
alarm about his predicament, but method governed his alarm, and it was
for me to discover it.

Clearly he was a prisoner on the island, in so far that he could not
wade or swim through the roaring dam which divided us.  Clearly, also,
the water was rising by miraculous draughts upon the rain, and soon his
refuge would be drowned, and he swept from it.  What was to be done by
me to save him, for action must be rapid?

He was beckoning up-stream with a meaning.  Searching with my eye the
meeting-place of land and water, I saw what looked like a boat.  Where
could it have come from?  There had been an old broad-bottomed craft,
used for fording in spate times, on a pool a mile or so up the glen,
and the flood had brought it down and thrown it ashore.  Could I get it
afloat, navigate it to the perishing man, and rescue him?

No sooner said than done!  Not at all; things don't happen so, at
least, when anything worth doing has to be done.  It took me a toilsome
journey to the boat, and I found it half-full of flood-water.  This I
emptied by hauling the boat, as the river rose, on to a shelving rock.
Then I waited for it to float free, having meanwhile got hold of a
long, fir sapling, which, pruned of its branches, I thought to use as a
guiding pole, helm or oar, as the rushing of many waters might demand.

Thus equipped, out I sailed on that uncharted ocean with never a
thought in my head whether I should again see dry land or riot.  The
darkness had deepened, but I could still distinguish the hillock and
the man thereon, now up to his waist in the waters, and for those
fading signs I steered.  Quickly I was in the flood race, but I kept my
head, otherwise I should not have heard the voice come to me again in
what seemed to be the words, "Hurry!  For God's sake, hurry!"

Down-stream I rushed, here shoving from disaster against a tree trunk,
there avoiding a smash with something else.  How it was all done I have
not the remotest notion--perhaps it was mere luck--but when I came
level with the hillock I was only three feet clear of it on the near
side.

"Jump," I roared, and the man with outstretched arms jumped strongly,
and I felt a pull which almost upset me, for I had been standing in the
boat.  Two hands had caught the gunwale, and the pull of dead weight
swung the heavy, clumsy craft round on a new course without, however,
upsetting it.  This took us into shallower waters, and presently the
suction of the main surge got fainter and we were aground on the
moorland edge.

I had not, in the dark, seen the face of my companion at all, and,
trailing beside the boat, he had no opportunity for making himself
known.  I stepped out, knee-deep, to find him also a-foot, and seeking
the land.

"Come on," I said, "whoever you may be."

"Yes," he answered; "whoever you may be, you are a friend in need."

I recognized his voice, and exclaimed, nay, shouted in my surprise,
"Jock Farquharson!"

"Yes, Ian Gordon," he said in turn.  "Would you rather not have saved
me?"

"God's will be done," said I.

"Amen!" said he.

Dramas of life do end laconically, like that, as death often comes by
casual side-steps.




_XII--Raiders of the Dark_

A man does something in a natural way and it takes the world's ear and
is called heroism.  Another man does a like thing, to all purpose, but
the world does not listen to it, or, anyhow, sings him no praises, all
of which we try to explain by saying "Luck."

It is natural for a man to show courage in extremes, for a woman to be
loving, self-sacrificing.  Every now and then the Great Bookkeeper
records an example for the common good; and the rest are a lost legion.
We do not know why, and if we did what good would it do us, though the
curiosity for knowledge is inbred, like inability, sometimes, to use it?

News of my rescue of the Black Colonel from the flood got about, and I
was acclaimed as a hero of sorts.  He, I fancy, for his own ends,
fathered a glowing account of what happened, and as it passed from
mouth to mouth it grew in glory.  He meant to be grateful, and his
gratitude took that form.  It was his airy way, for egotism, even when
it is not dislikeable, must ever carry its possessor into the picture.

Perhaps he also thought to please me, and thus to win a point towards
his larger ends, for I knew they would, in no wise, be modified by what
had happened.  By them, as he saw his case, he had to stand or fall,
and thus, in this reasoning, he had no choice at all.  His bonds, in
that sense, were entwined with coming events, which do not necessarily
cast their shadows before, anyhow when they are events of the heart.

Now, my secret hope for the Black Colonel, the inner prayer which I
hardly whispered to myself, was that he should escape his troubles as a
rebel, by going away to the foreign wars, and there make a new name.  I
thought I might help him out of the country, even if it had to be at
the risk of my commission.  He would be welcome wherever he found a
British camp across the sea, and no questions would be asked.  Truly,
there would be need to ask none, because his repute as a fighting man
among the Jacobites had gone far and wide.  By-and-by he could return,
when the feuds of Stuart and Guelph had died down to the dross they
were, though they had made a bloody toll, and sit in the home of his
fathers, not merely unmolested, but honoured by both sides.

I am not going to pretend that my own inclinations were not behind this
plan, for they were.  Why should I seek to hide them, even from the
Black Colonel himself; a hopeless thing to try, anyhow.  He had one
scheme for getting back to the world, and it struck bitterly across my
path.  I offered him another, which would attain his end, and if that
were so, why should he not take it and thank me?  I was not
ill-disposed to him personally; certainly well enough disposed to help
him--to help me.  When were we to make the reckoning?

He was seeking to live up to his new pretensions as a head of a clan,
and he had to find the wherewithal on which to do it.  The consequence
was that he used Red Murdo for taxing the country in the matter of his
necessaries.  If somebody, early some morning while it was still dark,
awoke to ask the question: "Are you come to harry and spulzie my ha'?"
it would most likely be Red Murdo who gave an insolent answer.  The
fellow, in fact, got swollen upon the little plunderings which his
master ordered, until he was hard to keep in hand.  But this, again,
suited the Black Colonel, because, to push his claims, he found money
handy, there being always smaller fry of the other side of friendship,
who have hungry purses, or none at all.

So Red Murdo, flown as he was with a lowly man's pride, which tends to
an unbalancing, must launch upon an expedition of no common sort.  It
embellishes a ballad of which only two lines come to me as I write:

  "There's four-and-twenty milk-white nowt, twal o' them kye
  In the woods of Glen-Tanner, it's there that they lie."


Beyond what the lines tell of a bold piece of rieving and spulzy by
Jock Farquharson's henchman, and done for him, I need not trouble to
instruct you, because the event only leads into our chronicle as by a
tributary wind.  When there is a mystery, and you cannot fathom it by
direct evidence, you are driven back on motives.  They are, in fact,
the nut and kernel of what lawyers call circumstantial evidence, a
fitting together of suspicions which have made the coffin of many an
honest Highland rebel.

I sought to keep my soldiers as unseen as a not over-great distance
from Marget and her mother at the Dower House would permit.  Naturally
the Hanoverian uniform was a sore sight for their eyes, and even a
personal grief, in that it recalled dear ones who had perished on the
losing side.  My desire to spare them was known to my men, who, in the
same spirit, would often walk a mile round not to show themselves to
the desolated inmates of the Dower House.

But it was essential, if anything unusual were to happen there, that we
should know, since it was part of our charge to protect Marget and her
mother from perils incidental to an unsettled country.  Therefore, I
had a private understanding with an old retainer of the family that he
was to hasten to me, should protection at the Dower House ever be
necessary.

This he was to do quietly, before giving any general alarm, as that
might not prove necessary, and also because I remembered an old
Highland wisdom, "Never cry fire, unless you want the heather to
catch."  Its bearing, as you will grasp is on strifes and feuds set
alive, not on the actual burning of heather, which is done to let
grass, for the sheep beasts, grow without being choked.

Well, on a night which I recall for its dense blackness, there came a
tap, tap, tap, three of them, slowly and distinctly, at the small
window of my room in the Castle.  I knew by the method of the
disturbance that it was not an accident, but I was on my feet and
peering hard into the outer darkness before I realized that here was
the prearranged signal of danger at the Dower House.

A hand moved close to the window, signalling me, and I motioned back,
though, on either side, all this was divined, as divination takes place
in the dark, rather than seen at all.  I picked up my sword, which
always stood in a certain corner of my room, pulled the door gently
towards me and stepped softly out on to the grass, which grew close up
to the Castle walls.

"Come ye, fast, Captain Gordon," quietly said a figure gliding beside
me, and without another word we made for the Dower House.  When I felt
myself beyond ear-shot of the sentry, I asked:

"What's happened--what's wrong?"

"I'm no' exac'ly sure," was the old retainer's answer, "but men hae
been surroundin' the place, as if to attack it.  They wakened me, bein'
a light sleeper, because they made sounds different fae' the ordinary.
It was like men crawlin' amon' the grass on a plan, and I slippit doon
for you."

"What had we better do?" I asked formally, and not because I expected
any answer, for I had decided to get into the Dower House without
alarming anybody, if that could be done.

We managed to open a window and step through it, but then the dogs
sleeping inside set up an alarm.  This quickly awoke everybody, and the
confusion set affairs moving outside, where I heard a voice that seemed
familiarly like Red Murdo's cry hoarsely:

"Lie close, lie close!"

Presently Marget and her mother, who had both dressed hastily, came to
the stair-head, holding a glimmering light over the darkness beneath.
Behind them crowded their few scared domestics, and odd the whole scene
looked, although, indeed, between keeping off the barking dogs and
wondering what was to happen outside, I had no desire or time to study
it.

"Who's there?" called Marget, in a not uncomposed but expectant voice,
and I answered, telling in a few words what I knew.  Quick in thought
and action she thanked me for coming, and said she would just get her
cloak.  She took her mother with her, but in a moment was back again
asking, "How can I be of service?"

She carried a stout walking-stick, and I looked at it as she came down
the stairs to where I stood in the lobby, her mother following.  "Yes,"
she said, "my hand lighted on it somewhere, perhaps because it has been
through troubles and wars and is in the presence of more.  Shall we say
that the fighting instinct, even in a stick, leaps to the call?"  She
laughed quietly, but with a concerned note in the laugh, and I knew she
was thinking of her mother's safety and health, both threatened by this
strange incursion of ill-disposed men.

Wishful as one would be at such a moment to magnify a trifle, in order,
if possible, to occupy an anxious woman's mind, I remarked, "Oh, a
stick can be a very sound weapon in a good hand."

"It's about all that the orders of search and suppression have left us
Jacobites," remarked Marget; "openly confessed, anyhow, for I suppose
there may be a small, concealed arsenal or two, even among our Corgarff
hills."

Nothing, apparently, had happened outside in those tense minutes, and
it was the strain of waiting which made us resolutely talk of
nothing--but a stick.  There had been no further cry since the "Lie
close" already mentioned, and it, no doubt, had been a mischance on the
part of Red Murdo.  All was silence and black without, and within all
quiet alarm, such as you get when a household suppresses itself in
obedience to some demand.

It was an oppressive silence, this waiting, and I was glad to hear
Marget tap the floor with her sinewy hazel and say merrily, thinking to
lighten her mother's concern, "My grandfather insisted that a stick
with a nob was no stick for a Highland gentleman.  It escaped, he would
say, when it was most needed, and that might, at times, leave the best
of Highland gentlemen by the wayside."  Joking, under difficulties!

She paused, for there arose a crack-cracking as of men coming closer
among the scrub of heather and fern which surrounded the Dower House,
only it was quite momentary.  The stick which she had half-lifted, an
unconscious act of readiness for defence, tapped back on to the floor,
and my sword-point made a sharper rattle, though I was unaware that my
hand had even moved it.  The tyranny of doing nothing began to be
intolerable and to insist on an issue, be it what it might.

Think of the situation for me, and although I am, I hope, neither more
selfish nor more cowardly than other men, I could not help doing that.
Here was I, the chief and head of his Majesty's garrison at Corgarff
Castle, standing defence on the door-step of a Jacobite household.  Why
was I there at all?  What was I there to accomplish?  How was I to do
this unknown something and return with composure to my quarters, secure
in my loyalty to King George and his ministers?

Moreover, what had I come out for to see?  A mere expedition of
burglary by a band of hungry caterans who took the chattels of friend
or foe indifferently?  Possibly that was all.  Then I could have
fetched half-a-dozen soldiers and apprehended those same footpads, or,
at all events, driven them to the hills again.  But at the head of what
defensive force did I find myself?  Why, a few domestics without
resource enough even to escape from the danger, a dear old lady who
anxiously wanted to mother the trouble about her, and a young woman of
nerve and resolve, my only stand-by.

There, for it was a new discovery in our relationship, I realized that
to have Marget by me was a very welcome comradeship, and, somehow, so
natural, that it made the other things of no burden.  I was curiously
happy, and could have left matters at that, but what to do, what to do?

There must, in all of us, be an instinct for our keeping, when we are
in danger.  Give it headway and you will probably win through, as a
thirsty horse knows how to reach a springwell among the hills.  Argue
with it and it says, "Take your reasoned method, your road of the
better judgment, but don't blame me, your natural guardian, if you come
to harm."

With this I got the strong intuition, possibly communicated to my mind
or heart by Marget's nearness, that here was no ordinary raid for
spoilage.  Something else of a personal and intimate sort was behind, I
was sure of it, something to which acute danger attached for my dearest
wishes.

When you are, in small authority, set over the people of a locality,
you are apt to develop a small official mind which obscures the power
of seeing, understanding, divining.  Such an attitude, as I had
painfully seen in various parts of the Highlands, fretted the great
sore of defeat that lay upon the Jacobites, whereas the effort should
have been to heal it.  My own mind I had tried to keep fresh and free
in all my relationships at Corgarff, impelled, may be, by a nature
which liked, possibly out of vanity, to give sympathy.  From this and a
mute speaking with one near and dear, I now had my personal reward, for
I understood.  Marget was the trophy sought in this dark raid, and she
was to be the Black Colonel's trophy.

"Action, front!" I said to myself, in one of the drill-book commands.
Offence is always a soldier's best defence, although it is a sailor's
phrase, so I would go out and make a reconnaissance from the back of
the Dower House.  This should cause the invaders to show themselves,
and might, if they thought the move stood for any force, even alarm
them into a quiet retreat, which, for several reasons, was what I most
desired.

Quickly I told Marget of my intention, and the need for it, and asked
her to remain on guard where she was.  She answered briskly, a woman
determined to be brave and not a burden, that nobody should enter the
place without feeling the weight of her grandfather's stick.  She
added, and here came in the other woman, that I was not to be long
absent.  This touched me sweetly, for it showed that Marget was
thinking less of her own safety, or, at the moment, even of her
mother's, than of mine in the night outside.  Honestly, I went dancing
from her side with a wine of joy in me that I had never tasted, for she
had shown that I was something to her, perhaps more than something.  I
might have been drunk, and if I had I could not have been more lost
than I was in the darkness behind the Dover House, because it instantly
swallowed me up.

There is a darkness to which, after a little, the eye so accustoms
itself that it can see trees and rocks and even faces in contour.
There is another darkness which seals the eyes and numbs the mind and
even weights the feet as with lead.  This was that night's darkness, so
pall-like that I was simply lost in it.

Nevertheless, calling up all my sense of locality, and feeling the way
lightly with my bare, ready sword, I started to make a circle of the
Dower House.  Ten, twenty, thirty, forty cautious steps, with my
sword-point probing the way, and it touched something soft and
yielding.  That something a-sort of whimpered, as a dog caught poaching
would, or as a man might who felt a quick pain.  A sword-prick stings,
and the something leapt erect and with a curse turned at me, when I
instinctively fell on guard.  Another sword struck at mine, my blade
slid up this other, caught in the handle and wrenched it from the
unseen hand.  The weapon fell among the bracken, but my man thought
more of getting away than of looking for it, so he doubled round a tree
and was gone.

Evidently I had struck the investing circle, and I went on cautiously,
but never another figure did I perceive, though, before me, ran many
soft noises of as many retreats.  Finally there was a suppressed rush
away, and with that I arrived at the front door of the Dower House to
hear a mother's cry of distress, "Marget, Marget! oh, Marget, Marget!"

"Where is she?" said I anxiously.

"She grew alarmed for you," answered her mother more anxiously, "and
went out, although I tried to keep her.  Hardly had she gone when I
heard a smothered sob, and then there was a hustle of feet as if she
were being carried oft by force."

There was a boding of ill in her cry, like a coronach, and the
domestics took it up in sympathy, as Highland women will.  "Marget!
Marget!  Mistress Marget!" rose the cry, and we became aware that all
the inmates of the castle were stirring to it.  But never a response
came from Marget, never a token from the raiders, and it was forced on
me that she and they were both gone from us.

We called on her, and searched for them until the dawn came, but only
found the sword which I had encountered, and I knew it as one the Black
Colonel had long worn, and then, when he himself got a better, that
with the "S" for "Stuart" on its handle, had given to Red Murdo.  The
larger knowledge, brought by the dawn, was that the raiders had
vanished as secretly as they had come, and that they had, beyond doubt,
taken Marget with them.  For though--

  "We sought her baith by bower and ha',
  The lady was not seen."




_XIII--The Wound of Absence_

You will probably know what it is to lose somebody who by physical
fragrance, the mystery of a common spirituality, or both, has become
essential to you.  The wound is twice as bitter if, until the parting,
you were unaware how much that presence really meant.  It is as if you
had come into a new world of your own and then found it vanish, before
you could take possession.

I had no doubt, thanks to the hearing of his voice and the leaving
behind of his sword, that the raiders were headed by Red Murdo, the
Black Colonel's henchman.  Actual light came during the morning, in the
form of a message by word of mouth: "I am a prisoner in the topmost
room of Lonach Tower, and Red Murdo and his men are camped below."

When the Highland woman who brought it had said that, she melted away
again without taking bite or sup.  She lived in the ruin of Lonach
Tower, and that was how Marget had been able to send her with the
message.  She could not be too long absent, however, or she might be
missed by Red Murdo, whom, she said, she had left snoring out his lost
night's sleep.

I found a Highlander who had engaged in relations with Red Murdo,
though their nature need not be mentioned, and who was anxious to score
them off for a settled life.  Working on that, I told him to go to
Lonach Tower, where he would find Red Murdo, and say the Black Colonel
was waiting at a fold of the hills, which I named--waiting to hear how
the night's work had fared!  That, as you will mark, was the nice
significance of the message, which I hoped would move Red Murdo and his
merry men--his master waited "to hear how the night's work had fared!"

If the Black Colonel was behind the business it would seem a natural
message, nay, a command, and my messenger went off with it.  When he
had gone, I picked out a dozen of our best soldiers, and, hinting the
mission, without explaining it, we followed at a distance.  We halted
behind the last peak of the hill which looks down on Lonach Tower and
awaited events.

We saw the receding Highland figure wend slowly towards the bare, lean
turret, and, when he reached it, my eyes lifted to its queer little
windows, seeking to look through them.  They gave no sign of anybody
inside, and, indeed, the mullioning of time had so dimmed them that,
perhaps, the outside world could hardly be seen from within.

My Highlander hammered at the one entrance door, and he had to hammer a
while before it opened to him.  Then it only opened partly, as if the
guardian kept a shoulder to it, while he spoke the visitor.  Next it
shut again, leaving my man outside, but evidently the colloquy had not
finished, for he waited.

Ten minutes more and the door drew wide, as we could see, and Red Murdo
came out, his comrades with him, and there was more questioning of the
bringer of news.  Evidently he played his part well, perhaps because,
knowing nothing of what lay behind, he simply stuck to the terms of his
delivery, for presently Red Murdo's party set off towards the
meeting-place I had named for them.

Here was my time to act, and I only waited until the coast, or rather
the valley, was clear.  When the tartans of Red Murdo's party had
fluttered out of sight, in obedience, as they fancied, to the commands
of their chief, I got my fellows quickly a-foot for Lonach Tower and
she who was a captive there.

The heavy oaken, iron-clasped door had been locked by the departed
raiders, and no sign of any tenant within fluttered out to us.
Half-measures are no more useful in opening bolted doors, of which you
have not the key, than they are in accomplishing other difficult
things.  So, finally, we put our collective weights against it, pushed
hard and steadily, and when the weather-worn bars and hinges gave way,
tumbled headlong into the old keep.

Nobody was in the ground-room floor, nothing, except the untidiness
left by half-a-dozen rough men, and I mounted the narrow stair and
tried the room above.  Again we had to use force, and when the door
flew inward I almost landed in the lap of Marget Forbes.  There she
was, bound to a rough seat, in the middle of the room, with a cravat
tied round the lower part of her face, to keep her silent.  Gently but
swiftly I undid the gag, and after that cut the rough tow which bound
her to the seat.  Being thus freed, she told me, with an agitation
which I tried to still, what had happened just before we came and on
the previous night.

Red Murdo, she said, when she could speak, had told her, with awkward
apologies, that he did not want to be unchivalrous but that he and his
men were called away for a little and that he must make siccar about
her custody, and no alarm giving, against his return.  She had ceased
asking him why she had been forcibly abducted and what was intended for
her, because on that he would say nothing except, "You are quite safe,
my young lady, quite safe.  We may be plain fellows, but we are
Highland men towards a woman, especially towards Mistress Marget Forbes
of Corgarff." "But how," I asked, for she had now somewhat recovered
her nerve and composure, and the agreeable surprise our arrival had
caused her, "how did you fall into their hands at the Dower House?"

"Oh," said she, "that was simple.  You went out to reconnoitre, and,
hearing in the stillness, words and a noise like a passage of swords, I
became anxious about you.  Under this impulse I opened the front door
and stepped out a few yards when a Highland plaid fell round my head,
silencing me effectually before I could shout an alarm, and I was borne
swiftly away by two men.  My astonishment was so great that I am not
sure if I attempted to resist until I was some distance from the Dower
House.  Then two other men relieved my captors in carrying me, and by
stages, for I absolutely declined to walk a step, I was brought here
and placed in this room."

"Where you have been unable to give any alarm?"

"That you can see, and all I knew was that Red Murdo was the leader of
my captivity, because he grumbled about having been stabbed in the leg
and about losing his sword.  'What,' I asked, 'could he and his master,
the Black Colonel, want by spiriting me away?'  But Red Murdo wouldn't
answer the question, and I haven't been able to answer it myself.
Somehow I have felt that no personal harm was intended me because my
captors, if not exactly friends, were not strangers, but men in some
relationship to our own people.  Mostly I have been anxious for the
anxiety of my mother," and her eyes looked concern at me.

"Well," I said, "we shall relieve that anxiety very soon now; you have
probably had enough of Lonach Tower, which, I notice, is sadly in need
of the repairer.  Let us go home!"

I said that last word out of my heart, and I thought Marget answered
with a gleam which comes into a woman's eyes only when her heart is
somewhere behind it.  We went down the slender, creaky stair, the
soldiers following, and came to the door, where, if you please, we ran
slap into the Black Colonel, Red Murdo, and the other caterans.  In the
unexpected lies drama, and here, indeed, was a dramatic confronting.
We stared at each other for a moment as if asking who was to speak
first, and, like himself, the Black Colonel managed to do it.

"I heard only an hour ago," he said, "of a lady in distress in this old
house.  I have come, at my best speed, to help her, as who would not,
when that lady is Mistress Marget Forbes."

"Would it not have been better," I cut in, "if you had heard of her
distress before and come earlier to remedy it?"

"Possibly," he answered, "but if I had been earlier, Captain Gordon, I
might not have met you here.  So you see," he added challengingly,
"there are compensations, although these are things, as far as my
experience goes, with which we could often dispense."

"Well," said I, "I have been able to render first aid to Mistress
Forbes, but it would be a satisfaction if you could explain to us how
she came to need it."

"Explain!  How can I explain?"

"You have cultivated a name for gallantry, Colonel"--he bowed--"and it
would be gallant to a lady if you would say why Red Murdo invaded the
Dower House last night and carried its young mistress away?"

"Did he, the villain?  He did not tell me of that, when I ran into him
and his following this morning.  He said he came to where we met, in
response to an order from me.  There was no such order, though it is
true that I was keeping an open eye for Red Murdo, a habit I have when
I know he is abroad, lest he might have anything for me."

By this time it was clear that the Black Colonel had commissioned Red
Murdo to kidnap Marget in order that he might rescue her, and, by the
act of so doing, advocate his plans towards her.  He was denying it now
that he found in Lonach Tower not Marget alone and a captive, but
Marget with a good, stout bodyguard to look after her.

She had not spoken so far, partly because she had not been directly
addressed, partly because, as I could see, she was in a hot fury with
the Black Colonel.  But the strange fascination of the man was working
on her, as I could also see, and, woman-like, speak she would or die.

"If," she demanded of him quietly, slowly, for she had herself in hand,
"you had anything special, even private to say to me, why did you not
come to the Dower House instead of sending your handy men to scare us
all and run off with me?  Whatever you hoped to gain, that, you must
know, was not the way to gain it."

The Black Colonel looked at her composedly for a moment and said,
"Mistress Marget, I am the last person in the world to think that any
form of duress would influence your actions.  On the other hand, since
the opportunity has come, I make bold, even in the presence of Captain
Gordon and our respective followers, to say a word in frankness, out of
regard for you and your house.  There are events pending which might go
far to re-establish your family, and you should know about them, not
merely indirectly but directly from me, who am deeply concerned in the
business."

Marget blushed and flushed and glanced at me, as if asking me to
protect her from what was very like a manifesto for public knowledge,
thrust upon her when she could not help it.  Her unconscious appeal
warmed my heart like the sun, but I held back, preferring she should
give the word which would, once and for all, put the Black Colonel in
his place.

"By what right," she said with dignity, "do you address your proposals
to me as you have done?  You have schemed them in an underground way.
Must you commit the affront of offering them to me in public, after
using force to bring me here?"

"I have told you," broke in the Black Colonel, "what I know of Red
Murdo and his doings on this morning, and if you do not believe me,
why, I cannot help it.  It may be that I had a plan for meeting you
face to face, but no plan like what has now emerged."

"No," said I, intervening, "your plan was to find Marget alone in this
eerie place, to work on her woman's feelings, her anxiety for her
mother, her regard for her house, all that you might commit her with
the Crown authorities as assenting to the secret negotiations which you
are ripening."

"Doesn't that reflection come oddly from an officer of the Crown," he
retorted, "because I have not heard you have resigned your commission?
You should leave it to us who are not honoured with service under the
foreign king, to flout his Majesty."

"There are moments, Jock Farquharson," I hotly replied, "when one's
first duty is to be a man, and this is such a moment.  I tell you if
you do not drop your persecution of this lady you will have to count on
a forthright quarrel with me."

"A pretty speech, my Captain Gordon," he said, adding: "Pretty speeches
have a habit of coming from those whose tongues are their boldest
weapons."

"You credit me," I said warmly, "with an accomplishment which I may or
may not have; you assail me for want of a quality which I beg you to
permit me to prove here and now."

There was no mistaking that, and he and his men looked their
understanding.  My feelings were what you can imagine, but I spoke
deliberately.  Perhaps I realized the need for quiet resolution rather
than temper, which is ever too brittle a weapon to work well.  As I
understood, the Black Colonel, having failed to get Marget into his
hands, with the object of mentally coercing her, now wanted to break
me, if he could, in her presence.  There was no end to the man's
resource when the bad side of his character got going, and no measure
at which he would stick.

His insult to me had been spoken in a voice loud enough to be heard by
everybody.  He so meant it to be heard, but my reply, an instant
acceptance of his challenge, surprised him for a moment.  He looked at
me, hesitating what to say, and I looked at him with a perfectly clear
purpose in my face.  We both looked at Marget, at his Highlanders and
at my men, knowing that with all these for witness of what had
happened, more must follow.

Deep down in my heart I felt relief, because I was sure that some day
we must fight out the odds between us, and when you come to that pass
with any man, it is best it should be settled.  They say that delay is
fatal in love and deadly in war, and with me the two risks combined,
for mine was both a question of love and a question of war.

"Is it elegant," the Black Colonel said in a purring voice of which I
knew the worth, "that two men who are kinsmen in a degree, should
fight, in the presence of a young lady who is a kinswoman?"

"You should have thought of that before," I quickly retorted.

"I agree with Captain Cordon," said Marget, interrupting us, "for I
come of a people who have never been afraid to see trouble through, and
I beg of you, Colonel Jock Farquharson, not to let me stand in the way.
Nay, if you will accept me, I shall be referee!"

I bent my head to thank her for this, and he bowed in the over-polite
fashion which he had learned among the French.  By this time our
respective followers, now taking a fight for granted, had lined
themselves up to watch it, one set of men in one row, the other set in
another, with space between them.  A spirit of the love of combat for
combat's sake, shone in their expectant eyes and echoed in their
suppressed, excited talk.

There had once been a small garden attached to the Tower of Lonach, but
it had been so overgrown with grass, and the grass had been so
industriously eaten by sheep and deer, that now it was a rough, hard
green, an entirely good place for swordsmen.  On it, as the sun began
to dip behind the hills, we took our stand, with my sergeant for second
to me, while Red Murdo filled the same office towards the Black Colonel.

Things had happened so swiftly that I had scarcely time to think, and
perhaps that was well, for thought never nerves you in such business as
I had before me.  There was I confronted with one of the best swordsmen
in the Highlands, while I was--well, passably good.  He was bigger,
stronger, a more heroic, more impressive figure altogether than I was,
and these pictorial attitudes count by the impression they make.  I had
to rely on a cool head, a nimble wrist, and I must in no wise depart
from the style of fighting by which alone, as I well knew, I could hope
to hold my own.

The Black Colonel would be sure, following the untutored Highland
manner, and keeping his French training in reserve, to attack
furiously, hoping so to destroy me at the beginning.  My plan, based
upon the barracks and camp training of a regular soldier, was to parry
with him, to hold him off, to wear him down, and then, if I had the
luck, which Heaven give me, get a blow home.

Marget, for all her courage, had walked over to a far corner of the
green, where, however, she could still see us, because my soldiers and
the Black Colonel's men stood aside to let her do that.  Their common
instinct for a fight flamed while they waited, but I knew that there
would be no interference from either party of retainers, however things
fell out, and so I had no anxiety as to the quarrel going beyond the
Black Colonel and myself.  All men of Highland degree were brought up
to believe that honest disputes could be settled better by combat than
anyhow else, and, indeed, they almost have a traditional reverence for
the broad-sword of their country.

Nobody called on us to begin, but when the Black Colonel and I, our few
preparations made, had looked at each other for a minute from the
measured distance which divided us, we both advanced.  As I had
expected, he came with a rush, and if it had not been for my sound
training in defence he might have smitten me at once.  As it was, by a
turn which seemed new to him, I caught his sword under the point and
lifted it lightly upward into the empty air.  He almost flew past me
with the motion which he had gathered, and we both had to face squarely
round in order that we might continue.

This time, apparently, he meant to be more deliberate, thinking,
perhaps, that if he missed me again with one of his wild lunges, he
might meet the sting of my thrust.  He played with me, and I responded
to his caution, so far as he could be cautious, in the same spirit.
Our swords were of equal length and about the same weight, but he had a
longer arm than I, as well as a stronger one.  Still, I made up for
this, as he began to realize, by quicker work in what might be called
the smaller craft of fighting.  I could be here and there and somewhere
else with my sword, while he was making a parry or a lunge or a level
stroke, for he tried everything.

Now his sword ran safely under my left arm where I guided it, and the
point of mine caught the breast-high edge of his kilt, where the cloth
is closely plaited and therefore very resisting.  My blade bent so that
if it had been other than the finest steel it might have snapped.  Then
the grip in the cloth broke, the sword was free again, and we were
without hurt, only the battle was growing warm.

Its contagion had agitated the men looking on, to a point where,
forgetting themselves, they began to shout encouragement to us
severally, the Black Colonel's men to him, mine to me.  Red Murdo was
urgently demonstrative, and my sergeant, as he afterwards told me, kept
an eye on him lest he should be tempted to intervene.  In the distance
Marget, as I saw momentarily, stood still and quiet, but there was a
fixed anxiety in her face, and the woman's horror of two men seeking to
take each other's life on her account!

Now came the third bout, and knowing the limits of my strength I
determined to make it the last, if I could.  The Black Colonel, it
encouraged me to notice, had also grown a little tired.  His rush and
dash were less strong when he came at me, and I thought I caught in his
eye a new doubtfulness of success.  He was famed for the quickness with
which he could finish a duel, and probably he had also decided to
settle this one at the third time of asking.

We parried and thrust, sword to sword, and I was driven to give way a
few paces by the Colonel's onslaught.  This led him to take risks, as I
had hoped he might.  Let him tire out his sword arm with heavy lunges
and elaborate recoveries, while I kept myself on guard, and then,
perhaps, my turn would come, for getting him.  It did come, but it
came, as most things come, in an unexpected fashion.

Sweating like a man in a fever, with his eyes wild and savage, the
Black Colonel at last fairly flung himself on me.  My face was also
streaming with perspiration, but my head remained cool, perhaps because
I felt that Marget was looking on.  A warm heart and a cool head should
neighbour an ordeal, and, in that assailing of me, my maintenance of
this combination was everything.

As he leapt forward, purposing to overwhelm me, the Black Colonel's
foot appeared to catch an uprising tuft that had been left unnibbled by
the sheep, possibly on account of the coarse toughness of its grass.
He lost his balance and shot heavily at me, holding his sword straight
out, as if to drive it through me.  Here was my chance, for he could
not, in this act of falling, change the position of his weapon.  I did
that for him by a mere touch, and it ran by me, near, it is true, but
without hurting me.  Mine, on the other hand, pierced the muscle of the
Black Colonel's right arm, and instantly his sword fell from his hand,
rattling close to my foot.  The blood spurted from him to the cry of
the onlookers, "Ah, he's ill hit," for he looked it, lying there on the
ground with a long, red gash in his arm.

"No," he said, slowly rising, "I am not ill hurt, but I am hurt in a
measure which will keep me from fighting any more this afternoon.  Here
I am with a useless right hand, and I have never learned to use the
left, so we must stop."

By this time Marget had come up, offering to bind the Black Colonel's
wounded arm, and staunch the bleeding, a task which Red Murdo had
already begun, only his hands were clumsy at it.  Marget made him take
off the strip of tartan which he was twisting tightly round the forearm
and put her linen handkerchief nearest the wound.  This tender and
thoughtful attention seemed to soften the field of battle, and
presently I found myself picking up the Colonel's sword and returning
it to him.

"Thank you," he said; "I can only carry it in my belt at present, but I
would not like to lose it, for it has proved you a better swordsman
than I had expected."

Handsomely said, was it not?  But we are always inclined to think a
compliment to ourselves fitting, especially when it comes from an enemy
as formidable as Jock Farquharson was.

"I hope, sir," I answered without undue gravity, "that I have earned
the compliment and I accept it, as I accepted your challenge, without
reserve.  Now, I suppose, our meeting is finished, and so we may each
go our own way.  Mistress Forbes, will you allow me to see you home?"
and I turned towards her.

She took my arm and we walked quietly from Lonach Tower and quietly
across the hills to the Dower House, neither of us saying much on the
way, possibly because our thoughts were not for the six soldier men who
strode behind us.




_XIV--The Cards of Love_

A man who serves the cause of a good woman is serving well, her and
himself, even if he only waits in the garden of the emotions.  He is
probably helping that woman in subtle, beautiful ways, to be herself,
to realize the full majesty of her womanhood, which otherwise she might
miss.  I had the highest wish to help the interests of Marget, and if
my heart beat an accompaniment, that was only another test of my
sincerity.

There, perhaps, I have written as if I had grown sure of Marget, which
I had no right to be, which no man can ever be of any Marget, else
romance would perish.  Typical of other youth and maid stories was
ours, a story without a beginning, a middle, or an apparent ending; a
sort of skein of hope and unspoken understanding such as links two
people, until they come closer or drift apart, ships that pass in the
night that should be the morning.

When did we begin to care for each other, if that state of regard as
between us was to be assumed, because people do ask themselves such
questions, and if they do, why not admit it?  When does a flower begin
to bloom?  Who can tell?  You see it, one unheralded high-noon, as if
it were just ready to burst beautifully upon its world.  So it is,
still much depends on how the world is going to treat it.  The flower
blows, if sunshine greets and warms it.  But let the sky be grey,
sombre, leaden, and that flower cometh not to its full kingdom--cometh
not, she said.

We had not spoken, Marget and I, to each other of love; we had not
called it by a name to each other; we had only felt and dreamt it.
Possibly, that is the natural course of a simple, true love, for it is
undemonstrative.  It likes the half-lights of the dusk, to live in the
shadow of its silvery clouds, and to arrive round corners, if only that
it may have a safe way of escape, should it be frightened.  Ever it
likes running away, and, better still, it likes being pursued!

All this goes with one dark little story of my love for Marget, and I
would only tell it under the compulsion of a full-breasted honesty,
because I judge it to be sacred to her as well as to me.  It was when I
first felt as if something hitherto unknown to me had come into my life
at Corgarff.  I had seen Marget once, with interest, because she was
good to look upon, the second time with pleasure, because she seemed to
see me, the third time with a sense of awkwardness, as if a mysterious
contact had arisen between us.

Words will not take me nearer to the uncanny, covetous feeling than
that, for they are bald, empty contrivances invented of this world and
not, like love itself, the fruit of the spirit world.  But perhaps you
will understand, certainly if you have experienced yourself, and,
understanding so much, you will be able to follow what came next.

Marget had been going somewhere, taking a mere walk, perhaps, and I had
said, "May I not come," and she said, "No, there is really no need,"
and I did not go.

Unknowing youth!  I saw my condemnation in her eye as she went her path
resolutely, turning neither to the right nor to the left, a maiden
determined to give me a lesson in this; that love, even when it is only
dawning, loves to be assailed.  That was a chapter of the spiritual
story which lay within the outer story of our doings in Corgarff.  You
may say that it was a trifle, a thing not worth recalling, and that
would be true for everybody except Marget and myself, who knew better
then and confessed it to each other afterwards, because it was a first
flicker of realization.

And, indeed, behind my marchings and counter-marchings around the grim
old Castle of Corgarff there lay a mystery of feeling nearer to me than
any call of arms could be.  It was always present, the most potent
influence that can exercise a man, born of one woman and in love with
another.  No doubt Marget and I shirked any admission, but it was in
our bearing towards each other, that whisper of the heart's throne
which calls and is answered.

This feeling was my settled comfort now that a cloud of events, as I
assessed them, was hurrying the Black Colonel into a new necessity
towards his personal aims and so towards Marget and myself.  The
"rough, raging, roaring, roystering, robustious rascal" side of him,
and the description is not mine but taken from an extant document, had
long been filling up.  Presently it would overflow in happenings urgent
enough to sweep our pilgrimage along like a high wind on the high hills
of Corgarff.

They began with a fall out between the Black Colonel and his Red Murdo,
some little time after the duel at Lonach.  To get his injured but
recovered sword-arm in trim again the Colonel had taken to practising
on his man, also a sufficient swordsman, though always liable to make a
foul stroke.  This time he had to defend himself from a sudden,
half-angry, half-playful, wholly energetic assault on the part of his
master, and that without a sword in hand.

What do you think he did, this Red Murdo, when the Colonel's provoking
blade had positively pinked him in the leg, above the garter and drawn
blood?  He picked up Jock Farquharson's pet dog, a wise and lively
Scots terrier, and flung it, a protection against further pinking, on
the sword-point, with the remark, "A good soldier never lacks a weapon."

The Black Colonel was fondly attached to his dog, and its death, for it
died from the wound, upset him into other troubles.  It is often the
way, when one thing goes wrong that many things go wrong, time getting
out of joint generally.  Naturally, too, if we remember that life is a
delicate machine which a small first unbalancing will throw into
disorder, as take the Black Colonel in witness.

It became necessary for him to "raise the wind," as he spoke of the
process, and to that end he sent Red Murdo on a foraging expedition.
This worthy, wishful to do the business with as little trouble as
possible, went after the first batch of cattle he could find.  He
planned to get them away in the dark of night, have them at a safe
distance by morning, and then, at his leisure, drive them to a southern
market and bring back to the Black Colonel what he got for them, less
his own expenditure on victuals and drink, and the due entertaining of
other gentlemen of the same kidney, met on the road, because its
comradeship had to be justly handselled.

Now, shrewdly, as a matter of precaution against raiders high, or kern
lowly, the owner of the grazing kine had put a white beast among them.
Consequently when he was wakened by a loud lowing and came forth to
find the reason, he saw that his cattle were being stolen away, for
there walked the white one, a guiding star to his eye.  He followed the
drove quietly at a distance, summoning friends as he passed their
several homes, and when he had gathered recruits enough, and while it
was still dark, he set upon Red Murdo and his thieves, gave them the
heartiest beating you could fancy, and re-captured the cattle.

This attempt to steal the kine was laid at the door of the Black
Colonel, rightly so, and when he heard of it and its failure he swore
at Red Murdo, saying he had lost all a henchman and provider's
artistry.  He was one of those men, very numerous in the world, who
could ill-support a failure made by himself, and could not bear it at
all when another failed who was acting for him.

"Why," he rated Red Murdo, "you can neither steal nor lie, as a
Highland gentleman's ghillie should.  You would have me do those petty
things myself, and they are not for me, although, mayhap, I'd be equal
enough to them."

Red Murdo answered nothing to his enraged chief, but perhaps made up
for his silence by some hard thinking.  When a rebuke is taken silently
the wrath behind it is apt, in average human nature, to simmer out, but
the Black Colonel's black fire burned on.

"Why," he roared, "didn't you think of an expedient to keep those
cattle, the white one and all, for very probably it was a beast to
fetch a good price?  Where were your wits?  You recollect when, for an
act which has since been counted brave, I had to fly with half-a-dozen
men on my heels, and how, coming to a mill, and nobody being there, I
put on the miller's dusty suit.  I was asked by my pursuers, sure that
they had seen the man they pursued disappear into the mill a few
minutes before, 'Did any one enter here?'  'Only the miller is here,' I
told them, and, as it seemed so, they went their way, and, after a
while, I went mine."

"But," said Red Murdo, "they wid na' hae believed me if I had sworn a
score o' oaths that I was the miller.  I'm nae sae good at swearin'
untrooths as some folk you ken!"

"Possibly," quoth the Colonel loftily.  "To be believed one must, after
all, look one's words and you might find it a difficulty.  But still a
ghillie of better strategy would have kept those cattle and, what is
worse, my friend, saved the suspicion which has fallen upon me."

"Nae for the first time," Red Murdo shot at the Black Colonel.

"It's not first times that matter," he retorted more quietly, being
pleased, in a manner, with Red Murdo's spirit; "it's last times that
count, and the need is to take care of them."

Possibly the Black Colonel might have met his material troubles for a
while longer without having to fly from them, because he was full of
stratagems.  But on the sentimental side he fell into an affair of much
sadness for a comely lady who, at her mid-age, should have known
better, though, indeed, the forties have their storms, like the sea
latitudes sailors call the "roaring forties."  Delectable as detail
might be, and desirable to illumine what all befell, I must, for I am
no scandal-monger, be content to give you the romance and the tragedy
in three snatches of verse begotten by the same.

First, you must make what you like of--

  "She kept him till mornin', then bade him begane,
  And showed him the road that he might na be ta'en."


Next, you have the news let loose, for--

  "Word went to the kitchen
  An' word went to the ha'."


Finally, when my lord of the lady rides home from a far journey and
hears that news, and meets her, he goes red, wud mad and--

  "O bonnie, bonnie was her mouth
    And cherry were her cheeks;
  And cleir, cleir was her yellow hair
    Whereon the reid blude dreips."


There the Black Colonel had found a tangle which he could not cut
through, and he sought a side-way out.  How he discovered it he was
good enough to inform me, though I had no claim to his confidence, in
an epistle drafted in his best style, which reached me at Corgarff,
hard on the tidings of what had made the necessity for it.

"To Captain Ian Gordon, for his privy knowledge only," it opened, and
it continued, in his usual, even manner, for, mind you, he had the
trick of writing, as well as the odd weakness towards it already
remarked on, all of which appears in what follows, so:

"It may oblige your calculations that I have a proposal through proper
channels to go on a special mission to New France, where a state of war
now exists between the British and the French.  Ordinarily I should
have hesitated to take a step which would remove me, even for a time,
from my most particular affairs here, these being familiar to you.

"The offer is put to me, however, as part of earlier overtures in those
same affairs, and that recommends it.  Moreover, there are urgent
private reasons, not here to be gone into, but perhaps to be j'aloused
by you, which favour an early change of air and scenery for yours
dutifully.  Accordingly I am departing for North America by the first
government ship on to which I can be smuggled, that, as I grimly note,
being the elegant word used in a dispatch of instruction to my hand.

"You cannot fail to be curious as to the nature of my mission, and I
shall inform you thereon so far as its delicate nature permits.  I am
offered by Government--your Government--a free pardon for the past and
a captain's commission in Fraser's Regiment of Highlanders, now in
Canada with General Wolfe, if I succeed in the undertaking which is
this . . . but its delicacy tries my power of pen.

"Briefly I, a proscribed Jacobite, am to depart from Scotland, find my
way to Canada, and offer my sword and service to the Marquis Montcalm
commanding his French Christian Majesty's troops for the defence of
Quebec.  There I am to keep an open eye, and a close tongue, for all
and every information of possible use to General Wolfe, and transmit
the same to him personally, by what safe channels I can devise.  He is
to be informed of my mission, and he alone, and that's all, though it
may be enough for you to digest, as it has been, I beg you to believe,
for me.

"Will you, I pray, make my humble excuses to Mistress Marget Forbes and
her mother, and accept them for yourself, and you may rely upon hearing
from me oversea, because I have no intention to relinquish a shred of
my attachment to my native Highlands and the well-being of the name I
bear; whereof it is the purpose of this epistle to inform you, as
between one man of honour and another."

News indeed, intensely personal, therefore intensely interesting news,
and I let it be known without delay at the Dower House, taking care, in
delicacy, not to seem curious as to the impression it made there.
Somewhat later I had intelligence of the actual sailing of the Black
Colonel for New France, across the Atlantic, with his inseparable Red
Murdo, whom, I was sure, the adventure would suit grandly, though he
probably would not be told its secret meaning.

Then came a long silence, and I began to wonder whether the Black
Colonel had not, somewhere and somehow, been caught in the last kink of
his pre-destined hair-rope.  While I wondered, off and on, in this
sense, and our small world of Corgarff drifted uneventfully on, a
much-worn, salt-sprayed letter reached me, and I recognized in it the
Black Colonel's writing.

What account had he to give of himself?




_XV.--News from Somewhere_

"Quebec," the Black Colonel had written above the first sheet of his
letter and he had forgotten to put any date, so I was left to guess how
long it had taken to reach me.  Nor did it bear any form of address to
myself, but just began abruptly, "I do not suppose you will be
specially glad to hear of me in this land of New France.  There was,
however, an understanding that I should write you, and I am doing it by
a sure and confidential messenger."  Then it went on as follows, for I
transcribe it fully, as is needful for the conveyance of its atmosphere
and even a certain quality of elegance natural to the writer:

"No man is happy who has had disappointments like me, but, at least, I
survive and am usefully occupied.  If I may say it, my not
inconsiderable fame in our native Highlands had gone ahead of me to
this country.  That made it easy to secure service in one of the French
corps in Quebec, for I speak the language, as you know, with no undue
stranger accent, and it always brings me gay memories of hours in Old
France.

"The regimental wages are not great, and they are not paid with exact
punctuality, because there are too many empty hands waiting between his
French Christian Majesty's coffers and his soldiers in Canada.  But
that, to a man like myself who wants little of the so-called comforts
of life, and has, moreover, other sources, is no great hardship, and
there are comfortings, sometimes, in unexpected quarters.

"The French, who know the art of romance, and how to spin it to the
last drop without getting to the dregs, have already peopled this new
land of theirs with colour, but I doubt me if it will last, which is
their affair, not mine, or yours.  King Louis himself is indulgent to
the human colouring of his dominion, in that he sends out shipments of
wives from the Old Country for the French settlers.

"Therefore they are called 'King's girls,' and being flowers of a
kingdom which has bloomed rarely with women, they are in much demand.
It is a joke, when a ship-load arrives, that the plumpest are married
first, and this, I gather, for two reasons: Being less active, it is
thought they will more readily stay at home, as honest married women
should, and, being well covered--not fat, oh no! not that--that they
will the better resist the icy cold of New France in the winter.  For
myself they do not interest me, not on account of the reason which
drove my late Count Frontenac here, he having in the Old Country a
shrewish wife whose temper he could not bear, but because I have found
attractions more to my taste, of which you shall know something.

"I may admit, with some assurance, that my luck in the regard of the
sweet sex, holds amid the altered conditions in which I find myself.
Those French women have not the freshness, and I am certain not the
innocence--you will admit me a judge on both counts--of my own
country-women in the Scots Highlands.  But they have a wondrous charm,
a quality of attractiveness which is as deadly to a Highlander as if a
dirk slit his heart.  I speak, you may think, in poetry numbers, but
you must do that, if, speaking of women, you would do them justice,
and, incidentally, yourself.  We have all sorts and most conditions of
women, and the trade in laces and ribbons and the gew-gaws with which
they adorn themselves, is wonderful for so small a place as Quebec.  No
sooner does a consignment of finery come in than it is snapped up, and
the men, too, are admirable dandies, ruffling it, some of them, as if
Louis Quatorze himself were here with his Court.

"Now, only last night I was at the party of the Intendant Bigot, and a
gay crowd we were until the small hours of the morning grew again.  His
Excellency, the Marquis Montcalm, has the Frenchman's natural love for
pleasure, but he is a serious, honest man who resolutely puts his duty
before it.  Monsieur Vaudreuil is more the gentleman of pleasure, a
governor with a large token of the gallant in him, but for chicane,
knavery and devilry commend me to this fellow the Intendant Bigot.
They say he grows richer every day by robbing his gracious master, the
King, first, and the King's subjects next.  I cannot speak with
authority of that, and it matters not, but I can tell you of what goes
on at his chateau, the Chateau Bigot, because, as I write, I am
scarcely cool from its doings.

"There was Bigot himself as master of the revels, a short, stout,
awkward man of more than middle-age, who did not well become the part.
He is, I must add, coarse for my taste, and by his appearance you might
judge him capable of any venture in the getting of money.  He would say
in his cynical, loud way that the end justifies the means, and with him
the end is Angélique des Meloises.  She is probably going to be the
Delilah of New France, the woman who is shearing it of its upholding
strength, but she is fine.

"Ah, ha! the name of Angélique is fresh to you, has no meaning, and I
see you halting and asking me to tell you more of her.  But here she is
a household word--or, should it be, by-word?--and I, a stranger, am
counted fortunate in having come close to the rustle of her skirt.
That skirt, you can believe me, is in many fabrics, and ever of the
best, and, though I cannot confirm it, the other women of Quebec say
that no parcel of lace, or silk, or satin, freshly sent by Old France
to New France, is free of being tampered with by Bigot in the
pleasuring of his mistress.  Without that news in your ear, you would
not, my friend, comprehend the Chateau Bigot.

"Angélique was not the first flame with whom the old sinner has lit his
fires in Canada, for there was Caroline, the Algonquin maid, not to
mention others.  Bigot, the story goes, had been hunting and, be it
conceded, he is, for a Frenchman, a sound shot, and had lost himself in
the wilds.  Presently, while he pondered on his course, there appeared
a fascinating Indian girl, and he made her guide him to his chateau and
there kept her.  The woman pays in such affairs, be she white, brown,
or black, all the complexions I have seen, and that Indian lass came to
a sad end, being found stark one morning in bed, with a knife through
her lissom body.

"But that was Bigot of the Garden of Eden, the primitive savage of
passion who would have his apple without having to eat the punishment,
so far, anyhow, though, I suppose, the devil, who has seven-league
boots when he likes, will overtake him.  If he were to do it now he
would find him engrossed in the smiles and, maybe, the caresses of
Angélique.  I have, myself, pretended to be some judge of woman-folk,
and Angélique pleases me in divers manners.  That is an admission I
would not mind making to herself, though, to be sure, I have found it
the silent gallantry towards women which reaps most harvest.  She is,
by marriage, Madame Pean, wife of a creature whom Bigot uses, and she
is a note of lovely abandon which a man with half my insurgency would
like to pluck an' he could.

"We have been introduced, Madame Angélique and I, for here all goes by
the most correct form on the surface.  We have even drunk from the same
cup of wine, because she preferred me hers yester-night, saying, 'To
our gallant recruit Monsieur Inverey, and to his gallant nation, les
Ecossais.'  Ah, the laughing witch!  You should have seen the languor
in her eyes, the blushing red of her lips, the delicate contour of her
arm, as she raised her glass to me and then bade me empty it.

"'Ah,' said I, bowing and taking it from her hand, against whose baby
pinkness the champagne sparkled; 'ah, it is good to see, chère Madame,
that you know the ceremony of the Loving Cup, and how, elegantly, to
express it.'  My phrase of the Loving Cup took her, I saw, it and my
significance in using it, and her dark eyes, her pouting lips, and the
turn of her lovely head, all had a new meaning as, saying, 'To our Lady
Venus, in New France,' I emptied the glass and set it on the table
beside her.

"We fell a-talking, Madame Angélique and I, and she was good enough to
praise my French, and I said that, alas! it was not sufficient to do
justice to her charms.  She flushed with pleasure, and said archly that
she wished her husband, Monsieur Pean, or even her very good friend the
Intendant, would pay her like compliments.  'But,' she added, 'you
Scotsmen are so gallant and so truthful,' and in her sweet French the
token rang true.  With it she raised her eyebrows, expecting me to
confirm her raillery, which I did, for I said, 'Madame, truth is the
only gallantry that tells twice, and so I am content to employ it, for
I hope we are to be friends.'

"It was a bold measure to take, but Madame Angélique, I judged, with
her on-coming air, was precisely the woman who would respond to bold
measures.  She is none of your woo-me-slowly ladies, her bosom, as it
rose and fell in her French laces, being eloquent of that.  She is a
singularly fine animal to whom Providence has, by an unusual
generosity, given a soul, though mostly, maybe, it hides in the silken
dalliance which is the note of Angélique.

"You will perceive, my old friend and, I hope, old enemy, that I
present to you a whole bouquet of charms: beauty of form, the radiance
of a personality, and brains with an edge to flatter or flout.  Very
rarely does Providence dower so many graces to one woman, but they are
all in Madame Angélique.  Moreover, she has the subtlest of sex
strategy, for in greeting me she made a stumble with her lace petticoat
so that I might catch the daintiness of her foot and ankle.  She also
has the swiftest, as well as the softest of glances, and I felt it
travel from my brogues to my head, approving the journey, I fancied.

"I have been particular about Madame Angélique because she is a woman
in a thousand, this frail beauty of New France, its Madame de Pompadour
in brilliance, however the comparison may hold in virtue, and because,
if I prosper at all in the friendship, I hope to hear from her the
inner news of events here which, by its usefulness to General Wolfe, is
to lead me far in my home desires.  When I left Scotland I had a sore
heart, for truly it fills that heart, but you will gather that I have
found a fresh land which also has its milk and honey.

"How much of them shall I sip?  That's the gamble, and time will tell,
but it is a great gamble in which I am enlisted, and, by my faith, I
like a gamble.  It stirs the blood in me, makes it run as it ran when I
made love to my first sweetheart, and a strapping lass she was, though,
alas! I have almost forgotten her very existence.  Poor Carrie!  I
wonder, I wonder, but hi, ho! what use to ask of the flowers of
yesterday, where are they?

"Only, my dear Captain Gordon, I wish I could have taken you with me
last evening to that romp at the Chateau Bigot.  Yes, I remember, your
tastes are different from my own--less elastic, shall we say?--and you
might not have come.  Well, set love and gambling and sport, all done
with abandon, in a choice, beflowered fold of this New France country
and you may realize what you have missed and I have seen.

"Revelry!  That is not the word for the night, and it took all the
seriousness in me to recall that I had other interests among the
revellers besides theirs.  My elegance in our Highland dress, for to be
sure I wore it, cost me many a temptation, and if Madame Angélique,
late in the evening, had gone a minute longer with her whimsical
measurings of my leg where it garters, why, sir, I should have made a
fool of myself.  But she merely said she wanted to test whether I was
not modelled to perfection for dancing the Highland dances, and
wouldn't I oblige her and the company?

"Monsieur Bigot, lolling in a chair, beslippered, be-hosed in the
fatness of his limbs, be-waistcoated round his windy paunch, wearing
velvet knee-breeches and a plum-coloured coat, what should he do, for
his ears miss little, but catch this remark and, wishing, I suppose, to
keep me from any further impressing of Madame Angélique, he cried,
'Surely, surely, let us have a Scottish dance from our gallant friend,
Comte Farquharfils!'

"He ennobled me in one breath, and in the next made French of the
ancient surname I bear, but that was of no consequence, and his cry was
taken up instantly by his guests: 'Beautiful ladies and gallant
gentlemen,' he went on, 'the Chevalier Ecossais--more ennobling of
me!--will entertain us with a dance of his native country!'

"For a moment I was abashed with confusion, yes, sir, believe it or
not, because this was a thing which had not come into my plans.  But I
have not lived for ten years by my wits and my sword without learning
to make rapid resolutions, and I decided to dance, not alone!  The
gallants and the ladies had now formed a circle, and I said very
quietly, 'I am honoured, Monsieur L'Intendant, and your desire will be
to me a pleasure, if Madame will permit.'

"A glance of curious inquiry went round the circle as I looked at
Madame Angélique, a radiant and bewitching picture, standing at the end
of the room, eager to see the Scottish dance for which she had made
measurements--yes, yes!  Perhaps some of the company had penetrated the
real purpose of Monsieur Bigot's interference as being what I have
said, and in that case they saw a challenge in my acceptance of his
invitation.

"But he was prompt to the occasion, for he said in his lordliest
fashion, 'Madame, I am sure, will be happy to permit,' and he bowed to
Angélique, who, in turn, bowed to me her gracious permission for a
dance Eccosais.  Neither had counted on what was to happen, for I
quietly walked over to her, invited her to take my arm, and, while
every one wondered, led her into the middle of the room.  I did this
amid a buzz of surprise, and I heard one gallant say, 'Parbleu, this
Scotsman asked the lady's patronage and takes herself.'  Neatly put, I
thought, and the French mind is neat, as well as swift.

"The music struck up as I passed my right hand about the responding
waist of Madame and lifted her elegance through a Highland round-dance.
There was no need to lift her through it a second time, because the god
of dancing was in that woman's feet, and between us we fairly wove
poetry on the polished floor.  Never, after the first moment, was there
such a partner as Angélique; never, perhaps, if I may be allowed the
conceit, such a pair of partners, a picture, my friend, a picture!

"As we warmed to the dance we lost all sense of an audience, and only
drank the intoxication of the music.  At first there had been a cold
silence around us, but we infected it with our own sultry spirit and
melted it.  'Bravo!' shouted the Frenchmen, and 'Divine!' said the
ladies, and I took the praise of the women and Madame Angélique the
praise of the men, a fair division, pleasing to us both.

"Monsieur Bigot alone remained aloof from praise, and as we turned once
very close to him--so close that he wilted in the hot draught made by
our wrapt figures--I saw a hard look come into his eyes and a hard
expression cross his coarse mouth.  When we finished at last and I had
conducted Madame Angélique to a chair and thanked her, a huzza rang to
the roof, but the Intendant took no part in it.  He did, however,
approach me with what others thought to be words of congratulation,
only you shall judge when I repeat them.

"'You dance like the devil himself,' were his words, 'but you had
better not dance again with Madame Angélique or you may find yourself
in the devil's company.  We have other uses in Quebec for you than
this, and your native Scottish wisdom will convince you of it without
more ado.'

"Well, the thing was done, the harm or good of it, for one cannot
always act with deliberation, and never, I should say, when Madame
Angélique beckons, for she is a witch incarnate.  Rarely is it any use
revising what has been done, and, frankly, I would not have missed that
dance even if it were to have cost me my head.  At the moment I am not
sure whether or not it has cost me my heart; temporarily, shall I say,
keeping on the safe side of truth?

"Anyhow, my dear Captain Ian Gordon, you will be made aware by these
greetings, should they reach you in the goodness of time, and the
friend who carries them, that I am having an experience which agrees
with me, and so I sign myself with the more heartiness,

"Your very faithful
  "JOCK FARQUHARSON OF INVEREY."




_XVI--The Wooin' O't!_

There are two kinds of people who make a difference in our lives when
they leave us: those we like and who like us, and those we do not like
and who dislike us, for that is one way in which the world wags.

We feel, in the first case, a quick sadness, we dwell on happy
memories, now tinted to a soft melancholy, and we ask ourselves, "Have
we been all to them we could have been, and they the most to us?"

Our feeling in the second case is one of relief, coupled with the
passing of an influence which, if not sympathetic, may yet have been a
stimulus to us.  Something that has been roused in our nature, goes
back into its hidden place with the cause which unhappily called it
out, rivalry, perhaps.  It is a whip that may carry you to the top of a
hill when otherwise, tempted by a warm sun and a soft wind, you might
recline on a half-way bank of heather.  Ah! it is good to day-dream at
the sun, our Highland sun, which plays hide-and-seek with the sailing
clouds.

But, may be, the incomplete parting is the best, that which has many
things unsaid, silences which are not silent; because it leaves room
for the imagination, lets us gild the picture in the roses of hope.

The going of the Black Colonel had meant a difference for myself
certainly, and also, I could suppose, for Marget and her mother.  But
it was a mixture of the two feelings which I have suggested, because,
in a fashion, I had a regard for the man, as well as something else,
and to the ladies of the Dower House he was both the kinsman and the
venturer who wanted to be more.  I admired his manly qualities and was
willing to clothe the others in a veil, as long as he did not make that
impossible.  They had the bond of family with him, a quiet pride in his
championage of the Stuart side, which had been theirs, and, well, they
wished no more of him.  But what, perhaps, we mostly felt, Marget and
I, without daring for a moment to confess as much, was that some
element which kept us apart, and might, unhappily, even divide us, had
passed across the sea to the New World with the Black Colonel.

We began unconsciously, and then, I suspect, noticeably, to grow
closer, to live the vital little things of life nearer to each other,
as it this were natural.  That, perhaps, is the most critical period in
the mating of two young people, as you may learn from the delicate
nurturing of Mother Nature herself in the spring-time, when the earth
grows warm.  They are so in the thrill of emotion, that they have no
thought for the building of the permanent house of the spirit in which
they are to dwell.  But it goes forward about them and otherwise the
prospect would be bleak for them, sad for them, and sadness should not
come to lovers in the honeymoon of their hopes.

"I suppose," Marget said to me one evening while we chatted in the
Dower House and her mother, tempted by the long summer light of the
north, read in the garden, "I suppose you really have nothing to do now
that the Black Colonel is gone, and his disturbance--for you--with him."

"Oh," answered I, "there are still things to do, things, some of them,
which I don't like, as my military superiors down there in Aberdeen
town may be suspecting, for only last week, you know, they sent up a
troop of horse to make a special search of Corgarff for any hidden
Jacobite powder and shot.  What happened you also know.  Our friends of
your Stuart faith heard of this expedition long before it arrived,
filled their knapsacks with bannocks, and went to the hills.  The
troopers came, found, by persistent search in deserted homes, a few
barrels of Spanish powder, some hundreds of bullets and a broken
cannon, and threw them all into the Water of Don.  It was not very
exciting, especially to me, because it was a kind of censure; but
nothing worse happened than the breaking of a drunken trooper's neck,
by a fall from his horse.  Here was one more way of death, not a pretty
way, for the man's commanding officer said jocosely, 'The idiot, he
must have come upon bad drink in his searches, and a bad woman is less
dangerous.'"

"Your statement," said Marget, "is, I see, a confidential apology to me
for the ongoings of those set over us and you!  I hope you don't spend
too many hours in reflections as unprofitable as the subject of these,"
and she made, with this advice, to be a very serious young woman.

"What," I asked, "would you have me do with my spare time?"

"I'm afraid I don't know."

"Well, if you don't, who does?"

"I think I see a compliment in what you say, but I'm not quite sure."

"It's against rules, isn't it, to repeat a compliment?  It would be no
compliment then."

"The more need to make it clear at first."

"I thought I had."

"Men think such a lot of things which are too unsubtle, too clumsy, for
a woman to comprehend.  Yes, it is so."

"Men--myself--the Black Colonel?"

"He is far away; why bring him back?"

"Only because it may concern you, and anything which concerns you . . .
is not to be spoken."

"It is more interesting to speculate on what might have happened if he
had stayed, instead of running from his guns--no, I mean to his guns,
for he was no coward.  Discount a good deal from him and he remains a
taking man.  It flatters any woman to be coveted by a man of parts,
good or bad.  She likes the homage thus implied, and if she did not she
would be no woman.  She says to herself, 'What a pity that man should
be in love with me because I would not have him at all.'  With her next
breath she says, 'A resolute lover, something like a lover, a great
lover.'"

"The unconventional lover--and more," said I; "that's it, all down
time, the primitive trait of sex, he who can lift a woman out of her
groove into a surprise."

"Well," said Marget, "the Black Colonel has the right blood for an
unconventional lover.  You cannot make a Farquharson respectable by
force, and I'm not sure about the Gordons!"

She looked at me with amusement in one eye and the rebel woman in the
other and I laughed, and that was all.  No; not all.

Such talks between Marget and myself may have seemed to lead nowhere,
but actually they did.  The unspoken side of them was full of those
secrets which cannot be put into language, because they would perish in
the effort.  What is spoken may be good, but what is unspoken in love
is still better.  Behind the word, there hides the speech of the soul.
You say one thing, and with the eye mean another, or you say it in a
fashion only intelligible to a particular person.  There is a
telegraphy of souls, as well as of hearts and minds, and the lesson is
never to believe your ears.

Things came to be understood between myself and Marget, and the Black
Colonel had a part in this, far away as he had taken himself and his
troubles.  He was not out of the picture, because he might return to
it, but we could paint him in or out as we liked, and that left us
canvas room.  One day he was returning to set us all by the heels
again; another day he was gone, to return no more, leaving us to
fashion our own lives, as we were doing.

"Marget," I asked, "suppose the Colonel comes back, is he to find us
just as he left us?"

"Not very friendly--or more friendly?" she replied vaguely, teasingly.
And then a little anxiously, as I thought, "Did you and the Black
Colonel make any bargain about our old Forbes property which need ever
call him back?"

"Dear me, no!  But if it would give you pleasure to see him again soon,
why, let us pray for his coming."

Marget was hurt at this, for she said, "I was only wondering whether
the Black Colonel will renew the quest here, if he does not reach his
ends through the New France venture."

That question was to be answered by a last long epistle from him, which
came to me about this time, and which tells his further part in our
story, a wandering story, like Jock Farquharson.




_XVII---A Song of Other Shores_

"Quebec, North America.

My Worthy Kinsman,

"You have not written me in reply to a previous letter of mine, nor did
I expect you would, but I hope you have not lost all interest in my
fortunes, and I make sure that the great events which have happened
here, in New France, must interest you, when told with some
particularity by me.

"You will be well aware, before this reaches you, that the
_fleur-de-lys_ of his Christian Majesty, King Louis, no longer flies
over the citadel of Quebec, and that in its place there blows the flag
of His Britannic Majesty--whom God bless, I suppose!  But of how all
this happened you will only have general intelligence, and none about
my own fortunate part in it.

"Well, it was not mere fortune, because I did exert myself strenuously
to discharge the mission confided to me, and General Wolfe said
privily, before he marched to a glorious victory and a glorious death,
that I had succeeded beyond his expectation.  But I should tell you
that I had necessary audiences of him more than once, while I served
with the French in Quebec, and these we managed with perfect secrecy,
thanks to methods which I may not disclose, except that the high esteem
felt by the French for the Black Colonel, and their faith in his
honour, alone made them possible.

"Saying so much of General Wolfe, I wish to set down my own monument to
his evident high parts as a soldier and a man.  I found him modest in
demeanour, graceful of manner, reasonable in attitude, altogether a
gallant gentleman.  He was simple and to the point, and when he had
finished with you he dispatched you courteously, pleased with him and
with yourself.

"His excellency, the Marquis Montcalm, who also did me the honour of
various conversations, and who likewise fell gloriously, had qualities
not dissimilar.  He was a French gentleman with the grand manner,
meaning he carried his air so quietly that you hardly knew its
presence, except by feeling it.  I will further say, in token to his
attributes, that he was of a moral stature in whose presence I felt
ashamed of my secret trade, a trade which a man can only follow once in
a life time, and then because he must.

"Perhaps you will scarce believe that several times my tongue was
bubbling to deliver all to his knowledge, and to throw myself on his
mercy.  His very trustfulness made that impossible, because in each of
us there is a natural refusal to destroy confidence, wherever we find
it.  That would be uprooting a plant which does not grow strongly
enough anywhere, and I, for one, love to cultivate it.  'So, so,' I
hear you say, my friend!

"Certainly at times I wished that my Lord Montcalm would treat me with
less consideration and not ask me questions about the British invading
forces, because I gathered information from those questions, and, in
truth, here was the basis of much I imparted to General Wolfe.  He
asked, did Monsieur Montcalm, in some detail, about the Highlanders of
Fraser's Regiment, and said that, far away as he had seen them from the
ramparts, they appeared so picturesque in their tartans as to be hardly
associable with the even, undeviating, outward English character.

"I answered that there were greater similarities between the
Highlanders of Scotland and the French than between those same
Highlanders and the English, both having Celtic blood in them, and that
this resulted in a natural brotherhood which even the hazards of war
could not disturb, or only temporarily.  Nay, I said once to his
excellency that we Jacobites still look more over the water to France
and to our Stuart King than we look, or ever may look, over the
Scottish border to England.

"You will mark how I sprawl between my native land and this New France,
as it was termed until the other month.  A man's heart can be in many
places, a woman's only in one, and my affections, I confess, have
mostly been a divided allegiance.  They have gone out and come home
again, and now, thanks to my prosperity here, they have a tendency to
abide where my epistle finds me.  For there is grateful comfort in
Quebec, and a freshness glad to experience, and the society remains
merry, though the _fleur-de-lys_ has perished for ever.  All the French
women here in Quebec did not see, in its changed governors, a burial
for the living, and some of them said, 'It is destiny; let us make the
best of things.'

"But I anticipate events, and that would be to miss their drama and my
own little share in them, a share with which, in the result, I am
satisfied, although I could sincerely have wished the ways and means to
be more aboveboard.  However, you cannot remain the complete gentleman
and make history, and my justification lies in this signal fact: that I
inspired and counselled General Wolfe to his scaling of the cliffs at
the one place where that was possible, a matter on which I beg you will
see that right credit and justice be done towards Jock Farquharson of
Inverey, commonly called the Black Colonel.  He and I alone knew
beforehand where exactly the escalade was to be, and it was a singular
joy to share a large, potential secret with another able to make it
good, as General Wolfe most handsomely did, though, once being shown
how, no great difficulty remained.

"When, in the hurry of Quebec that fated morning, I heard Fraser's
Highlanders had climbed the cliffs, swinging from foothold to foothold
like the wild cats of their native mountains, I said to myself, 'This
is, indeed, my venture, and it is fitting my own people should carry it
out.'  But how odd it is that two Highland threads should come together
in such a fashion, only we Celts have been destined to weave many of
the red warps of story.  I had knowledge of the part my kinsmen were to
play in the bloody gamble between General Wolfe and the Marquis
Montcalm, and, without desiring to appear on the field of battle, which
was no part of my diplomacy and not hard, with my privileges from the
French, to avoid, I sought an elevation where I could behold the kilted
Frasers drawn up in battle array.

"My certes, they made a brave picture, with the sun shining on the
colours of their kilts and the cool Canadian breeze waving them as in a
rhythm of martial motion.  Ah! the heart aye warms to the tartan, and I
could have given my soul, if it be left me, which I must hope, to stand
in front of that red and green line, an officer of the Fraser's, as I
have now become, by virtue of the successful completion of my contract.
They awaited orders with impatience, for the headlong charge has ever
been the natural form of battle with Highlanders, only the appearance
of General Wolfe, fearlessly wearing a new, conspicuous uniform, and
the entire confidence of his step forward and backward while history
boiled in the pot, held them in like a rein.

"It was the French who joined battle first, making some confusion among
themselves as they did so, because their several units fired
differently.  This wasted and scattered their salvoes, but they
advanced gallantly to within forty yards of the British lines.  Then
General Wolfe ordered 'Fire!' and before its solid stroke the French
reeled like trees stricken by lightning.  Swiftly, then, the
Highlanders leapt forward with bayonets gleaming, and in what I say of
them--my own people--I say of the British army as a whole: it caught
the French before they could reform, and thus the issue was already
decided.

"Now here was a change on the message, my Comte Frontenac, in earlier
years, returned to a British admiral who demanded his surrender.  'The
only answer,' he swore, 'I will give will be from the mouth of my
cannon and musketry, that he may learn that it is not in such a style
that a man of my rank may be summoned.'  It was a change, too, from the
ill-success of General Wolfe's assault on Montmorency, over beside the
little river falling into the big one, where the very elements were
unfavourable.

"Montcalm won then, very fairly won, for his fire upon the British was
of a nature which none could overcome.  Monsieur Vaudreuil, the
Governor, who, like the Intendant Bigot, had an eternal desire to reap
where he had not sown, was so patronizing as to say after the
Montmorency fight, 'I have no more anxiety about Quebec.  Monsieur
Wolfe, I am sure, will make no progress.'  'La, la,' as Madame
Angélique would say when she teases me, what a poor prophet was his
excellency Vaudreuil, but, indeed, prophecy has a trick of falling into
incapable hands and I, being, I trust, capable, have rarely tried it.

"You needed my broad account of events in Quebec to do me justice, and
that is why I have lingered over it.  I have given you hints enough for
the proper fitting of me into those events, as when, most casually, I
hope, I mentioned my advising of General Wolfe precisely where to make
his ascent to the Plains of Abraham.  However, there are small personal
items you cannot know, without they are told you, and very chiefly that
refers to the ingenuity with which, my mission, as compacted, being
done, I passed from the ranks of the vanquished French to those of the
conquering British, where I had been expected.

"There was such confusion everywhere, such a tearing up of things, that
I could do what I wished, and have it go unchallenged.  Moreover, there
was a want of bitterness between the contending parties, for one
reason, possibly, because the deaths of Wolfe and Montcalm had softened
enmity: and nobody has yet hurled the words 'traitor,' 'spy,' at me,
and I feel I am not truly open to them, my task having been that of an
intelligence officer on the highest scale.  As much is recognized in
the affability which I have continued to find among the French since
the close of the siege, but they are by nature surprisingly agreeable,
as I would wish, with my heart to subscribe.

"Why, man, and this will make you curious, if envy there be in you,
young French ladies take pains and pleasure to teach British officers
French, with what view I know not, if it be not to hear themselves
praised, flattered and courted, without loss of time.  To praise comes
natural to me, to flatter is not amiss, and, as to courting, I judge
you have always appreciated that in me.  You may have doubted me in
some respects; you had no doubts I fancy, in that particular.

"This quality of mine--I claim it a quality--has made me take, with
growing kindness, to where I am, and the idea of coming home again,
when it arises in my mind, I rather put aside.  My natural dream is
that I shall return, but mostly I am content to play with the fancy, to
catch it up, put it aside, and again catch it up, and once more let it
rest.

"There I am backed by the circumstance that I have no tidings whatever
touching my plans, as declared to you, in regard to Corgarff, and I
suppose that your thankless rulers have forgotten me.  They were
willing to use me as a pacifier, and when that did not promise an
immediate result they found me of use in the war of New France.  This
service being completed, faithfully, honourably, I dare aver, and to
the very letter of the bargain, I am, I repeat, for much I repeat,
given my commission in Fraser's Highlanders.  But, of a settlement in
the larger spirit which the inclusion of Corgarff would have implied, I
have no intelligence, and it is conceivable that I may get none.

"Therefore I may remain at Quebec with the Fraser Highlanders so long
as they continue here, and, when they go hence, still remain as an
independent gentleman, provided I were, by happy chance, shall I say?
to find genial companionship.  I am not old, not of the sort ever to
grow actually old, but the excursions of life have wearied me, and I
begin to sigh for a permanent holding ground, the anchorage of rest
which should come to us all.

"That desire, if I may make you a great confidence, would satisfy
itself in a woman of the qualities of Mistress Marget Forbes.  I do no
more than quote her because she is known to us both, and therefore she
makes clear the exact shade of my meaning.  But I imply no freedom with
her name, except what the honouring of it carries, and if any man
implied anything more she would know how to answer him.  She has, I
will say, the tang of the Forbes blood full in her, and I have always
thought it warmer in its flow of both love and pride than the Gordon
blood, although of that you should be a better judge than I am.

"One needs a wife of parts if one is, as I hope, to found a new clan in
a new country, for, mind you, many of the Fraser Highlanders, when they
end their period of enrolment, will prefer to settle in this lush,
virgin country where the days go by like a dream.  They will sit down
on the untilled lands, and out of them find a competence of food and
raiment, and they will marry French women who are buxom and healthy and
will be good wives and mothers.

"Granted all this, and it follows that there will be materials for a
new house of Inverey in some valley by the River Saint Lawrence, where
the Red Man at present reigns in indolence.  He who can sit on a knoll
for an hour and let old Mother Earth spin her tune to the fathering
sun, is ever a friend of mine.  But the Red Man carries the pastime
beyond me, unless when he is on the warpath, and then he is a devil.
It would give me no compunction to reign with a hundred or more Fraser
Highlanders, in a strath from which the Red Man has to be persuaded
away, or driven by force.  Perhaps I could even hold out a helping
invitation to smaller 'broken men' still in the Aberdeenshire Highlands
or elsewhere in dear Scotland, and that would please my self-importance.

"I renounce nothing, give up no legitimate claim that I have put
forward for hand or land in our native country, but I see that I am
come to leaving them unclaimed.  Madame Angélique, to whom, mayhap, I
have confided those consolations and aspirations, and who has a comely
sense as well as comely looks, says very properly that changed
circumstances carry other changes, and that even a Highland gentleman
may recognize as much without loss of self-respect.

"Madame has, in the crash which sank Bigot's fortunes, come to plain
faring, but I have made no difference in my friendship to her, and she,
I feel, has increased hers towards me.  She tells me she has no clamant
ties left in Old France, any more than in New France, where the lustre
of her powerful French friends has set, and my heart goes out to her in
sympathy, and, I know not what more, except that she is a very fine
woman and would adorn the home of. . . .  Why give a name?

"You must make what you can of this scattered epistle and read it into
my future because you may not hear from me again, or, if you do, only
briefly in unlikelihoods.  I am no practised writer, though I might
have acquired the trade, and it is only out of a felt duty, combined
with a personal regard of some durability, that I have set down, for
you, those epistles of my doings far across the sea.  Farewell, if it
be farewell, and to Mistress Marget Forbes the like salutation, if she
will accept it, as I am sure she will, when presented through you; and
similarly to Madame Forbes, her mother, my humble duty.

"Always your well-wisher,
  "JOCK FARQUHARSON, late of Inverey."




_XVIII--My Garden of Content_

  "Said Edom o' Gordon to his men
  We maun draw to a close."


That close, whether to a love story or a life, should come in the
quiet, natural way which Providence orders, unexpectedly almost, not in
tumult and trappings.

I am of a family which has been accustomed to storm through the world,
sometimes with all the world could give, at other times with mighty
little.  This element has got into our blood, become, you might say, a
habit, and often, myself, I have felt its prickings.  After all, it
must be a finely insurgent thing to drive to the devil in a golden
carriage built for two, or more; and the Gordons have never been
accustomed to count their guests, so long as they made good company.

Then I had grown up at a time in our Highlands when the kettle of
history was about to boil over, scalding a great many people in the
process.  The fiery cross of war carried its message from one valley to
another and left its embers on new graves wherever it went.

You are asking what this excursion in deep waters has to do with Marget
and myself and the Black Colonel, Jock Farquharson.  It has everything
to do with us, because it is the lamp of the road along which we
journeyed.  Anybody can count turnings in a path, but it is harder to
catch the other-world glow which sees us past them to our desired haven.

We were in sight of it, and, although we said little, I knew that we
both rejoiced exceedingly over the news which the Black Colonel sent in
his last letter.  When we met I looked at Marget as much as to ask,
"Shall I say it?"  And she looked at me answering, "No, you need not,
because I understand."

It is a curious state this which, at some time or other, exists between
two loving people cast for each other's welfaring.  A delicate mystery
lies in it, and that is an essential strand in every true affection,
but it can readily be destroyed.  Break it rudely, even shock it a
little, and a chasm may yawn where, before, there was a silken thread
of union, tender in its fibre, but beautifully elastic.

You may exclaim, when you read these confidences and remember others to
which I have confessed, that I was not so awkward a lover as I
sometimes appeared to be.  No, I was not awkward in thought, but I
could be, I know full well, very awkward in its expression as deeds.
Often I would go wrong in form, rarely in feeling, if you can assume a
man built on those colliding lines.

Marget has told me, in raillery, that she was more than once tempted to
give me "a good shaking," as the woman's saying goes.  It was not,
perhaps, that she expected to shake much out of me, or to shake me out
of myself, but that she would herself have been relieved by the
exercise, for women, you see, are like that.

My reflection has to do with a day when we spoke of it as settled that
the Black Colonel would never come back, that the whole episode which
he represented was over, and that an open road, undisturbed surely by
any more surprises and alarms, lay before us.  How could I forget the
scene, for it was to open out our true life, our deep, full love.

She looked at me as much as to ask had I been planning a stratagem, I
the unsophisticated, which I had not.  She looked again, and I saw she
knew, that at long length, we were face to face with the soft realities
which, hitherto, had remained dumb, or only whispered.  I waited to
take her in my arms, and she told me later her instinct expected me to
do it, and I didn't.  What poor fools men may be, to miss so much, and
to place a good woman in the position of having her consent rebuffed,
for that is to outrage her sex-respect.

I seem to remember that Marget turned her head away in despair with me,
only she pretended to be watching the sun and the clouds as they dipped
the hills in light and shadow.  This threw her face into profile, and I
thought I had never seen it quite so beautiful.  There was an expectant
vibrancy in it, from the fair forehead to the dimpled chin, but its
flower of expression was in the flowing eye, the ripe mouth, and the
tremulous lips.

"A wonderful scene," she said, her look lost in the river and the
hills; "a scene which makes one think in parables, as the old men of
Scriptures did."

"Parables," I replied, remembering, as I saw she did, "are very
unuseful."

"Why do you say that?" she asked gently, still looking at the dance of
sunlight and shadow upon the heather and the water.

"Oh, because they are," I said absurdly enough.

"That's a woman's reason," she observed, "and it should be left to a
woman.  Have you nothing more original to say?"

"Well, if I were to tell you a parable, a parable of my own, as you
once told me one of yours, what would happen?"

"I'm sure I don't know," she laughed, "but why trouble about what may
happen?  A little risk gives a spice to life, and, anyhow, it can
mostly be run away from at the last moment!"

"Then," said I, fairly and warmly hit by that, "it is the parable of a
maid and a man, the old, old story, in a new setting.  They met under
cross circumstances, when things around them were difficult and their
families took separate sides in politics and war.  But if it had not
been those very troubles they might never have met, or, what is even
worse, have met too late, as maids and men often do.  Perhaps trouble,
because it brought them together in sympathy, also began to bring them
together in heart, that being one road to affection.  Love at first
sight?  Yes, for a winning face, an elegant figure, a silvery voice, or
even a shapely foot.  But that, surely, is the stuff of passion which
may bloom in the morning and fade at night, not love the enduring as, I
promise you, in my parable."

Marget nodded her head, unconsciously, as if some far voice were
calling to her from the spreading country of red heath and green
fir-trees, of dancing sunshine and rippling stream, that lay beneath
us.  She did not speak, and I went on:

"You do not in parables say much of people, and never by name, but I
must tell you of my maid, the man, and of the other man who came
between them--nearly!  She was all simple charm, yet also of pulsing
womanliness, the healthy product of a country life, a fair survival of
many ordeals.  Deep in her nature was that intense power of feeling
which belongs to complete womanhood, as music belongs to an ancient
fiddle.  There were strings so sweet and subtle, so strange and strong,
that she herself feared to play on them, and when the man appeared she
greeted him as a friend, nothing more."

Marget waited as I paused, for when one's heart is in one's mouth words
are hard to find, and I am not much in command of them at any time.

"The man," I resumed, "what shall I say of him, for he had no personal
history.  He had an old name, however, which he hoped not to sully, and
he bent himself quietly to duty, as, crookedly and undesirably, it came
his way.  He found no call to do great things of the world, but rather
to straighten out the small things of a wee corner of it, and there to
keep the peace.  The maid just came into his life, and he, in his plain
way, thanked Providence and held his tongue, except when secrets would
half slip out and tell-tale acts come about."

Marget made no sign as to whether or not she recognized the portrait,
and thus I was brought up abruptly against the other man of our parable.

"He," I said, "had all the ruder qualities admired by women, those of
manliness, which good women may like, and the others which the other
women secretly like.  It was not difficult to see him, both as a hero
and as a villain, and either way the pull of romance lay about him.  He
had particular ambitions which brought him between the maid and the
first man, and there was, thanks to certain elements in human ties and
high affairs, a strong influence favourable to those ambitions.  But,
as chance or Providence would have it, he was translated to another
land, and there he found such comfort and companionship that he decided
to stay.  This left the maid and the man who feared too much, free to
be to each other what they desired; and there ends my parable."

"But," asked Marget with unsteady words which betrayed her agitation,
"where is its moral?  A parable must have a moral."

"Has it none?" I boldly asked her, taking her hand in mine, before she
or I knew it, and kissing it and then her rosy, rebellious lips.

By-and-by she looked at me through wet eye-lashes and asked, "Shall I
tell you a parable which had a moral, though maybe it has lost it," and
her tears laughed.

"Do," I said; "I can stand the moral now, whatever it may be."

"It should be a severe moral for you," she whispered, "because you have
been so foolish, so little understanding with me, yet I'll try and make
it light.  It also concerns a maiden and two men, but she only cared
for one of the men, never at all for the other.  Nor would all the
family interests in the world have made her marry the other.  The real
man, well, he seemed not to know that there is a precipice of
influences, of circumstances, for every woman, over which she may be
let slip by his hesitation; and this without possibility of return,
for, even if she could return, her sex pride would not let her."

"Ah," I whispered, "and the moral?"

"That you deserved to lose me; and that it would have broken my heart
if you had."

We sat very close, hand in hand, mind in mind, heart in heart, and
watched the sun go down behind the silent hills of our beloved
Corgarff, both of us silent, like them.

Years have gone by since then, and they have proved to us how sure a
conduct is the heart alike to happiness, and, though it matters less,
to prosperity.  March where the tune of its soft beating calls, and you
are blessed.  Traffic with it, and you miss the real lift of life, that
which makes life good, whatever betides.

Marget and I had learned this in the school of sweet-hearting, and now
we knew it in the joy of confiding words.  Nothing else mattered,
because it mattered all, but when the inner world is well the outer
world responds to it in kind.  The private happiness which we had won
made a larger good fortune for us without, or at all events, we saw the
morning radiance, not the morning mists.

Our poor ruined Highlands still lay under their covering of sorrow, as
grass grows indifferently upon a grave.  But they were mending, even
while they suffered, for they had spirit in them.  Virile men and
womanly women do not cry all the time, but give thanks to God for his
mercies and go forward.

It was my fortunate destiny to be helpful beyond myself at Corgarff,
and I will tell you how.  When gossip of a purpose of marriage between
Ian Gordon and Marget Forbes reached high quarters, friends in the two
political camps got to work on our behalf.  The outcome was that before
Marget Forbes became Marget Forbes, or Gordon, as the Scots legal form
has it, the lands which were her peoples had been returned to her, a
sort of wedding gift.

Good and bad news like not to travel alone, and what must a kinsman of
my own, an aged bachelor Gordon, do, but say that instead of waiting
for his estate until he was dead, and his will read, I should come into
it and its perquisites at once, if only because there must be acre for
acre exchanged, as between a Gordon and a Forbes.  Thus our heart's
house of joy was dowered with worldly goods, though I should, in
justice especially to Marget, add that we laid no stress on that, apart
from the usefulness towards others which it carried.

At such usefulness, I can fairly say, we laboured whole-heartedly from
the hour when we took each other for better, and never a minute for
worse, in the Castle of Corgarff, with Marget's mother saying,
"Children, you have all my poor old heart, to keep the fire of your
young hearts warm."

She was a gracious lady, and she dwelt with us until we bore her to the
little churchyard on the hill-side, where there is a clump of trees to
break the cold sough of the winds into a lullaby.  By that time another
Marget, beautiful of face like the Forbeses, lithe of limb like the
Gordons--we never could agree whom she most resembled!--had been given
to us.  She was our guerdon of the reverent gospel of home, which is
the high altar of this world, the source and sanctuary of our
well-being as men and women.

We have tried to live up to that ideal, and none can do more, unless,
indeed, it be to seek the perfect heights of the Sermon on the Mount
itself.  It is good to look upward there, even if one cannot hope to
reach the golden peaks of that world without an end--Amen!




THE END