XI

I imagine that thereafter for a time John Fulton's attitude toward Lucy
was now dignified and manly, and now almost childlike in its despair.
Having made her love him once, he must have felt at first that he could
make her love him again.  I imagine him making love to her with all the
chivalry and poetry that was in him, and then breaking off short to
rail against fate, against the whole treacherous race of women,
perhaps, and to ask what he had done to deserve so much suffering?
"Why didn't you do this to me when I was proposing?  Why did you wait
till I was stone broke and worried half sick, with everything going
from bad to worse?  Is it anything I've done, anything I've failed to
do?  Why, Lucy, we were such a model of happiness that people looked up
to us.  How can anybody suddenly stop caring the way you have?  If it
had been gradual!  But you were in love with me the night I went away,
weren't you?  _Weren't_ you?"

Here he catches her shoulders and forces that one admission from her,
and makes the great praying woebegone eyes meet his.  Then, almost, he
pushes her away from him.

"And I go away for a few days," he cries, "and come back and everything
is changed.  I who had a sweetheart, haven't even a wife.  Why have you
changed so?  There must be a reason?  What is it?  Are you sick?  Have
you eaten something that has made you forget?  Have you been bewitched?
That's no fool question.  Have you?  Have you?"

"Have I what?"

"Have you been bewitched?  Tell me, dear, who has done this thing to
you?"

Again he has her by the shoulders.

"Lucy, is there someone?  Never mind the other things, just tell me
that?  You've gotten to like someone else?  Is that it?"

And Lucy must have answered that there was no one else.  And there is
no question but that to the best of her belief and knowledge she was
telling the truth.

But the mere thought that there might be someone else had moved Fulton
as he had never been moved before.  He once told me that even as a
little boy he had never in all his life known one pang of jealousy.  He
will never be able to make that boast again.  And like some damned
insidious tropical malaria, the passion has taken root in his system,
so that only death can wholly cure him.

Like some vile reptile it had found within him some cave from which it
might emerge to brandish its hideous envenomed horned head, and into
which betimes it might withdraw.

I can imagine no one so stupid as to question any serious statement of
fact that Lucy might make.  Her eyes were wells of truth; her voice
fearless and sure, like that of some kingly boy.

So when she said there was _no one_, Fulton, who knew her far better
than anyone else, believed her without any question.  And a great
weight must have been lifted from his heart.  With the truth that he
had wrung from her, I think he must have rested almost content for a
few hours.

But contentment is far off from a man who hears the great edifice of
love and happiness which he has reared, crashing about his ears.

He could not make up his mind to any definite course of action.  Now,
calm and judicial, I hear him discussing matters with coolness, and
self-forgetfulness.

"If there is any chance for me, ever," he would say, "it would be silly
of us to take any action which would be final.  And, besides, I don't
see how I could reconcile my conscience to giving you a divorce.  Or
you yours to getting one.  It would be hard enough for you to lie about
the most trifling thing.  You couldn't, you simply couldn't face the
court and tell them that I had been cruel and unfaithful.  You couldn't
accuse me of anything so gross, and so unlike me, as the other woman
who would have to be hired for the occasion.  There's another side to
it.  I think the children are better off with you than with me.  You're
the best mother that ever was, the most sensible and the most careful.
But I don't think I could give them up.  If you and the babies were all
three to drop out of my life, I'd have nothing left but the duty of
finding money to support you.  There's a certain pleasure in doing your
duty, of course, but in this case hardly enough.  Honestly, dear, with
never a sight or touch of you, I simply couldn't keep things going
long."

Then perhaps Lucy asked some such question as this: "Don't people
often, when they've stopped caring about each other, go on living
together just the same, as far as other people know?  And really just
be good friends and live their own lives?"

"This is very different.  We haven't stopped caring about each other.
You've stopped caring about me.  I care about you, just as I did in the
beginning, and always shall.  We _couldn't_ lead separate lives under
the same roof.  God knows I feel old enough, but I'm still a young man,
and like it or not, you are still my wife.  It is something to own the
shell that once contained the pearl."

Another time he goes hurrying through the house, prayer-book in hand, a
thumb marking the marriage ceremony.  He has been brooding and brooding
and snatching at straws.

"Read this, Lucy.  Just look it over.  It's what you and I stood up and
promised before a lot of people.  I'm glad I looked it up.  You'll see
right away that it's a contract which nobody could have the face to
break.  I want you to read it over to yourself."

[Illustration: "'It's what you and I stood up and promised before a lot
of people.'"]

Finally she does, just to please him, in the sad knowledge that no good
will come of it.

"You'd forgotten, hadn't you?  But just see what you promised.  Didn't
you mean to keep these promises when you made them?"

"Oh, of course I did.  Why ask that?"

"But now you want to back out."

Then the old argument that a promise which one is powerless to keep
isn't a bona fide promise and cannot be so regarded.  Fulton sees that
for himself presently.

"No, of course," he says.  "If you don't love me, you can't make
yourself by an effort of will.  And if you don't honor me . . ."

"You _know_ I do."

"How about the other thing, the promise to obey?  That is surely in
your power to keep."

She admits that she can keep that promise; but she leaves herself a
loophole.  She does not say that she _will_ keep it.

And so the words of the prayer book shed no light on the situation, and
I shouldn't wonder if Fulton raged against the book, and flung it into
a far corner, and was immediately sorry.

For a man situated as Fulton was, some definite plan of action is
necessary; and to my mind the one that would be best would be one in
which the least possible consideration for the woman should be shown.
When Lucy began to play clench-dummy with her own life, with her
husband's love, and with the institution of marriage, Fulton, I think,
would have made no mistake if he had stripped her to the skin and taken
a great whip to her.

Her whole life had been one of self-indulgence.  She had indulged
herself with Fulton's love till she was glutted with it; that she was
the mother of two children may, perhaps, be traced to self-indulgence,
and surely it must be laid down to self-indulgence that she was not the
mother of more than two.  Her self-indulgence kept Fulton poor and in
debt, and it had come to this: that her impulse to self-indulgence
would now stop at nothing unless circumstances should prove too strong
for it.

It is not the gentle, faithful, self-sacrificing man who keeps his
wife's love; it never was.  It was always the man who had in him a good
deal of the brute.

But, except in a moment of insanity, a man does not go against his
nature.  Fulton has too good a brain not to think that if Lucy were
locked up for a week or so, and fed on bread and water, good might come
of it.  But his was not the hand to turn the key in the lock.  He could
no more have done it than he could have struck her.  This sudden
failure of her love for him was only another evidence of that
wastefulness and extravagance which had so often hurt him financially.
Surely it must have occurred to him more than once to publish notices
in the newspapers to the effect that he would only be responsible for
his own debts.  He must, I think, have threatened the thing from time
to time, knowing in his heart that he could never bring himself to put
it into execution.

I wonder how Fulton felt when hard upon the knowledge that she no
longer loved him, he received the bill for the dance which she had
given against his wishes, and in full knowledge of his present
financial predicament?

She had treated him so badly that it is a wonder of wonders that he
kept on loving her.

For one thing they deserve great credit.  Even Evelyn Gray, a guest in
the house, did not know that there was any trouble between them.  All
she thought was that owing to financial and other worries, which time
would right, Fulton seemed a little graver and less enthusiastic than
usual.

Nor was I any wiser.  I had not, of course, so many chances of seeing
the two together, but I saw as much of Lucy as ever, for we rode
together nearly every day.




XII

If nothing more definite had come of all this, I should now see but
little significance in those long afternoons of riding with Lucy.  She
could leave the substance of her trouble behind, as easily as she could
have left a pair of gloves, and she took into the saddle with her only
a shadow of the tragedy that was glowering upon her house.

I see now, that, at this time, we must have begun to talk more
seriously and upon more intimate topics; that we laughed less and that
there were longer silences between us.  We began to take an interest in
the trees and flowers among which we rode, to learn their names, and to
linger longer over those which did not at once strike the eye.

And I see now that Lucy talked more than usually about her husband.  It
was as if by doing constant justice to his character she hoped to make
up to him for her failure of affection.  In his domestic relations he
was a real hero by all accounts.  Didn't I _think_ they lived nicely?
She thought so, too, but it wasn't her fault.  She was so extravagant,
and such a bad manager, it was a wonder they could live at all.  She
admitted so much with shame.  But if I could understand how it is with
some men about drink, then it must be easy for me to understand how it
is with some women about money.  Oh, she'd spent John into some
dreadful holes; but he had always managed to creep out of them.  How he
hated an unpaid bill!  It wasn't his fault that there were so many of
them.  For her part (wasn't it awful!) they filled her neither with
shame nor compunction.  And he'd been so fine about people.  His
instinct was to be a scholar and a hermit.  But she loved people, she
simply couldn't be happy without them, and (wasn't it fun?) she had had
her way, and now John liked people almost as much as she did.  And he
had a knack of putting life and laughter into the simplest parties.

Sometimes when we had finished riding, we had tea in the garden.  It
would be turning cool, and she would slip a heavy coon-skin coat over
her riding things; and there was a long voluminous polo-coat of John's
that I used to borrow.  Evelyn nearly always joined us, John not so
often.  Sometimes Dawson Cooper came.  He was getting over his shyness.
Sometimes he was quite brazen and facetious.  It looked almost as if he
was being encouraged by someone.

Of the sorrow that was gnawing at John Fulton's heart I saw no sign.
He was alert, hospitable, humorous often, and toward Lucy his manner
was wonderfully considerate and gentle.  If I had guessed at anything,
it would have been that the wife was in trouble and not the husband.
He could not sit still for long at a time, but he did not in the least
suggest a man who was on the verge of a nervous breakdown.  His
activity and sudden shiftings from place to place and from topic to
topic were rather those of a man who superabounds in physical and
mental energy.

At this time he did not know whether he and Lucy were going to separate
or not.  If they should, he was already preparing dust to throw in the
world's eyes.  He let it be known that at any moment he might have to
go to Messina in the interests of his cartridge company (this was a
polite fiction) and that he might have to be gone a long time.
Business was a hard master.  He had always tried to keep it out of his
home life, but in times like these a man must be ready to catch at
straws.

And Lucy, just her head and fingers showing from the great coon-skin
coat, would give him a look that I should not now interpret as I did
then.  I thought that it made her feel sick at heart even to think of
his going to some far-off place without her!

"Speaking of far-off places," I said once, "Gerald Colebridge is taking
some men to Burlingham to play polo.  He's asked me, and I'm tempted
almost beyond my strength.  What does everybody think?"

"I'd go like a shot," said Dawson Cooper.  "Gerald will take his car
and everything will be beautifully done; and California just about
now!"  Here he bunched his fingers, kissed them and sent the kiss
heavenward.

"Wish _I_ was asked!" exclaimed Evelyn.

"Ever been to California?" Fulton asked.  "Because if not, go.  And
still I've thought sometimes that spring in Aiken is almost as lovely."

Poor fellow, it must have been quite obvious that he didn't think so
any more.  But then Evelyn, Dawson, and I were blind and deaf, at this
time.

"When," said Lucy at last, "would you go, if you go?"

"Why, in a day or two," I said.  "I'd probably leave day after tomorrow
on the three o'clock and join the party in New York."

"Oh, dear," she said, "I'll have to take up golf then.  You're the only
man in Aiken who likes to ride.  And John won't let me ride alone."

"Why not," said he, "ask me to ride with you?"

"Oh, I know you'd do it," she said.  "You're a hero, but I'm not quite
such a brute."

I wish I could have gone to California.

I rode with Lucy the next afternoon, for the last time as we both
thought.  As we came home through Lover's Lane, the ponies walking very
slowly, she leaned toward me a little, turned the great praying eyes
upon me, and said, her mouth smiling falteringly:

"Please don't go away.  I hate it.  Everything's gone all wrong with
the world.  And if you're not my friend that I can talk to and tell
things to, I haven't one."

"Are you serious, Lucy?"

"Oh, it's no matter!" she said lightly, and began to gather her reins,
preparatory to a gallop.

"It's only that it didn't seem possible that you could need one
particular friend out of so many.  Of course, I stay.  Will you tell me
now what it is that's gone all wrong?"

"Yes," she said with a quickly drawn breath.  "I've had to tell John
that I don't love him any more, and don't want to be his wife."

If one of those still and stately pines which lend Lover's Lane the
appearance of a cathedral aisle had fallen across my shoulders, I could
hardly have been more suddenly stunned.

When I looked at her the corners of her lovely mouth were down like
those of a child in trouble.

"Please don't look at me," she said.

We rode on very slowly in silence.  Sometimes, without looking, I could
not be sure that she was still crying.  Then I would hear a little
pathetic sniffling--a catching of the breath.  Or she would fall to
pounding the thigh with her fist.

But she pulled herself together very quickly and borrowed my
handkerchief and when we reached the telegraph office her own husband
could not have known that she had been crying.

She held my pony while I telegraphed Gerald Colebridge that I could not
go to California with him.

Far from looking like one who had recently been crying, she looked a
triumphant little creature, as she sat the one pony, and held the
other.  The color had all come back to her face, and she looked--why,
she looked happy!




XIII

"Well, my dear," said my mother, "we shall miss you."

"Oh," I said, "I've given it up.  I'm not going."

As she had said that she would miss me, this answer ought to have given
my mother unmixed pleasure.  It didn't seem to.  She smiled upon me
with the greatest affection, and at the same time looked troubled.

"When you came into my room this morning your mind was definitely made
up.  Has anything happened?"

"Only that I've changed my mind.  Aiken is too nice to leave."

"I sometimes think," said my mother, "that the life you lead is
narrowing.  At your age, how I should have jumped at the chance to see
California in spring!  But I shan't ask you why you don't jump.  I know
very well you'd not tell me."

"Must I have a reason?  They say women don't have reasons for doing
things.  Why should men?"

"A woman," said my mother, "does nothing without a reason.  But often
she has to be ashamed of her reasons, and so she pretends she hasn't
any.  Men are stronger.  They don't have to give their reasons, and so
they don't pretend."

"Maybe," I said, "I'm fond of my family and don't want to be away from
them."

My mother blushed a little, and laughed.

"I shall pretend to myself," she said, "that that is why you have given
up your trip.  But I'm afraid it isn't your father and me that you've
suddenly grown so fond of."

"Now look here, mamma," I said, "we thrashed that all out the other
day."

"Thrashed all what out?--Oh, I remember--your attentions to Lucy
Fulton, or hers to you, which was it?"

"It wasn't our attentions to each other, as I remember.  It was the
attention which Aiken is or was paying to us."

"So it was," said my mother.

She gave me, then, a second cup of tea, and talked cheerfully of other
things.  Some people came in, and I managed presently to escape from
them.

It hadn't been easy to tell my mother that I had given up the
California trip.  I knew that her triple intuition would connect the
change of plan with Lucy Fulton, and I was not in the mood to meet such
an accusation with the banter and levity which it no longer deserved.

Like it or not, I was staying on in Aiken because Lucy had asked me to.
That we had been gossiped about had angered me; but it could do so no
longer.  That we were good friends, and enjoyed riding and being
together, was no longer the whole truth.  There was in addition this:
that Lucy no longer loved her husband, and that she had made me her
confidant.

From the first to the last of my dressing for dinner that night,
everything went wrong.  I stepped into a cold tub, under the impression
that I had told my man to run a hot one.  He had laid out for me an
undershirt that had lost all its buttons, and a pair of socks that I
hated.  I broke the buckle of the belt that I always wear with my
dinner trousers; I dropped my watch face downward on the brick hearth,
and I spilled a cocktail all over my dress shirt, _after_ I had got my
collar on and tied my tie!

Usually such a succession of misadventures would have given rise to one
rage after another.  But I was too busy thinking about Lucy.  I could
no longer deny that she attracted me immensely.  Perhaps she had from
the beginning.  I can't be sure.  But I should never have confessed
this to myself, or so I think, if I had not learned that she had
suddenly fallen out of love with her husband.  In that ideal state of
matrimony, in which I had first gotten to know her, she had seemed a
holy thing upon a plane far above this covetous world.  But now the
angel had fallen out of that which had been her heaven, and come down
to earth.  That I had had anything to do with this, I should even now
have denied to God or man with complete conviction.  I had no interest
in the causes of her descent, only in the fact of it.  And all that
time of bungling dressing for dinner I kept thinking, not that I should
help her look for a new heaven, but that I must try, as her true
friend, to get her back into her old one.  At that time John Fulton had
no better friend than I.  It seemed to me really terrible that things
should have gone wrong with these two.

My father came in while I was still dressing.

"Hear you've given up California," he said bluntly; "do you think
that's wise? . . .  Where do you keep your bell?"

I showed him.

"How many times do you ring if you want a cocktail?"

"Twice.  If you'll ring four times I'll have one with you.  I spilt
mine."

So my father pushed the bell four times and complimented me on my love
of system and order, and then he returned to his first question.

"Do you think it wise?"

"Well, father," I said, "we've always been pretty good friends.  Will
you tell me why you think it isn't wise?"

"Yes, I will," he said; "I think it's foolish for a man to run after
women in his own class for any other purpose than matrimony."

"So do I!" said I.

"A man," he persisted, "doesn't always know that he is running after a
woman.  Nature will fool him.  Look at young lovers!  Why, they
actually believe in the beautiful fabric of spiritual poetry that they
weave about each other.  And nature lets 'em.  But men who have seen
life, and have lived, as I shouldn't be at all surprised if you had,
for instance, are able to see the ugly mundane facts through the rosy
mist.  My boy, you and Lucy Fulton are being talked about.  You don't
have to tell me it's none of my business, I know that.  But I can't
help wanting you to steer clear of rows, and I don't want to see any
woman get mud thrown on her because of you.  For a man of course,
unfortunately, consequences never amount to much.  It's for the woman
that I should plead if I had any eloquence or persuasiveness.  I'd say
to you, don't run away for your own sake, that's not worth while; but
run away for hers.  Now you will forgive me, my dear fellow, won't you,
for butting in like this. . . ."

The cocktails came, and when the man who brought them had gone, I said:

"It's for her sake that I'm staying, father; will you listen a little?
You're the only man in the world that I can talk to without fear of
being repeated.  As far as going to California is concerned I _was_
going--until a late hour this afternoon.  I felt more concern at
leaving my mother than anyone else.  You believe that?"

He nodded to what was left of his cocktail.

"Lucy and I may have been talked about, but there was absolutely no
reason why we should have been.  We rode together this afternoon and
out of a clear sky she told me that she had fallen out of love with her
husband--for no _reason_ at all, that's the worst of it--and she
doesn't know what to do, and has no friend she feels like talking to
about it, except me.  That's why I'm staying.  She _asked_ me not to
go.  And of course I said I wouldn't."

My father finished his cocktail, and blew his nose.

"Oh," I said, "I'm not infatuated with the situation either."

"Women certainly do beat the Dutch!" said my father.  "I suppose she
wants advice, and backing when she doesn't follow it."

"If I can keep her in the path of her duty, father, be sure I will."

"And if you can't?"

"It's a real tragedy," I said.  "They were the happiest and most loving
couple in the world, except you and mother, and only a short time ago."

"What time is it?" asked my father.

"I've broken my watch."

"Well, it doesn't matter if we are a little late for dinner."

He cleared his throat, and turned a fine turkey-cock red, and looked
very old-fashioned and handsome.

"I never thought to tell you this," he said; "it's like throwing mud on
a saint.  Once your mother came to me and said she didn't love me any
more and that she loved another man and wanted to go away with him."

"I feel as if you'd kicked my feet out from under me."

"It doesn't seem to have come quite to that with Lucy, but it may, and
in some ways the cases are parallel.  I took counsel with your
grandfather.  He advised me to whip her.  When I refused to do that, he
gave less drastic advice, which I followed.  I told your mother and the
man that if after a year during which they should neither see each
other nor communicate they still wanted each other, I would give your
mother a divorce.  I don't know when they stopped caring about each
other.  I think it took your mother less than three months to get over
him.  And if he lasted three weeks, why I'm the dog that--he was."

I detected a ring of passionate hatred in my father's voice.

"So she came back to me," he said presently, "in a little less than a
year.  Your little sister was your mother's offering of conciliation.
And we have lived happily.  But things have never been with us quite as
they were.  I have never known if your mother really got to loving me
again, or if she has raised a great monument of simulation and devotion
upon a pedestal of shame and remorse.  Even now, if I drink a little
more than is good for me, she never criticizes.  She feels that she has
forfeited that prerogative."

"What became of the man?"

"He died of heart failure," said my father, "in a disreputable place.
They tried to hush it up, but the facts came out.  When I heard of it,
I plumped right down in a chair and laughed till I was almost sick.  I
knew what he was," he said with sudden savageness, "all along.  But
there is no making a woman believe what she doesn't want to believe.
He was fascinating to women, and a cur.  He kept his compact with me,
not because of his given word, but because he was physically afraid of
me."

"Thank you for telling me all this, father," I said; "I like you better
and better.  But in one way the cases aren't parallel.  In Lucy's case
there is no other man."

"Not yet," said my father; "but when a woman no longer loves her
husband, look out for her.  She has become a huntress--she is a lovely
sloop-of-war that has cleared her decks for action. . . .  Are you
ready?"

I slipped my arm through my father's and we went downstairs together.

"I'm sorry you're mixed up in this," he said; "but you couldn't go when
she made a point of your staying.  I'm obliged to you for telling me."




XIV

It grew very warm during the evening and windy.  By bedtime there was a
hot, lifeless gale blowing from the southeast.  Now and then the moon
shone out brightly through the smother of tearing clouds, and was
visible for a moment in all her glory, only to be submerged the next
moment and blotted out.  About two o'clock single raindrops began to
splash so loudly on the veranda roof just outside my window that the
noise waked me; after that I only slept fitfully, and my ears were
never free from the loud roaring of the tropic rain that began
presently to fall upon Aiken.  I dreamed that somebody had stolen the
Great Lakes and while being hotly pursued had dropped them.  All day it
rained like that, and all the following night, and only let up a little
the afternoon of the second day.  I got into an oilskin then and walked
out to the Fultons'.

Theirs was a nervous household.  Jock and Hurry confined indoors for
nearly two days had had too little exercise and too many good things to
eat.  They were quite cross and irrepressible.  John had the fidgets.
He couldn't even stay in the same room for more than a minute, and he
wouldn't even try sitting down for a change.  Lucy had had to give up
at least a dozen things that required dry weather and sunshine.  She
seemed to take the rain as something directed particularly against
herself by malicious persons.  Evelyn, also cross and nervous, was on
the point of retiring to her own room to write letters.  Just then
Dawson Cooper telephoned to know if she cared to take a little walk in
the rain and she accepted with alacrity.

"It's gotten so that he only has to whistle," said Lucy petulantly,
when Evelyn had gone.  "I think she's made up her mind to be landed."

Fulton came and went.  Every now and then he dropped on the piano-stool
for a few moments and made the instrument roar and thunder; once he
played something peaceful and sad and even, in which one voice with
tears in it ran away from another.

The piano was in the next room, and whenever it began to sound, Lucy
dropped her work into her lap and listened.  At such time she had an
alert, startled look.  She resembled a fawn when it hears a stick snap
in the forest.

We heard him leave the piano, cross the hall and go into the
dining-room.

"He's hardly touched his piano in years," said Lucy.  "But now he's at
it in fits and starts from morning till night.  Night before last when
the rain began he got up and went down in his bare feet and played for
hours.  I had to fetch him and make him come back to bed."

Then she seemed to feel that an explanation was necessary.  She bent
rosily over the work, and said: "We don't want the servants to know."

Again the piano began to ripple and thunder.  Again we heard John go
into the dining-room.

I must have lifted an eyebrow, for Lucy said:

"Yes.  I'm afraid so, but it doesn't seem to go to his head.  Oh," she
said, "it wrings my heart, but I haven't the right to say anything."

"Lucy," I said, "have you thought out anything since I saw you last?"

"I think in circles," she said; "one minute I'm for doing my duty to
him, the next minute I can only think of myself.  It _can't_ be right
for me to be his wife when I've stopped being--Oh, anything but awfully
fond of him."

"You _are_ that?"

"Of course I am."

"It's just about the saddest thing that ever came to my knowledge," I
said; "and you won't be angry if I say that I think you ought to stick
to him and make the best of it?"

"You're not a woman.  No man understands a woman's feeling of
degradation at belonging to a man she doesn't love.  Oh, it's an
impossible situation.  And I can't see any way out.  I _couldn't_ take
money from John, if I left him; I haven't got a penny of my own.  And I
think it would kill me to go away from Jock and Hurry for long.  And
the other thing would just kill me."

"That," I said, "Lucy, I don't believe."

"You don't know.  Not being a woman, you _can't_ know."

"Men," I said, "and women too survive all sorts of things, mental and
physical, that they think _can't be_ survived.  I read up the Spanish
Inquisition once for a college essay, and the things they did to people
were so bad that I was ashamed to put them in, and yet lots of those
people survived and lived usefully to ripe old ages."

"Who did?"

Unheard by us, John had finished in the dining-room and had come to pay
us a flying visit.

"People that were tortured by the Spanish Inquisition," I said.

"A lot they know about torture," said he.  "They only did things to
people that the same people could imagine doing back to them.  Nothing
is real torture if you can see your way to revenge it--if only in
imagination.  Torture is what you get through no fault of your own from
somebody you'd not torture back for anything in the world.  It's what
sons do to mothers, husbands to wives, wives to husbands.  Isn't that
so, Lucy?"

"I suppose so," she said very quietly, her head bent close to her work.

"But what," exclaimed John, "has all this to do with the high cost of
living?"

He would neither sit down nor stand still.  He moved here and there,
changing the positions of framed photographs and ash trays, lighting
cigarettes, and throwing them into the fire.  He had the pinched,
hungry look of a man who is not sleeping well, and whose temperature is
a little higher than normal.

"Were you in the Spanish War?" he asked me suddenly.

(At the moment I was thinking: "If you go on like this you'll never win
her back, you'll only make matters worse!")  I said: "In a way, but I
didn't see any fighting.  I got mixed up in the Porto Rico campaign."

"I was with the Rough Riders," he said; "I've just been remembering
what fun it all was.  I wish you could go to a war whenever you wanted
to, the way you can to a ball game."

Then as quickly as he had introduced war, he switched to a new subject.

"I want you to try some old Bourbon a man sent me."

He had crossed the room, quick as thought, and pushed a bell; when the
waitress came he told her to bring a tray.

"Isn't whiskey bad for you when you're so nervous?" said Lucy quietly,
and without looking up.

"I don't know," said John, with a certain frolicking quality in his
voice; "I'm trying to find out."

"What was that you were playing a while ago?" I asked.  "The slow,
peaceful, sad sort of thing."

"This?"  And he whistled a few bars.

I nodded.

"I made it up as I went along," he said; "music's like a language.
When a man's heard a lot of the words and the idioms he can make a
bluff at talking it; but I can only speak a few words.  I've only got a
child's vocabulary.  I can only say, 'I'm hungry,' or 'I'm sleepy,' or
'I want a set of carpenter's tools,' or 'Brown swiped my tennis bat and
I'm going to punch his head,' or 'The little girl over the fence has
bright blue eyes and throws a ball like a boy and climbs trees.'"

He had to laugh himself at the idea of being able to express such
things in musical terms, but when he had sponged up a long glass of
very darkly mixed Bourbon and Apollinaris, the picture of the little
girl over the fence must have been still in his mind, for having left
us abruptly for the piano, he preluded and then began to improvise upon
that theme.  He talked rather than sang, but always in tune and with
the clearest enunciation, and any amount of experience.

He began merrily, and in no time had us both laughing; I think the
first air which he tortured to fit his unrhymed and unrhythmical words
belonged once to Mozart, but I am not sure.  It was made out of
merriness, sunshine, and dew.

  "The little girl over the fence, the fence
    Has bri-i-i-ight blue-ooo eyes
  And throws a ball like a boy, a boy,
    And cli-i-i-i-i-i-imbs trees."


He repeated in the minor, modulated into a more solemn key, and once
more talked off the words.  He left you with a slight feeling of
anxiety.  You began to be afraid that the little girl would fall out of
the trees and hurt herself.  But no, instead he grabbed something by
the hair right out of a Beethoven adagio, and began to want that little
girl with the blue eyes as a little girl with blue eyes has seldom been
wanted before; she became Psyche, Trojan Helen, a lover's dream; all
that is most exquisite and to be desired in the world--and then
suddenly he lost all hope of her and borrowed from Palestrina to tell
about it, and the last time she climbed trees it was plump on up into
Heaven that she climbed, and from hell below, or pretty close to it,
there arose the words "And climb trees" like a solemn ecclesiastical
amen.

It was an astounding performance, almost demoniac in its cleverness and
in its power to move the hearer.

Lucy's eyes were filled with tears.

"I wish he wouldn't," she said.

There was quite a long silence, but as we did not hear him moving
about, he probably sat on at the piano, for presently, in a whisper,
you may say, more to himself than to us, he sang that Scotch song,
"Turn ye to me," which to my ear at least stands a head and shoulders
taller and lovelier than any folk song in all the world, unless it's
that Norman sailor song that Chopin used in one of the Nocturnes.

  "The waves are dancing merrily, merrily,
  Ho-ro, Whairidher, turn ye to me:
  The sea-birds are wailing, wearily, wearily,
  Horo Whairidher, turn ye to me.

  "Hushed be thy moaning, love bird of the sea,
  Thy home on the rocks is a shelter to thee;
  Thy home is the angry wave, mine but the lonely grave,
  Horo Whairidher, turn ye to me."


Lucy rose abruptly and left the room.  I could hear her whispering to
him, pleading.

Surely he must have sung that song to her when she was only the little
girl with blue eyes over the fence, and it must have had something to
do with making her love him.  But the qualities of his voice that could
once make her heart beat and fire her with love for him could do so no
more.  He had left, poor fellow, only the power to torture her with
remorse and make her cry.




XV

The next day I kept a riding engagement with Lucy, but she didn't.

"She's gone for a walk with John," said Evelyn, who had come out of the
house to give me Lucy's messages of regret and apology.

"Lucy gone walking!" I exclaimed.  "Have the heavens fallen?"

"Sometimes I think they have," said Evelyn.  "But you know more about
that than I do."

"Know more about what?"

"Haven't you noticed?"

I shook my head.

"Why, John is all up in the air about something or other, and Lucy is
worried sick about him.  I thought probably she'd told you what the
trouble was.  I've asked.  She said probably money had something to do
with it; and that was all I could get out of her.  Come down off that
high horse and talk to me.  I'm not riding till four."

So I left my pony standing at the front gate and Evelyn and I strolled
about the grounds.

"Money isn't the whole trouble," said Evelyn presently.  "I know that.
Something even more serious has gone terribly wrong.  And I want to
help."

"Won't they work it out best by themselves?" I suggested.

"Sometimes," she said, "it seems almost as if they had quarreled.
Sometimes John looks at her--Oh, as if he was going to die and was
looking at her for the last time.  Could he have something serious the
matter with him?"

"He could, of course, but it doesn't seem likely."

"He doesn't _look_ well."

"True."

"Look here, Archie, don't you know what's wrong?"

"I wish I did," said I.  "If I could right it."

As a matter of fact I didn't know what was wrong.  I knew only that
Lucy no longer loved her husband.  But why she no longer loved him was
the real trouble, and she had not told me that, even if she knew It
herself.  But wishing to strengthen my answer, I said: "You're the one
who ought to know what's wrong.  You're on the spot.  And besides,
you're a woman and a woman is supposed to have three intuitions to a
man's one."

Evelyn ignored this.

"Sometimes," she said, "John's so gentle and pathetic that I want to
cry.  Sometimes he is cantankerous and flies into rages about trifles.
It's getting on my nerves."

"Why not pack up your duds and move on?"

"Oh, because----"

I laughed maliciously.  "We might move on together," I suggested.

"_You_ were going to move on," she said, "but you have stayed.  I
wonder why?"

I did not enlighten her.

"If," she said presently, "people find out that things in this house
are at sixes and sevens I wonder if they won't find fault with you and
Lucy?  Has that occurred to you?"

"It has occurred to you," I said, "to my own mamma and doubtless to
other connections.  But it hasn't occurred to me.  We see too much of
each other?"

"Altogether."

"You really think that?"

Evelyn shrugged her shoulders.  "For appearance' sake, yes," she said.
"Of course you do.  But it's my opinion that if you'd been going to get
sentimental about each other you'd have done it long ago."

"Evelyn," I said, "I've never made trouble in a family."

"Is that because of your natural virtue or because you have never
wanted to?"

"A little of both, I think.  People fall in love at first sight.  That
can't be helped.  Or they fall in love very quickly, and that's hard to
help.  But people who fall in love gradually through long association
have no good excuse for doing so, if they oughtn't.  They should see it
coming and quit seeing each other before it's too late."

"But I don't agree," said Evelyn.  "I think love is always a
first-sight affair.  I don't mean necessarily the first time two people
see each other, but that suddenly after years of association even, they
will see each other in a new light."

"A light that was never on sea or land?"

"A light that is always where people are, just waiting to be turned on."

At that moment we heard Dawson Cooper's voice calling: "Hallo there!
Where are you?"

Presently he hove into sight, and did not seem altogether pleased at
finding Evelyn and me together.

"Archie thought he was going to ride with Lucy," Evelyn explained, "but
she threw him down, and I suppose we have got to ask him to ride with
us!"

"Yes," I said, "I think you have, but I don't have to accept, do I?
You're just doing it so's not to hurt my feelings, aren't you?  Of
course if you really want me----"

"Come along, Coops," said Evelyn.  "He's trying to tease us.  He
wouldn't ride with us for a farm."

We separated at the mounting-block, and I watched them a little way
down the road.  And felt a little touch of envy.  Evelyn was looking
very alluring that afternoon.

I rode in the opposite direction until I came to the big open flat
north of the racetrack; there, a long way off, I saw John Fulton and
Lucy walking slowly side by side.  John was sabering dead weed stalks
with his stick.  So I turned east to avoid them, then north, until I
had passed the forlorn yellow pesthouse with its high, deer-park fence,
and was well out in the country.

Then I left the main road, and followed one tortuous sandy track after
another.  Suddenly Heroine shied.  I looked up from a deep, aimless
reverie, and saw sitting at the side of a trail a withered old negress.
She looked like a monkey buried in a mound of rags.

"Evening, Auntie," I said.

"Evening, boss."

Heroine had broken into a sweat, and was trembling.  She kept her eyes
on the old negress and her ears pointed at her, her nostrils widely
dilated.

"My horse thinks you're a witch, Auntie," I said.  "Hope you'll excuse
her."

"I allows I got ter, boss, caze that's jes what I is."

"Honest to Gospel?" I laughed.

"You got fifty cents, boss?"

I found such a coin in my pocket and tossed it to her.

"I used to have," I said.

She rose to her feet and Heroine drew away from her, firmly and rudely.

"Don' min' me, honey," said the old woman, and she held out a hand like
a monkey's paw.  To my astonishment Heroine began to crane her head
toward the hand, sniffed at it presently, gave a long sigh of relief
and stood at ease, muscles relaxed, and eyelids drooping.

"Now I believe you," I said.  "What else can you do?"

She turned her bright, beady eyes this way and that, searching perhaps
for anyone who might be watching and listening.  Then she said, "I kin
tell fo'tunes, boss."

"Just tell me my name."

"You is Mista Mannering, boss."

"Hum, that's too easy," I said.  "I've been coming to Aiken a great
many years.  What is my horse's name?"

"Her name is He'win, boss."

"Hum," I said and felt a little creepy feeling of wonder.

"Does you want to know any mo'?"

I nodded.

"You's flighty, boss, but you ain't bad.  You is goin' ter be lucky in
love, 'n then you is goin' ter be unlucky.  You is goin' ter risk
gettin' shot, but dere ain't goin' ter be no shootin'.  When summer
come around you is goin' ter have sorrer in you' breas', and when
winter comes around dere'll be de same ole sorrer, a twistin' and a
gnawin'."

"What sort of a sorrow, Auntie?"

"Sorrer like when you strikes a lil chile what ain't done no harm, only
seem like he done harm, sorrer like you feels w'en you baby dies, 'case
you is too close-fisted ter sen' fer de doctor, sorrer like----"

She broke off short, looking a little dazed and foolish.

"You've had your share of sorrow, Auntie, I can see that."

"Is I a beas' o' de fiel'?" she exclaimed indignantly, "or is I a
humanous bein'?"

"Must all human beings have sorrows?"

"Yes, boss, but each has he own kin'!  Big man has big sorrer, little
man have little sorrer, and dem as is middlin' men dey has middlin'
sorrers."

"It's all one," I said, "each gets what he can stand and no more.  Put
a big sorrow on a little man and he'd break under it; put a little
sorrow on a big man and he wouldn't know that he was carrying it.  What
else can you tell me, Auntie?"

"I ain't goin' ter tell yo' no mo'."

"Not for another half-dollar?"

"No, boss."

"Well, there it is anyway.  Good evening."

"Good evening, boss."

She had made me feel a little shivery and I rode off at the gallop.

XVI

I was surprised to find John Fulton in the Club.  As a home-loving man
he was not a frequent visitor.  He had dropped in, he said, to get a
game of bridge, had tired of waiting for somebody to cut out, and had
been reading the newspapers to find out how the world was getting along.

"I haven't more than glanced at them in a week," he said, "but there's
nothing new, is there?  Just new variations of public animosity and
domestic misfortunes.  Have you read this Overman business?"

"I haven't."

"It's a case or a hard-working, thoroughly respectable man who, for no
reason that is known, suddenly shoots down his wife and children in
cold blood, and then blows his own head to smithereens."

"But of course there was a reason," I said; "he must have felt that he
was justified."

"He seems to have had enough money and good health.  And he passed for
a sane, matter-of-fact sort of fellow."

"If it was the regular reason," I said, "jealousy, he wouldn't have
hurt the children."

"Only a very unhappy man could kill his children," said Fulton.  "His
idea would be to save them from such unhappiness as he himself had
experienced.  But in nine cases out of ten it would be a mistaken
kindness.  Causes similar to those which drove the father into a
despair of unhappiness would in all probability affect the children
less.  No two persons enjoy to the same degree, suffer to the same
degree or are tempted alike.  How many wronged husbands are there who
swallow their trouble and endure to one who shoots?"

"Legions," I said.  "Fortunately.  Otherwise one could hardly sleep for
the popping of pistols."

"Do you believe that or do you say it to be amusing?"

"I think that the number of husbands who find out that they have been
wronged is only exceeded by the number who never even suspect it.  But
they are not the husbands we know, the modern novelist to the contrary
notwithstanding.  In our class it is the wives who are wronged as a
rule; in the lower classes, the husbands.  I've known hundreds of what
the newspapers call society people; the women are good, with just
enough exceptions to prove the rule: the men aren't."

"When you say that the women are good, you mean they are technically
good?"

"Who is technically good?"

"Hallo, Harry!"

Colemain, having pushed a bell, pulled up a big chair and joined us.

"We were saying that the average woman we know is technically good."

"You bet she is!" said Colemain.  "She has to be!  If she wasn't how
could she ever put over the things she does put over?  And as a rule
her husband isn't technically good and so she has power over him.  She
says nothing, but he knows that she knows, and so when she does
something peculiarly extravagant and outrageous, he reaches meekly for
his checkbook.  For one man who is ruined by drink there are ten ruined
by women; and not by the kind of women who are supposed to ruin men
either; not by the street-walker, the chorus girl or the demi-mondaine.
American men are ruined by their wives and daughters who are
technically good.  Don't we know dozens of cases?  When there is a
crash in Wall Street how many well-to-do married men go to smash to one
well-to-do bachelor?  A marriage isn't a partnership.  It's the
opposite except in name.  It's a partnership in which the junior
partner gives her whole mind to extracting from the business sums of
money which ought to go back into it.  And she spends those sums almost
invariably on things which diminish in value the moment they are
bought.  It isn't the serpent that is the arch enemy of mankind.  It's
the pool in which Eve first saw that she was beautiful, or would be if
she could only get her fig-leaf skirt to hang right."

"But I think," said Fulton gently, "that women ought to have pretty
clothes, and bright jewels and luxuries.  If a girl loves a man, and
proves it and keeps on loving him, how is it possible for him to pay
her back short of ruining himself?  Haven't you ever felt that if the
whole world was yours to give you'd give it gladly?  Why complain then
when afterwards you are only asked to give that infinitesimal portion
of the world that happens at the moment to be yours?  If a man is
ruined for his wife, if cares shorten his life, even then he has done
far, far less than he once said he was willing and eager to do."

He looked at the big clock over the mantelpiece, sat silent for a
moment, then rose, wished us good-night and went out.

"You wouldn't think," said Harry, "to hear him talk that a woman was
playing chuck-cherry with that infinitesimal portion of the world that
happens to be his.  I was in the bank this morning and I saw him come
out of the President's room.  He looked a little as if he'd just
identified the body of a missing dear one in the morgue."

"I'm afraid he is frightfully hard up," I said, "but he hasn't said
anything to me about it, and I don't like to volunteer."

"He's a good man," said Harry, "one of the few really good men I know,
and it's a blamed shame."

"Oh, it will all come out in the wash."

"It depends on how dirty the linen is!"

"American men," I said, "never seem to have the courage to retrench.
Why not take your family to a cheap boarding-house for a year or two?
Cut the Gordian knot and get right down to bed rock?  Boarding-house
food may be bad for the spirit, but it's good for the body.  My father
had dyspepsia one spring, and his doctor told him to spend six weeks in
a summer hotel--_any_ summer hotel--and take _all_ his meals in it."

Just then one of the bell-boys interrupted us.  He said that Mrs.
Fulton wished to speak with me.  He followed me into the coat room,
where the telephone is, in a persistent sort of way, so that I turned
on him rather sharply and asked what he wanted.

His eyes were bulging with a look of importance and his black face had
an expression of mystery.  "She ain't on de telephone," he said, "she's
outside."

"Well, why couldn't you say so?"

I went out bareheaded into the dusk and walked quickly between the
bedded hyacinths and the evergreen hedges of Carolina cherry to the
sidewalk.  But she wasn't there.  Far up the street I saw a familiar
horse and buggy, and a whip that signaled to me.

She was all alone.  Even Cornelius Twombley, as much a part of the
buggy as one of the wheels, had been dropped off somewhere.

"I haven't seen you all day," she said.  "I thought maybe you'd like to
go for a little drive."

I simply climbed into the buggy and sat down beside her.

"Evelyn and Dawson," she explained, "were crowding the living-room, so
I thought of this.  Is John in the Club?"

"He was, but he said good-night to Harry Colemain and me, and I think
he went home. . . .  How is everything?  I saw you and John from afar,
walking together.  I knew you could run because I've seen you play
tennis, but I didn't suppose you'd ever learned to walk.  You're always
either on a horse or behind one."

"Was it very bold of me to come to the Club for you?  I suppose I ought
to have telephoned."  Then she laughed.  "I ought to have had more
consideration of your reputation," she said.

"My reputation will survive," I said.  "But look here, Lucy----"

"I'm looking!"

"I meant look with your mind.  I don't know if I ought to bring it up;
it's just gossip.  Harry saw John coming out of the President's room in
the bank.  He said it looked to him as if John had been trying to make
a touch and hadn't gotten away with it.  You know I hate to see him
distressed for money, especially now when other things are distressing
him, and I wonder if there isn't some tactful arrangement by which I
could let him have some money without his knowing that it came from me."

"_Aren't_ you good!" she exclaimed.  "Oh, I suppose he makes things out
as bad as he can so as to influence me as much as possible; but he says
we are in a terrible hole, that we oughtn't to have come here at all,
that if he'd had any idea how much money I'd been spending in New York
before we came he wouldn't have considered coming, that everybody is
hounding him for money, and that he doesn't see how he can possibly pay
his bills at the end of the season.  Of course it's mostly my fault;
but I can't help it if the Democrats are in power and business is bad,
can I?"

"Well," I said, "I'm flush just now and I'll think up a scheme.
Meanwhile let's forget about everything that isn't pleasant.  Where are
you going to drive me?"

"I don't care.  Let's get away from the lights.  What time is it?  John
doesn't like me to be late; and besides I haven't kissed the kiddies
good-night.  Let's just take a little dip in the woods.  On a hot night
it's almost like going for a swim.  Oughtn't you to have a hat or
something?  If you get cold you can put the cooler on like a shawl."

Her manner affected me as it had never affected me before.

The dip from the hot dusk of the dusty road into the cool midnight of
the pine woods had all the exhilaration of an adventure.  The fact that
she had sent into the Club for me flattered my vanity.  She wanted me
and not another to be with her.  I felt a tenderness for her that I had
never felt before.  I wanted a chance to show that I understood her and
was her friend without qualification.  Shoulder touched shoulder now
and then and it seemed to me as if I was being appealed to by that
contact for support, countenance, and protection.

We chattered about the night and the pale stars, and the smells of
flowers.  We wished that there was no such thing as dinner, that the
woods lasted forever, and that we might drive on through the soft
perfumed air until we came to the end of them.

Then there was quite a long silence, and for the first time in my life
I experienced the wish, well, not to kiss her, but to lay my cheek
against hers.  It was a wish singularly hard to resist.

"I suppose we ought to turn back."

"You know best," I said.

"Do you want to?"

"No, do you?"

"No."

But we turned back and came up out of the woods into the lights of the
town.

"Where shall I drop you--at the Club?"

"Let me drop you," I said, "and borrow your buggy afterward to take me
home.  You ought not to drive alone at night."

"Maybe it would be better if I did," she said.

We said good-night at the door of her house, but not easily.  For once
it seemed hard to say anything final.

"Was I very brazen," she said, "to ask you to go with me, when I didn't
want to be alone?"

"You were not," I said, "it was sweet of you.  I loved it."

Cornelius Twombly lunged from the black shadow of a cedar tree and went
to the horse's head.

"Good-night, Lucy.  Good luck!"

Just then we heard John calling.

"That you, Lucy?  You're late.  I was getting anxious."

We could see him coming down the path, a vague shadow among the
shadows, his cigarette burning brightly.

"Hallo, who is it?  I can't see."

"It's Archie Mannering," said Lucy.

"Oh, is it?  Won't you come in?"

"Can't, thanks.  Got to dress.  Lovely night, isn't it?  Good-night.
Good-night, Lucy."

When I had driven a little way I turned and looked over my shoulder,
but though I could only see the fire of John's cigarette, I imagined
that I could see his face--a little puzzled, a little anxious, and very
sad.

It was on that same night that he said to Lucy: "Aren't you seeing a
good deal of Archie Mannering?"

And she answered:

"Am I?  I suppose I am.  I like him awfully."




XVII

I awoke the next morning with the feeling that something or other was
impending.  I had no idea what it might be, pleasant or unpleasant.  I
felt a little the way you feel just before a race on which you have bet
altogether too much money, a little excited, a little nervous, equally
ready for laughter or anger.  I had also the feeling that I had a great
many things to do, and could not possibly get them done in so short a
space of time as one day.

I hurried through breakfast.  I hurried through the papers.  And then I
realized with a sense of anti-climax that until four o'clock, when I
was to ride with Lucy, I had but one thing of any possible importance
to do.  And upon that business from first to last including the walk to
the village and thence to the Club I spent no more than three-quarters
of an hour.  It had been an eccentric piece of business, and I was
rather pleased with myself for having brought it to a satisfactory
conclusion.  But I wanted others to know what I had done and to be
pleased with me for doing it; and to tell anyone was quite out of the
question.

In the Club letter-box under "M," I saw a small gray envelope.
Instinct told me that it was for me, and that it was from Lucy.  Then
somehow all my feeling of restlessness and suspense melted away like a
lump of sugar in hot tea.  I felt at once serene and comfortable.

I carried the note to a writing-table, for I imagined that it would
require an immediate answer, and then read it.  Like all Lucy's notes
it began without the conventional endearment, and ended with initials.
It contained also her usual half-dozen mistakes in spelling.


John says he has no money and can't get any.  So we've got to close the
house and go back north, and live very cheaply till better times.  So
I've got to begin packing.  So I can't ride this afternoon.  Isn't it
all a beastly shame?  But please drop in and say how-dy-do just the
same, and don't mind if you have to sit on a trunk.  And please be a
little sorry because I'm going away and we can't have any more rides.
And please don't say anything about this; because John isn't just
himself and maybe when we get all packed up he'll change his mind.

L. F.


Long before they were "all packed up," John did change his mind.  I was
present when he changed it.  Lucy, Evelyn, and I were in the
living-room helping each other to pack large silver-framed photographs
into the tray of a trunk.  It was slow work.  During the winter none of
us had looked at the photographs or commented on the originals, but now
that they were to be swathed in tissue paper and put out of sight each
one had to be approved or disapproved, and long excursions had to be
made into the life histories and affairs of the friends who had sat for
them.

Lucy had just taken a large photograph of Evelyn from the top of the
low bookshelves that filled one end of the room when John came in from
the garden with an open letter in his hand.  He was smiling in a
puzzled sort of way.

"What do you know about this!" he exclaimed rather than asked.

"Nothing," said Lucy, "_yet_."  And she began to wrap Evelyn's
photograph in many folds of tissue paper.

"Yesterday," said John, "I tried to get some money from the bank, but
they turned me down.  Now they write that upon reconsideration I can
have anything I like."

Well, Lucy's expression at that moment was worth a great deal more than
the few thousands which her husband would see fit to borrow from the
bank, and I couldn't but feel that there are moments when it is really
worth while to be alive and rich.

"Wonder what made 'em change their minds?" said John.

"There's one thing sure," said Lucy.  "You are not to look a gift horse
in the mouth."

She unwrapped the photograph of Evelyn and put it back in its old place
on top of the bookshelves.

"This settles everything, does it?" asked John.  "We don't go back to
New York?"

"We do not," said Lucy firmly.

"Well," said John, "I'd better see the bank before it changes its mind
again.  Is the buggy outside?"

"No, but you can take Archie's or Evelyn's.  Can't he?  I sent
Cornelius Twombly to do some chores."

"I'll drive you down," said Evelyn, "having a telegram to send."

"And I'll stay and help Lucy unpack," I said.  "Lord, people, I'm glad
you're not going!"

The moment we were alone Lucy said: "You did it."

"Did what?"

"Don't beat about the bush!  Don't pretend that you are not a blessed
angel in disguise!"

Her face was very grave and lovely.

"It's the kindest, tactfulest thing that anybody ever did."

"I couldn't bear the thought of your going back to the city when it's
such fun here."

"What can I say or do to thank you?"

"Nothing, Lucy.  Yes, you can.  You can ride with me this afternoon."

She looked a little troubled.  "Last night, after you had gone," she
said, "John said, 'Aren't you seeing a good deal of Archie Mannering?'"

For a moment I felt distinctly chilled and uncomfortable.  Then I said:
"Oh, dear!  Now Brutus himself is beginning to worry about us.  How
silly!"

"How silly!" echoed Lucy, and we stood staring at each other rather
vapidly, finding nothing to say.

After a while I asked if John had said any more on the subject.  "Did
he embroider the theme at all?" I asked.

Lucy took a photograph out of the trunk tray and began to unwrap it.
"Yes," she said.  "He did.  He even held forth.  He said that when a
woman no longer cared for her husband, it was dangerous for her to see
much of another man.  He realized, he said, that ours was an
exceptional case, but that soon people would guess about _him_ and me,
and that then they'd begin to talk about _you_ and me.  And he hates
anything conspicuous, and so forth, and so forth."

"What did you say?"

She smiled up at me, but not very joyously.  "I said, 'I'm not going to
be rude to one of the best friends I've got, just for fun.  If you
forbid me to see him, why I suppose I'll obey you, but I'd have to
explain to him, wouldn't I?  I'd have to say, "John considers our
friendship dangerous, so we're not to see each other any more!"'  And
of course he said that that was out of the question, and I agreed with
him."

"Still you've said it."

And we smiled at each other.

"He didn't give me a good character," said Lucy dolefully.  "He said I
never think of yesterday or tomorrow, but only of the moment.  He said
I neglect the children, and Oh, I'd like to end it all!  It's an
impossible situation.  I'd give my life gladly to feel about him the
way I used to, but I can't--I can't ever."

She looked very tragic.

"Oh," she went on vehemently, "it's terrible.  I'm all cold and dumb.
Every power of affection that I had has gone out like a candle.  I _do_
neglect the children!  It's because I can't look them in the face.
I've failed him, and I've failed them, and I ought to tie a stone round
my neck and jump into the nearest millpond."

"It's a good three miles to the nearest millpond," I said.  "And there
isn't a stone in this part of South Carolina.  You are all up in the
air now, because the situation you are in is so new to you.  But you'll
get used to it."

"If I don't go mad first."

"Why, Lucy?"

"You don't understand," she cried.  "You have never had loving arms to
go to when you were in trouble.  I've had them and I've lost them.  I
mean I've lost the power to go to them and find comfort."

A picture of her running to my arms for comfort flashed through my
mind, and troubled me to the marrow.  And I had from that moment the
definite wish to take her in my arms.  And in that same moment I
realized that those who thought we were too much together were not such
meddling fools as I had thought them.

"Lucy," I said, and I hardly recognized my own voice.  "Whatever
happens, you've a friend who will never fail you."

"I know that," she said, and she held out her two hands, and I took
them in mine.

"If you sent for me to the ends of the earth, I would come."

"I know that."

"There is nothing you could ask of me that I wouldn't give."

"I know that."

And that afternoon we rode together in the woods.




XVIII

A man must have descended to the very deepest levels of depression
before he loses his power to laugh, or to be cheered by an unexpected
bettering of his financial position.  John Fulton was in a bad way, but
certain things still struck him as funny, and the money which he had
been enabled to borrow from the bank had eased his mind.  Still, so
Lucy told me, he could not sleep at night, and it must have been
obvious to the most casual observer that he was a sick man.  He had a
drawn and hungry look.  Jock and Hurry could by no means satisfy his
appetite for affection.  Indeed, I think the sight and touch and the
sounds of them at play were no great comfort to him at this time.  He
must have felt in their presence something of that anguish of pity
which a man feels for children who have lost their mother.

He had hoped at first that Lucy's failure of affection was but a
temporary aberration.  But at last he must have come to despair of any
change in her feelings for him, at least under existing conditions.
Indeed their relations were going from bad to worse.  A man loved and
beloved falls into habits of passion for which there is no cure but
death or old age.  Yet a man would readily believe that separation
might affect him like an opiate, and it must have been in this belief
that Fulton determined to accompany Harry Colemain on a trip to Palm
Beach.  To me he vouchsafed the explanation that he was not well and
that he couldn't sleep, and that when he wasn't well, and that when he
couldn't sleep, his one thought and desire was to get to salt water.
"It always cures me," he said, just as if he had often been sick
before.  From Lucy I had the truth of the matter.

"He thinks," she said, "that if he goes away and stays away for a long
time that perhaps I will miss him enough to want him back, and on the
old footing.  He isn't even going to write to me.  It's going to be
exactly as if he didn't exist."

"Do you think it wise for him to go, Lucy?"

"Perhaps it will do him good.  It won't change me.  I know that.  If
only he'd change.  Haven't I done him enough harm to make him hate me?
Archie, I'm so sorry for him that I wish I was dead.  And yet I want to
live.  I'm too young to die.  I want to live, and be happy--happy the
way I used to be happy."

"And you can't with John?"

She shook her head quietly.  "It's the most wonderful thing to be in
love!" she said.  "I wonder what I did to have that wonderful thing?  I
wonder what I've done to deserve to lose it?  And even if--even if it
happened again it could never be the same.  There can be only one first
time--even if you've got a silly memory that doesn't remember very
well.  And you make ties and habits and all these have to be thrown
overboard when the second time happens, and there's scandal, and cold
shoulders, and--what do you think I _ought_ to do?  If I can't give him
what he's paying for oughtn't I to cut loose on my own, to support
myself, and not be a burden to him and a ubiquitous reminder that we've
failed to make a go of living together?  What _ought_ I to do?"

It had become very hard for me to tell her what I thought she ought to
do.  Ever since that moment when I had first known that I wanted to
take her in my arms and comfort her, I had begun to have doubts of my
own honesty.  And now she had put that honesty to a definite test, and
I was determined that it should come through the ordeal alive.

"Must I really tell you what I think you ought to do?"

"Yes."

"Some of the things I think you ought to do, are things that I know you
don't want to do--things that you think perhaps you _can't_ do.  Women
often say _can't_ when they mean _won't_, don't they?"

"Maybe."

"I'm afraid you aren't going to like what I'm going to say, nor me for
saying it."

"Try me," she said, and she gave me a look of great trust and
understanding.

"I'm going to tell you what I think you ought to do, Lucy, and what I
think you ought to have done."

Any teacher whose scholars looked at him with the trustfulness and
expectation with which Lucy now looked at me, must be inspired, I
think, to the very top notch of his sense of honor and duty.  I am sure
at least that I laid the law down of what I thought she should do, and
should have done with complete honesty and without regard to
consequences.  If I got nothing better for my pains than dislike, at
least I could criticize her conduct and character without being biased
by my growing affection for her.

"In the first place," I said, "when you found out that you no longer
loved your husband, you made your first mistake.  By your own admission
he had given you everything in the way of devotion and faithfulness
that a man can give a woman.  When you found that you no longer loved
him, you shouldn't have told him.  He ought never to have known.  You
should have summoned all your fortitude and delicacy to deceive him
into thinking that you had not changed toward him, and never would."

"I _couldn't_!" exclaimed Lucy.

"You wouldn't," I said.

"It wouldn't have been honest."

"Perhaps not.  But it would have been noble."

Lucy naturally enough preferred praise to blame, and this showed in her
face and in her voice.  I felt infinitely removed from our previous
terms of intimate confidence, when she said: "Couldn't or wouldn't,
it's history that I didn't."

"That being so," I said, "I think you should go now to your husband and
tell him that love or no love you propose to be his faithful wife till
death part you; to put him first in your head, if not in your heart.
It may be that through a long course of simulation you will come once
more to care for him.  Self-sacrifice is a noble weapon.  I think,
Lucy, that you would be very wise if you told him that two is not a
lucky number."

"I don't understand."

"Jock and Hurry," I said, "are two."

She changed color to the roots of her hair.  "Oh," she cried, "you
don't understand how a woman feels about that!  I'd rather die.  I--I
_couldn't_!"

"You _won't_."

"I thought _you_ understood me better.  I thought _you_ wanted me to be
happy!"

"Upon my soul, Lucy, I think that you might find happiness that way."

She shrugged her shoulders and her face looked hard as marble.  "And
that's your advice!" she said.  And then with a sudden change of
expression, "It's what you think I _ought_ to do.  Would it please you
if I took your advice?  Is it what you _want_ me to do?"

I had spoken as I thought duty commanded.  It hadn't been easy.  With
each word I felt that I had lost ground in her estimation.  She asked
that last question with the expression of a weary woebegone child, and
I answered it without thought, and upon the urge of a wrong impulse.

"No--no," I cried.  "It's not what I want you to do.  I had almost
rather see you dead."

There was a long silence.

"Do you mean that?"

"Yes, Lucy.  Yes."

"Then you _do_ care.  Oh, thank God!"

I don't know how she got there.  It was as if I had waked up and found
her in my arms.

Kissed and kissing, we heard the opening of the distant front door.
And Oh, how I wish I had found the courage when Fulton came into the
livingroom, to tell him that I loved his wife, and that she loved me,
and what was he going to do about it!  I did have the impulse, but not
the courage.  When Fulton came in Lucy was knitting at an interminable
green necktie, and I was talking to her from a far chair across an open
number of the illustrated _London News_.  We looked, I believe, as
casual and innocent as cherubim, but my conscience was very guilty, and
it seemed to me, rightly or wrongly, that for the first time Fulton
showed me a certain curtness of manner, as if he was not pleased at
finding me so often in his house.




XIX

With the knowledge that I loved Lucy and that she loved me, came also
the knowledge that for a long time the situation had been
inevitable--inevitable if we kept on being so much in each other's
company.  Passages between us of words and looks now recurred to my
memory filled with portentous meaning.  Oh, I thought, how could I have
been so blind!  A fool must have seen it coming.  I ought to have seen
it coming.  I ought to have run from it as a man runs from a
conflagration.  When Lucy told me that she no longer loved her husband
I ought to have known that the fault was mine, and I ought to have gone
to a far place, and left that little family to rehabilitate itself in
peace.  Surely after a "blank" spell Lucy would have loved her husband
again.

But all the thoughts that I carried to bed with me that night were not
dark with remorse.  It was possible for whole minutes of time,
especially between sleeping and waking, to forget the complications of
the situation and to bask in the blissful warmth of its serenities.
The laughter, the prayers, the adoration of Lucy's lovely eyes were
mine now.  She loved me better than her children, better than life
itself.  She had not said these things to me, she had looked them to
me.  It was wonderful to feel that I had been trusted with so much that
was beautiful and precious.

Once a spoiled child, always a spoiled child.  In the scheme of things
I _would_ not at first give their proper place to those awful barriers
which society has set up between a man and another man's wife.  We
loved each other with might and main, and our only happiness could be
in passing over those barriers and belonging to each other.  John
Fulton and his children were but vague pale shadows across the sunshine.

The sleep that I got that night, short though it was, was infinitely
refreshing.  I waked with the feeling that happiness had at last come
into my life, and that I was not thirty-five years old, but twenty
years young.

I walked in my mother's garden waiting for servants to come downstairs
and make coffee for me and poach eggs.  It was going to be a lovely
day.  Already the sun had coaxed the tea-olives to give out their odor
of ripe peaches.  "How she loves them," I thought.  "If only she were
with me now."

The garden seemed very beautiful to me.  For the first time in my life,
I think, I took a flower in my hands and examined it to see how it was
made.  A great and new curiosity filled me.  How beautiful the world
was, and all things in it; how short the time to find out all that
there was to be known about all those beautiful things!  And what an
ignoble basis of ignorance I must start from if I was to "find out,"
and to "understand!"  There filled me a sense of unworthiness and a
strong desire for self-improvement.

"I must learn the names of some of these things," I thought, and I
began to read the labels which stood among the flowers and shrubbery,
for in such matters my mother was very strict and particular: _Abeleia
grandiflora, Laurestinus, Olea fragrans, Ligustrum napalense, Rosa
watsoniana_----  Now really could that thing be a rose?  It looked more
like a cross between a fern and an ostrich plume.  I looked closer.
Each slender light green leaf was mottled with lighter green, a miracle
of exquisite tracing, and the thing was in bud, millions and millions
of buds no bigger than the eggs in a shad roe.  Yes, it was a rose.  I
looked at the drop of blood on the ball of my thumb, and thought what a
beautiful color it was, and how gladly, if need be, I would shed every
drop of it for Her.

Dark smoke began to pour from the kitchen chimney, and I knew that the
cook was down.  Hilda must have seen me in the garden, for she was
setting a place for me at one end of the big dining-table.  How fresh
and clean she always looked and how tidy.  Almost you might have
thought that her hair was carved from some rich brown substance.  It
was always as neat as the hair of a statue.

"Good morning, Hilda."

"Good morning, Mr. Archie."

"How about breakfast?"

"It will be ready directly."

"Wish you'd give me a long glass of Apollinaris with a lot of ice in
it."

"With pleasure."

I heard her pounding ice in the pantry and then the pop as the bottle
came open.  She stood behind my chair while I drank.  And somehow I got
the feeling that she was smiling.  I turned my head quickly.  She was
smiling, but tremulously, almost as if she was going to cry.

"What's the matter, Hilda--have I forgotten to brush the back of my
hair?"

"No, sir--it's----"

"It's _what_?"

"Nothing, sir--only----"

"Don't be silly----  Tell me."

She told me, and for a moment, so odd was her statement, I thought she
must have gone out of her mind.

"The window of my room," she said, "is just over one of the windows of
yours."

I didn't know what to say.  I really thought she must be slightly
deranged.  I said lamely: "Which window?"

"The one by your bed, the one you always leave open so's the air can
get to you."

"Well, Hilda, what about it?"

"Sometimes I hear you talking in your sleep, and then I lean out of my
window and listen."

With this admission she blushed crimson and no longer looked me in the
eyes.

"Do you think that's quite fair?"

"I don't lead a very full life, Mr. Archie."

"And my unconscious prattle helps to fill it?  Do I often talk in my
sleep?"

"You talked last night."

Her voice was full of meaning and somehow I felt chilled and no longer
so very gay and happy.

"What did I talk about?"

"About a lady."

With humiliation I realized that I was now turning red; but I laughed,
and said: "We look like a couple of boiled lobsters, Hilda.  What did I
say about the lady?"

"You said--I only thought you ought to know that I know--so's--well
so's you can keep that window shut, and fix it so no one else will
know."

I felt like a convicted criminal.

"Did I--mention the lady's name?"

She nodded.  "You were talking about Mrs. Fulton," she said in a low
voice, "only you didn't call her that."

"Hilda," I said firmly.  "Mrs. Fulton and I are very old
friends--nothing more."

I could see that she didn't believe me, and I changed my tactics.
"You'll not talk, Hilda?"

Her face had resumed its natural color, and she now looked me once more
in the eyes.  "I'd sooner die than hurt you, Mr. Archie."

"Why, Hilda----!"

All this time I had been sitting and talking over my shoulder, but now
I got quickly out of my chair, and drew her hands away from her face.
"Oh, Hilda, I _am_ so sorry.  What _can_ I do?  I'm so sorry, Hilda,
and so proud, too."

She looked up at that.

"You poor child!  I feel like a dog, a miserable dog!"

"You couldn't help it, Mr. Archie.  You can't help being you.  Can you?"

She tried to smile.

"How long," I asked, "has it been like this?"

"Ever since the day I came--three years and two hundred and twenty-one
days ago--and I heard you say to Mrs. Mannering--to your
mother--'Mother,' you said, 'that new maid is as pretty as a picture.'
And that did it!"

"Hilda," I said as quietly as I could, "I'm more touched and flattered
than I can express.  I'll be a good friend to you as long as I live.
But--I think I ought to say it, even if it's a cold rough thing to say.
I don't believe I'm ever going to feel the same way about you, and
so----"

"Oh, I know that, but----  Oh, do you still think I'm pretty?"

"_Indeed_ I do.  I've always thought that.  Always known that."

"Well," she said, speaking very bravely but with a mouth that quivered,
"that's something.  I don't lead a very full life, but that's
something."




XX

"Mother, are you very busy with those letters?"

"Yes, dear, very."

"I thought so; so put them down and come into the garden.  There is a
bench where the thyme and eglantine----"

"My dear, you frighten me.  What has happened?"

My mother rose, one hand on her bosom.

"Nothing to be frightened about.  It's only a little tragedy in a life
that isn't very full.  Come and talk it over."

I gave her my arm and we strolled into the garden like a pair of lovers.

"Do you remember when Hilda came to us?"

"Perfectly."

"I said to you on that day, 'Mother, the new maid is as pretty as a
picture.'  Do you remember?"

"No."

"Well, I said it, and Hilda heard me say it, and please don't laugh, it
seems that my saying it made the poor child--Oh, care about me.  She's
cared ever since, and I'm afraid she cares a whole lot."

"How did you get to know?"

"She told me, this morning, practically out of a clear sky.  One thing
I want to make clear is that it's just as little my fault as it
possibly can be.  I feel like the devil about it, but I can't for the
life of me find one little hook to hang a shred of self-reproach on.
My morals aren't what they should be.  But I am a fastidious man, and
the roof under which my mother lives is to me as the roof of a temple.
But you know all this.  Now what's to be done?  One thing is clear, I
can't and won't be amorously waited on.  I think the poor child will
have to be sent away."

"Oh, dear!" cried my mother, "and just when she's getting to be a
perfect servant, and your father so used to her now--says he never
knows when she's in the room and when she isn't."

We returned to the house.

"I'll talk it over with her," announced my mother, "and try to decide
what's best--best for her, the poor, pretty little thing."

You may be sure that that meeting in the little room where my mother
wrote her letters was no meeting between a mistress and a servant, but
between two honest women who in different ways loved the same man.

I was with Lucy while it took place, but certain gists of what was said
and done have come to me, some from my mother, and some from Hilda.

My mother, it seemed, waived at once all those degrees of the social
scale which separated them, took Hilda in her arms, kissed her, and
held her while Hilda had what women call a "good cry."  My mother is
too proud and brave to cry, but she was unhappy without affectation.
After the embrace and the cry they sat side by side on a little
brocaded sofa and talked.  My mother fortunately did not have to point
out the social obstacles in the way of a match between Hilda and me, as
there was never any question of such a match.  Indeed, in the talk
between them I was not at first mentioned.  My mother took the position
that Hilda was just a sweet, nice-minded girl who was very unhappy and
needed comforting, and advice.  First she made Hilda tell the story of
her life.  To be permitted to do this in the presence of a sincere
listener and well-wisher is one of the greatest comforts to anyone.

"The poor child," said my mother, "has had such a drab, colorless,
unhappy life that it made her almost happy to tell about it."

It seemed that Hilda wasn't "anybody" even for a servant.  Her earliest
recollections were of life in an English orphanage--one of those
orphanages where the mothers of the orphans are still alive and there
never were any fathers.

"But she's made herself think," my mother told me, "that her father was
a gentleman--God save the mark!"

Well, she went into service when she was a "great" girl of fourteen or
fifteen, and after various drab adventures in servitude came to this
country and was presently sent to my mother on approval.  She had left
her last place in England because of a horrible butler.  He was
bowlegged and very old.  He drank and made the poor frightened girls in
the house listen to horrible stories.  One found notes, printed notes,
pinned on one's pincushion.  "Have a heart.  Don't lock your door
tonight," and such like.  Or a piece of plate would be missed and one
would find it in one's bureau drawer, where the horrible old man had
put it, and one dared not complain to the master lest upon carefully
planned circumstantial evidence one be made out to be a thief.

It had been so wonderful coming to live in my mother's house.  The
servants were so different, so kind, so worthy.  The servants' rooms
were so clean and neat and well-furnished as the master's rooms.  So
much was done to make the servants comfortable and happy.  Nobody had
ever spoken crossly to one in my mother's house----"And, Oh, Mrs.
Mannering, I feel so low and ashamed to have made so much trouble for
you and Mr. Archie."

That was the first mention of my name.

"My dear Hilda, you mustn't feel ashamed because you've had a romance."

"Oh, it has been a sort of romance, hasn't it, Mrs. Mannering?  But I
never--never should have let it all come out.  Because now I'll have to
go away, and never even see him ever any more.  I never should have let
it come out, but I couldn't help it.  And him always so kind and
polite, and never once guessing all these years!"

Now my mother had not gone into that interview without a definite plan.
She had heard that the Fultons--of all the people in this world whom it
might have been!--were being abandoned by their waitress, and already
by a brisk use of the telephone my mother had secured the place for
Hilda.

It's a wonder that Hilda did not burst out laughing or screaming when
she heard into whose service she was to go.  I don't think she hated
Lucy--yet.  But for a woman who loved a man to take a place with the
woman the man loved must have struck her as the most grotesque of
propositions.  But what could she do?  Loyal to me, and to my secret,
she wasn't going to give me away to my mother.

"But," she protested, "Mr. Archie goes so much to that house!"

"But now," said my mother, "don't you see, he won't go so much."

Indeed the dear manager felt that she had killed two birds with one
stone.  Lucy had a good place, and from now on there would be in the
Fultons' house a living reason why a man of tact (like her beloved
son!) should keep away.  Alas, mother, there were other living reasons
in that house which should have served to keep me away, and didn't.

I heard from my mother of the arrangement and was troubled.  For once
in her life of smoothing out other people's lives she had blundered
seriously.  Her measures had in them only this of success: that I found
many excuses for not taking meals in the Fultons' house, and from that
time forward saw Hilda very seldom.  My mother gave her a lot of
clothes, and quite a lot of money, I suppose, and the poor child for a
while dropped out of sight.  But not out of mind, I can tell you; for
it worried me sick to feel that she was always in Lucy's house,
watching and listening when she could.

I had not at this time had any great experience with the passion of
jealousy.  But a man who reads the newspapers, or has done his turn at
jury duty in Criminal Sessions, cannot be ignorant of the desperate
acts to which now and again it drives men and women.

Hilda, according to the slight knowledge I had of her character, was
gentle and patient; she would be treated by Lucy as all Lucy's servants
were, with the greatest tact and friendliness, and still the mere fact
of her presence in that house filled me with forebodings.  She would be
in a position to make so much trouble, if ever anything should happen
to start her on the war path.  She had proved already that her moral
nature was not superior to eavesdropping; already she had my secret by
the ears, and one-sided and innocent though that secret may have
appeared to her, it was not really a one-sided secret, and when she had
got her clutch upon the other side, she could be almost as dangerous
and mischievous as you please.

At best, Hilda was one more difficulty with which Lucy and I would have
to contend.

It would have been wisest to tell Lucy all that I knew about Hilda.
But you may have noticed with butterflies that they do not fly the
straight line between two points; rather they fly in circles, with
back-tracking, excursions, and gyrations, so that unless you have seen
them start you cannot guess where they have started from, nor until the
wings close and the insects come to a definite rest, are you in a
position to know what their objective was.

In the face of our recently declared love for each other, any mention
of Hilda's below-stairs passion for the "young master" seemed to me a
blatant indelicacy.  Almost it might have a quality of pluming and
boasting, a gross acceptance of man's polygamous potentialities.

There would be time later for conversations in which future
practicalities should take precedence over romantic fancies and
protestations.  Just now the Butterfly did not care a rap what should
happen when winter came; for the present the world was filled with
flowers--all his, and all containing honey.




XXI

"He broke up their home," is a familiar phrase.  But few men in the act
of breaking up a home realize the gravity of what they are about.  I
had gone a long way toward breaking up Fulton's happy family life
without having the slightest notion that I was doing anything of the
kind.  When Lucy fell out of love with her husband, it was not because
she had fallen in love with me.  It was because she was going to.  The
lovely little sloop-of-war was merely clearing her decks for action.
She didn't know this; I didn't.  I frequented the house a little more
than other men; that was all.  And I frequented it not because of the
charm exercised upon me by an individual member of the Fulton family,
but of the charm which it exercised upon me as a whole.  _There_ was
peace, _there_ was happiness, _there_ was love and understanding; there
was poignant food for a lonely bachelor to chew upon.  Remembering this
how can I believe that this is the best of all possible worlds, and
that everything in it is for the best?  If I had not been fascinated by
the Fultons as a family, I should never have become a frequenter of
their house.  If I had not been a frequenter of their house, I should
never have split that family which as a whole so fascinated me with a
wedge of tragedy.  It is a horrid circle of thought.

When I learned that Lucy no longer loved her husband my heart had given
no guilty bound of anticipation; instead it had turned lead-heavy for
sheer sorrowing and sunk into my boots.  The other day the Germans
smashed the blue glass in Rheims Cathedral.  A friend brought me a
little fragment of this, and among my personal possessions I give it
the place of first treasure.  It's a more wonderful blue than Lucy's
eyes, even.  The light of heaven has poured through it to illumine the
face of Joan of Arc.  Its price is far above rubies and sapphires, and
it seems to me the most wonderful treasure to have for my very own.
But does this fact automatically make me glad that the Germans banged
the great cathedral to pieces?  It does not.  Sometimes when I look at
the light through my piece of blue glass I see red.  And I hope that
those who trained guns against the holy shrine and who are not already
in hell, soon will be.  And I could wish myself the hell of never
having known Lucy's love, if by so doing I could restore the Fulton
family to the blessed and tranquil state in which I first knew them.

I began this chapter with an idea of self-defense.  How much of the
tragedy am I responsible for?  Upon my soul I can never answer that
question to my satisfaction, and my conscience has put it to me
thousands of times.  I ought to have seen it coming.  I didn't--at
least I'm very sure that I didn't.  But sometimes I am not so very sure
of this.  It is so obvious (now) that I ought to have seen it coming,
that sometimes I persuade myself that I actually did.  But how could I?
For if I had, with any certainty at all, surely I would have been man
enough to hide myself away somewhere, even at the ends of the earth.
Love does not grow and wax great upon air.  Solid food is needed in the
occasional presence of the beloved.  Suppose I had fled away the moment
I learned that Lucy no longer loved her husband?  Already her heart
must have been turning to me, if only a little, but with the magnet
which had caused it to turn that little removed from sight, first, and
presently from mind, I believe that after a dazed numbed period that
heart of hers might have swung back into its place.

Later when Fulton said to me, "But you ought to have seen it coming,
and taken measures to see that it didn't come," I gave him my word that
I hadn't seen it coming, and it was very obvious that he didn't believe
me.  Will anyone believe me?  It doesn't matter.  I am not even sure
myself that I am telling the truth.  But I know that I am trying to.

I had left my mother to her interview with Hilda, and betaken myself to
the club.  It was too early even to hope for a sight of Lucy.  There
were a number of men in the reading-room discussing the morning leader
in that fair-minded and pithy sheet, the _Charleston News and Courier_,
and one of these, eyeing me with a quizzical expression, said: "You
look as if you had won a bet."

So already _it_ showed in my face.

Well, I felt as if I had won many bets, and was only twenty, and that
the course before me was all plain sailing.  I was not yet in a
condition to argue with myself about right and wrong.  It did not seem
worth while to look into the serried faces of difficulties and think
how I could burst through them.  It was more natural on that first
morning after the discovery to look boldly over their heads to the rich
open and peaceful country beyond.

A line from the "Brushwood Boy" kept occurring to me, "But what shall I
do when I see you in the light?"

What should I do, what would Lucy do?  Would there be people about or
would we have the good luck to meet alone?  Did she still love me, or
had the dark night brought council and a change of heart?  I knew that
it hadn't.  We were as definitely engaged to each other as if there was
no husband in the way, no children, no law, no convention, no nothing.
I was idiotically happy.

One thing only troubled me a little.  Had Lucy's impulse to precipitate
frankness already started any machinery of opposition into action?  Had
she told her husband?  Knowing her so intimately, I could not make up
my mind, but would have been inclined to take either end of the bet.

Suppose she had told him?

Wouldn't she give me a word of warning so that I could be prepared for
anything he might say to me at our first meeting?  I thought so, but
could not be sure.

"If he does know," I thought, "I don't want to see him.  Why don't I
want to see him?  Am I afraid of him?  I am not afraid of him
physically.  I am stronger than he and more skillful, and I am not
afraid of him mentally.  He has a better mind than I have, but that is
nothing to be afraid of.  Well, then, why don't I want to see him?  Oh,
because it will be awkward and disagreeable; because he will look sick
to death and irreparably injured.  Because he will not do me justice,
because he will think it is all my fault; and because he will require
of me things which I shall not promise him."

I heard the telephone ringing in the distance.  My heart bounded and I
knew that Lucy was asking for me.  I had risen and half crossed the
room to meet the boy who came to tell me that I was indeed wanted on
the phone.  My heart began to thump in my breast, like a trunk falling
downstairs.  I glanced guiltily to see if the rumpus it seemed to me to
be making was attracting notice.  No.  Every man was sunk in his
newspaper.  A moment later, I heard her voice in my ear.

"Listen, I'd like to see you.  I'll be dressed and downstairs in ten
minutes.  Evelyn and John have driven to the golf club to get John's
sticks.  He's really going to Palm Beach.  They start sometime soon
after lunch. . . .  How do I feel? . . .  Oh, about the same as
yesterday!"

I cannot describe the thrill or emotion which I managed to abstract
from that last phrase.  About the same as yesterday!  I, too, felt like
that, only more so.

"Good-by--for ten minutes."

She hung up suddenly.  But I could not at once leave the telephone
room.  It seemed to me that I must be visibly trembling from head to
foot.

My buggy was at the club door.  First I drove home, raced up the stairs
to my room, and from a closet in which I keep all sorts of hunting and
fishing gear, snatched a fine deep-sea rod by Hardy of London, and a
big pigskin box of tackle.  I remembered to have heard John Fulton say
that he had none of such things with him in Aiken, and I thought they
might come in handy for him at Palm Beach.  I cannot quite explain why
it was, but I had the sudden desire to load the man with favors and
presents.

It was only on the way to his house that the rod and the tackle-box
struck me as an excellent excuse for so early a morning call.  I left
them on the table in the front hall, and marched boldly through the
house, and unannounced into the living-room.

Of all the Lucy that turned swiftly from a window at the sound of my
steps, and hurried to meet me, I saw only the great blue eyes.

She came into my arms as if it was the most natural thing in the world
for her to do, as if they had always been her comfort and her refuge.
She was calm and fresh as a rose in the early morning.  I could feel
her heart beating tranquilly against mine.  It seemed to me that the
essence of every sweetest flower in the world had been used in her
making.  I felt that she was the most precious and defenseless thing in
creation, and that me alone she trusted to cherish her and to defend
her.  It could not but be right to hold her thus closer and closer and
to learn that her heart beat no longer tranquilly, but with a
fluttering throbbing quickness like the heart of a wild bird that you
have caught and hold in your hand.

All this while my lips were pressed to hers and hers to mine.  Then
from the playground door rose in lamentation over some tragic-seeming
mishap of play, the voice of Hurry.

Our kiss ended upon the shrill note of woe and protest.  But still we
looked each other in the eyes, and she said: "What are we going to do
about it?"




XXII

She hadn't told her husband.

She had been on the point of telling him, but for once her great gift
of frankness had failed her.  She had not feared any storm that might
burst upon her own head; it was only that her heart had rebelled
against adding to the weight of care and sorrow which her husband
already carried.  Let him have what pleasure he could out of the trip
to Palm Beach.  When he returned she could do her telling.

The fact that she had not told, and was not going to for some time,
troubled her.  She felt, she said, as if she was lying.  She made it
very clear that her reticence was for his sake, not for her own.

Personally I rejoiced in the failure of her frankness.  Trouble enough
was bound to come of our love for each other; at best there would be
weary months of waiting for old knots to be untied before there could
be any question of tying new ones.  There would be at least one
dreadful interview to be gone through with John Fulton; many
readjustments of friendships, some friends would side with him, some
with her; and last and worst, that moment when I should have to tell my
mother and she would grow old before my eyes.

"There'll be heaps of little worries and troubles, Lucy, dear," I said;
"bound to be.  But we'll not begin to think about them till John comes
back from Palm Beach.  If it's wrong for us to love each other at all,
at least we are going to make it as right as we can.  We owe ourselves
all the unalloyed happiness we can lay hands on.  So--let's pretend."

We sat on the sofa in the Fultons' living-room holding hands, like two
children.

"Let's pretend," I said, "that there aren't any complications; that
time has gone backward ten years; that we've just gotten engaged; that
there's nobody to disapprove and be unhappy about it.  I can pretend
true, if you can."

"It's easy for me," said Lucy; "I was never any good at remembering or
looking forward, never any good at anything that wasn't going on right
there and then.  Oh, I'm so glad it's _you_!"

"Why, Lucy?"

"Because you're not a bit like me.  If you were like me, we wouldn't
think of what would happen later on, we'd just go away together.  It's
so complicated and foolish to think we can't.  Laws and people make
such a snarl of things.  I wouldn't try to untangle it, I'd just cut it
all to pieces, and then I suppose we'd be sorry."

"Yes, dear, we'd be very, very sorry.  And the world would make us
suffer almost more than our love could make up to us for.  So we'll
just have to pretend for a while."

"And besides," she said in a startled sort of way, "I might fall out of
love with you, mightn't I?  Oh, I've fallen out of love lots of
times--then with John, and maybe I'll fail you.  You must know that I'm
not any good.  But even if I'm not, I do love you.  Oh, I do."

"Do you?"

"And I _trust_ you so.  There's nobody so kind and thoughtful and
strong."

It is pleasant for an unkind, thoughtless weak man to be told such
untruths by the woman he loves.  And for a few moments I imagined I had
the qualities that she had wished upon me, nay, loved upon me.  For a
few moments there was no kindness, no thoughtfulness, no strength of
which I was incapable.

"When your arms are around me I know that nothing can hurt me."

I was holding her in my arms now.  But there came in through the hall a
pattering of little feet, and by the time Jock and Hurry had burst into
the room I was at a garden window looking out, and Lucy had caught up
from her work bag that Penelope's web of a silk necktie upon which she
so often worked, and made no progress.

"Has Favver come back?"

"Why, no, you little goose.  He's gone to Palm Beach.  We took him to
the train.  He won't be back tomorrow, nor the day after.  Nor the day
after that," and she halted only when she had come to about the tenth
tomorrow.  "And now make your manners to Mr. Mannering."

In fiction children and dogs have an intuitive aversion for the villain
of the piece.  But Jock and Hurry had none for me.  Indeed they liked
me very much and looked to me for treats, and rides round the block,
and romping games in which I fled and they pursued.  But then it was
only since yesterday that I had become a genuine villain.  Had their
intuition made the discovery?  I think I was a little anxious.

But they rushed upon me, and we were to remain for the present at
least, so it seemed, the same old friends.

It flashed across my mind that some day in the not far future these
children would live under my roof; surely the courts would award them
to Lucy; and I highly resolved to be a genuine father to them through
thick and thin.  Somehow or other they must always be fond of me.
Whatever I had to leave when I died they must share equally with any
children that I might happen to have of my own.  Children?  I caught
Lucy's eyes.  We looked at each other across the tops of those
children's heads, and read each other's thoughts.  I know this, because
when Jock and Hurry had been sent away, I said: "Did you know what I
was thinking of just then?  I was thinking, wondering, hoping----"

"I couldn't love you," she said quietly, "and not want what you want
and hope what you hope."

"Lucy!"

I touched her hair with the tips of my fingers.

"What, dear?"

"There was never anyone in the world so wonderful as you, so beautiful,
so generous."

"I suppose it's nice to have you think so."  She looked with great
contentment at the necktie.

"You haven't told me when Schuyler is coming."

"He's coming tomorrow."

"That's fine.  But it will have its funny side."

"Why?"

"Well, I shall have to tell him all about us, won't I?  And we were
schoolmates together, and I think telling him I love his sister and
want to marry her and asking his consent has its funny side.  _He'll_
be on our side anyway, Lucy."

"I'm afraid nobody will think it's as nice as we do."

"Well, of course, it isn't as nice for anybody as it is for us."

"Will you tell him right away?"

"Couldn't I wait a few days?  Somehow I like to bask in the sunshine of
just _you_ knowing and just _me_ knowing.  What do _you_ think?"

She gave me a wonderful look.  "I'm not here to think--I'm here to take
orders from my dear."

I let five days go before I told Schuyler.  They were five wonderful
days, during which we borrowed no trouble from the past or the future;
five days during which we agreed to cross our bridges only when we came
to them.  On that fifth day I received a long letter from Harry
Colemain dated Palm Beach.


MY DEAR FELLOW [he wrote]: At the risk of losing you I think that I
must tell you something of the experiences that I have been having with
John Fulton.  To begin with he told me about his wife's failure of
affection and their domestic smash-up.  He told me going down in the
train.  We shared the drawing-room.  Every time I was jolted into
wakefulness, I found him wide awake.  For five days I don't think he
has slept a wink.  He looks parched and dry like a mummy.  He has tried
very hard to be a cheerful companion, and we have fished and swum and
gone through the motions of all the Palm Beach recreations.  But his
mind is never for one single instant clear of his troubles.  We have
become very intimate.  I think he had to talk or die.  He apologizes
very often for having talked and continuing to do so, but throws
himself upon what he calls my mercifulness.  He talks in a circle,
always coming back to the questions _why_ and _what_.  _Why_ has it
happened?  _What_ has he done to deserve it?  He searches his memory
for reasons as you look for bits of gold in a handful of sand.  Yes, he
was very cross once about some money, but that was years before she
stopped loving him.  It couldn't be _that_, etc., etc.

Our rooms are separated by a little parlor.  I'm a sound sleeper, and
hate being disturbed, but I have given him positive orders to wake me
if he gets lonely and wants to talk.  He's only obeyed these orders
once.  And then he didn't exactly obey them, he waked me because he
couldn't control his nerves.  He couldn't sleep, as usual, so he
started to get up, and just when he got his legs over the side of the
bed he began to laugh.  It was his laughter that waked me.  By the time
I was wide awake the laughter sounded very ugly, and by the time I got
to him it was mixed with awful sobs that came all the way from his
diaphragm and seemed as if they were going to tear him to pieces.  I
turned on the light, but the moment I saw his face I turned it off.  It
isn't decent for one man to see another have hysterics.  We haven't
spoken of the thing since, but he knows that I came in and sat by him
and felt horribly sorry for him.  I can read this in his eye.  And I
think he would do anything in the world for me.  The next morning his
voice was very hoarse; sometimes a woman's voice is that way after
she's paid somewhat over-handsomely for being a woman.  I am trying to
convey to you the impression that the man is in a terribly bad way, and
through no possible fault of his own, which must make his torment
harder to bear.

What I think about Lucy Fulton is simply this: that she ought to be
cowhided until she sees which side her bread is buttered on.  And this
is where you come in.  You're great friends with her, and have a lot of
influence with her.  John says so.  She admires what she is pleased to
call your judgment.  Can't you make her see that just because she has
been spoiled, and given all the best of everything, she's gotten bored,
and is letting one of the best men in this world eat his heart out with
grieving?  She ought to lie to him.  She ought to telegraph him to come
back, and when she gets him back she ought to make him think that she
still loves him.  Every woman has at heart one chance to be decent.
This is hers.

Another thing.  John has betrayed his notion that Lucy sees too much of
you for her own good, at this time.  He doesn't even imagine that she
cares for you in any way that she shouldn't or you for her; but he does
wish--well, that you'd gone to California when you planned to, etc.,
etc.  Now the season's pretty nearly over, and I know that a few weeks
one way or the other never did matter to you and won't now.  Of course,
it has its ridiculous side, but I really think it would comfort John
Fulton quite a little if he heard that you had left Aiken.  You see
he's half crazy with grief and insomnia, and he's got it in his head
that if Lucy had fewer other people to amuse her, she might get bored
again and in sheer boredom turn again to him.  But just use your
influence with Lucy, if you've got any.  I tell you on the honor of a
cynical and skeptical man, that if things go on the way they are going,
I think John Fulton will die of a broken heart.  You see, he's had too
much--more than you and I can possibly imagine--and that much he has
now lost.  If he isn't to get back any portion of it, he'll curl up and
die.

Hoping you're having a fine time and fine weather,

Always your affectionate friend,
  H.C.


Well, the days of basking in the sunshine on top of the powder magazine
were over.

After some thought, I went to Lucy's brother and gave him Harry's
letter to read.  He had slept late, and I found him dressing.

Schuyler was, of course, deeply troubled and concerned.  That he
himself hadn't had "an inkling of this--not an inkling," seemed for
some minutes quite important to him, for he made the statement a number
of times.  Then, for he was energetic, and, like Lucy, oftenest in a
hurry, he said:

"The thing to do is for us to take this letter to Lucy, stand over her
while she reads it, and then throw hot shot into her.  Why it's a
damned shame!  John's been twice as good a husband as Lucy's been a
wife.  And now she does this to him."  Then something appeared to
strike Schuyler's sense of humor, for he burst out laughing.  "And he's
getting jealous of you!" he said gleefully.  "When did you first become
a snake in the grass?"

"Perhaps you'll end by calling me that," I said gravely.  "Stop
laughing, Schuyler.  A very sad thing has happened and a very wonderful
thing.  Lucy and I----"

His face became instantly as grave as mine.  "Lucy and you?"

"We hope that you'll be on our side."

"And John doesn't know?"

"You see by Harry's letter that although he doesn't _know_, his
intuition is trying to tell him."

"How long's this been goin' on?"

"It just came, Schuyler, happened, was--not many days ago.  We didn't
see it coming, and----"

He interrupted sharply, his eyes grown suddenly cold.  "I want to know
if you have still a sort of right to be in this house?"

"Why--yes--I think so."

"_Think_--don't you _know_?"

He gave a harsh short laugh.

"I know what you are driving at, of course.  We care about each other.
If _that's_ wrong, that's all that is wrong."

"You take a weight off me," he said, and his tone was more friendly.

"You always maintained that love was its own justification, Schuyler?"

"And I've heard you maintain that it wasn't.  Now we seem to have
swapped beliefs."

He turned to his dressing-table and tied his tie.  While so doing he
muttered: "Pleasant vacation in sunny South."

And then was silent.  I could not think of anything to say.  Having
finished dressing he thrust his hands into his trousers pockets and
began to pace about the disordered room.

"Shall we go out in the sun?" I suggested.

"A dark cave would be more in keepin' with my feelings.  Let's stop
here a little and talk.  What's the idea anyway?"

"Why, the usual idea, I suppose."

"John to give Lucy a divorce, you and Lucy to marry shortly after, and
Jock and Hurry to go to hell!  I think less than nothing of the usual
idea.  To begin with, why should John give Lucy a divorce?  She's the
one that's done all the harm.  I _know_ I'm her brother.  It only helps
me to see her character clearer than other people do.  Well, say he
isn't the fool I think he is.  Say he _won't_ give her a divorce?  What
then?"

"Hadn't we better cross that bridge when we come to it?"

"In the usual way, I suppose.  No.  I'm too old-fashioned to like usual
ways of doing things.  Furthermore, I like you and Lucy too much.  I
don't want to see her life ruined, and John after all is a manufacturer
of ammunition.  How about crossin' the bridge and findin' him on the
other side with a big bang-stick in his hand?"

I shrugged my shoulders, though at heart I was not indifferent to the
picture which Schuyler had conjured up.

"Oh," said he, "what a damned mess!  Come, we'll talk to Lucy."

I went with him most unwillingly.  And I thought it good fortune that
we did not find her alone, but with Evelyn, Dawson and the children.

Schuyler kissed his sister good morning with warm, brotherly affection
and gave her a playful pat or two on the back.

"All we need," he said cheerfully, "is old John, and a girl apiece for
Archie and me, to be a happy family party."

He made goat's eyes at Evelyn and Dawson.  The latter blushed.  But the
former returned his glance with a fine and mischievous indifference.

"Now, people," Schuyler continued, "I'm on my vacation.  I've plenty of
energy, and I'm open to suggestion.  You, Evelyn, do you want to ride
with me or with Dawson?"

"I want to ride with you, but I'm going to play golf with Dawson."

"When?"

"We were just lingering to say good morning."

She rose a little languidly, and I perceived with misgivings that she
and Dawson were really about to depart.

"Well," said Schuyler, "any time you feel like shakin' Dawson, just put
me wise, there's a good fellow!"

When Dawson and Evelyn had gone, Schuyler proceeded to get rid of the
children.  He gave them fifty cents apiece, and said that if he didn't
see them or hear them for half an hour they could keep the money.

"Are you trying to get this room all to yourself?" asked Lucy.  "Do you
want Archie and me to vanish, too?"

"No," said Schuyler; "much as you and Archie may wish to, I want
nothing of the kind.  Lucy, I think you'd better telegraph John to come
home, don't you?"

"I've told Schuyler, Lucy," I said.

"And that's a good thing," said Schuyler; "because I don't have to take
sides.  I like you all.  You and Archie _have_ to take your side, and
John has to take his, naturally."

Lucy, her hands folded in her lap, looked bored and annoyed.

"A lot of talk isn't going to help any," she said.

"For certain reasons, Lucy," said Schuyler, "you and Archie are just
now as blind as two bats.  You don't see what you are doing, and you
don't see what you are up against."

"I've only one life," said Lucy, "and it's my own."

"But it isn't," said Schuyler; "you gave it to John.  I'd be mightily
hurt and shocked to find out that you were an Indian giver."

"John will give my life back to me when he knows."

"Well, find out if he will or not.  Send for him.  Tell him what's
happened."

"I think that would be best, Lucy," I said.

"Then, of course, I'll send," she said.  "But----"

"John, you know," said Schuyler, "may not take you two very seriously.
He may think that Lucy's feelings for you, Archie, are just a passing
whim.  Upon the grounds of his own experience with Lucy, he would be
within his rights to feel that way.  Why not," his face brightened into
a sort of cheerfulness, "why not test yourselves a little?  You go
north, Archie, and wait around, and then, after a while, if you and
Lucy feel the same, it will be time enough to tell John.  It's all been
too sudden for you to feel sure of yourselves.  It isn't as if neither
of you had ever been in love before and gotten over it.  As a matter of
cold fact, you've both been tried before now and found wanting.  So I
think you ought to go slow--for John's sake.  He's the fellow that's
been tried and that hasn't been found wanting."

It was obvious that Lucy did not like her brother's suggestion at all,
for she rose suddenly, her hands clenched, and exclaimed:

"Oh, you don't understand at all.  How can I go on living with a man I
don't love?  How can you ask me to be so false to myself and to
Archie----"

"And to Jock and Hurry?" asked Schuyler gently.

She showed no emotion at the mention of these names.

"Don't they count for anything?" persisted Schuyler.

"Of course they count for something, so does poor John.  Do you think
it's any pleasure to have hurt him so?  But is it my fault if they
don't count _enough_?"

Here she came swiftly to my side, and slid her hand under my arm and
clung to it.  "They count," she said, "but they don't count enough."
And she turned to me.  "You are all that counts.  I'd give up my life
for you, and I'd give up my children and everything.  You know that."

[Illustration: "'You are all that counts . . . you know that.'"]

There was a long silence.  Then Schuyler, speaking very slowly, said:
"You'd go away with him, and never see Jock and Hurry again, not be
able to go to them when they were sick, not to be at little Hurry's
wedding when she grows up and gets married. . . .  For God's sake!"

"_Now_ do you realize that I'm in earnest?" she cried.

Schuyler turned quietly on his heel and left the room.  After a while
we heard his voice in the distance, mingling joyfully with the voices
of Jock and Hurry.

Lucy's face, all tears now, was pressed to my breast.

"You are giving up too much for me, my darling," I said; "I'm not worth
it."

"But if you went out of my life I'd die!"

"I won't go out of your life, Lucy.  But there are lives and lives.  We
could meet and be together to gather strength for the times we had to
be apart."

At that she had a renewal of crying, and cried for a long time.

"It isn't right for Jock and Hurry to run any risk of losing you," I
said, "and love--Lucy--love with renunciation is a wonderful thing, and
a strong thing."

"I'm not strong.  I don't want to be strong.  I just want to give and
give and give."

"We could have our own life apart from everybody else--but not a hidden
guilty life--a life to be proud of--a life in which you would
strengthen me for my other life and I would strengthen you for yours."

She stopped crying all at once and freed herself from my arms.  "Then
you don't want me?"

"I want you."

She lifted her hands to my shoulders.  "Suppose we find that we can't
stand a life of love--with renunciation?"

"At least we would have tried to do what seemed to make for the
happiness of the most people."

"And you think I ought to live on with John, as--as his wife?"

"No, I couldn't bear that--but as his friend, Lucy, as the mother of
Jock and Hurry.  Oh, no," I said; "I couldn't bear it, if--if you
weren't faithful to me."

"And you would be faithful to me?"

"In thought and deed."

"And we'd just be wonderful friends?"

"Lovers, too, Lucy.  We couldn't help that."

And I kissed her on the forehead.  And at that moment I felt very
noble, and that the way of life which I had proposed was a very fine
way of life, and possible of being lived.

"Then," she said, "John mustn't know.  He must never know.  It will
always be our secret.  But then Schuyler knows."

"When I tell him what we mean to do, he won't tell."

And the first chance I had I told Schuyler.  And finished with, "So
don't tell John, will you?"

"I'll see how happy Lucy manages to make him, first," said Schuyler.
"But if you think he won't find out all by himself, you're mistaken.
It's a rotten business all around."

And he looked at me with a kind of comical amazement.  "Think of Lucy
carin' more for you than for Jock and Hurry!" he exclaimed.  "I suppose
you regale her from time to time with episodes from your past
life? . . .  Well, if I didn't think you'd both get tired of each other
before long, I'd feel worse.  One thing, though, if I promise you that
I won't give you away to John, will you promise me for yourself and for
Lucy that you won't take any serious step, without telling me first,
and giving me a chance to try to dissuade you?"

"As there is to be no question of a serious step," I said, "I promise."




XXIII

Ours was to be one of the most beautiful and beneficial loves of
history.  Almost we fell in love with our new way of loving.  It had,
we felt, a dignity and a purpose lacking in other loves.  To look each
other in the eyes, and feel that in a moment of strength, spurred by
pity for those who had no such love as ours to sustain them, we had
renounced each other, was a state of serenity and peace.

It added to the beauty of our renunciation that it claimed no luster of
publicity, but had been made in quiet privacy.  No one, we thought,
will ever know; yet it will have been strong and pure, so that the
world cannot but be the better for it.

We delighted for a while in our supreme renunciation as children
delight in a new toy.  And even now I can look back upon that time and
wish that there could have been a little more substance to the shadow.
It was a time of wonderful and sweet intimacy.  We were to tell each
other everything.  There was delight in that.  There was the delight of
looking ahead and planning the meetings that should be ours in other
places, until at last John himself came to realize that in our loving
friendship was nothing unbeautiful, or unbeneficent, and meetings would
happen when or where we pleased, the world silenced by the husband's
approval.

So I did not take Harry Colemain's well-meant advice, and leave Aiken.

For a while it would suffice John to know that Lucy intended to stand
by him and be the keeper of his house; to put his interests first, and
to make up to him in dutifulness and economy for the love which she
could not but reserve.  Yes, indeed!  Riding slowly through the spring
woods, I made bold to preach a gospel of new life to her, and she
listened very meekly, like a blessed angel, and she felt sure that from
me she would derive the will and the strength.  Mostly it was a gospel
of economy that I preached and how best she might help her husband back
upon his feet.  And before his return from Palm Beach she had made a
beginning.  She bought a book to keep accounts in, and she got together
all the bills she could lay hands on, and added them up to an appalling
total (several, for it came different each time) and she stacked the
bills in order of their pressingness, with the requests for payment
from lawyers and collectors on top, and she felt an unparalleled glow
of virtue and helpfulness.

And one day she took Jock and Hurry in the runabout (Cornelius Twombly
behind) and drove to the station to welcome John home.  How sweet the
sight of those three faces must have seemed to him after absence!
Indeed they had seemed very sweet to me as I looked into them just
before they drove stationward.  I was not to show up for two or three
days.  That was one compromise on Harry Colemain's advice.  It would
show John that Lucy and I were not entirely engrossed in each other's
society.  It would give him time to turn around and see how he liked
the fact that Lucy was going to stick to him, and in many ways be a
better wife to him.  It would give me an opportunity to see, and be
seen by many people.  It would, in short, be a beginning of knocking on
the head and silencing most of the talk that there had been about Lucy
and me.

When you have a secret you might as well do your best to keep it.

So I did not see John Fulton for three days after his return from Palm
Beach, and then by accident.

He had stopped at my father's house to leave the rod and tackle-box
which I had loaned him, and I, happening to be in the hall, opened the
door myself, and went out to speak with him.

"Have a good time?" I asked.

The man looked so sick that I pitied him.

"Mechanically, yes.  I went through the motions," he said.  "That's a
beautiful rod.  It was the most useful thing I had along.  Going to the
club?  I'll drive you."

"Will you?  Thanks.  I'll just put these things in the hall."

We drove slowly toward the club.

"Glad to be back?"

"Very.  I couldn't have stayed away from Lucy and the kids much longer,
even if I'd been held."

He laughed gently.

"Lucy," he said, "must have thought that I wasn't ever coming back.
She's been trying to put the house in order."

"How do you mean?"

"Oh, finding out how much money's owed, and making a beginning of tying
up loose ends."

"Kids all right?  I haven't set eyes on 'em for three or four days."

"Yes, the kids are fine," and he added, after a pause, "and Lucy's fine
too."

There were several men in the club and they made John heartily welcome,
and told him how much better he looked than when he went away.  As a
matter of fact he looked much worse.

We all had tea together and asked questions about Palm Beach, and if he
had seen so and so, and if he'd brought any money away from the
gambling place, and what was new, and amusing, etc.

"Do you know," he said all of a sudden, "there was one very interesting
thing that happened.  Anybody mind if I talk shop?"

Nobody did; so he went on: "I had a telegram from a Baron Schroeder
asking if it would be convenient for me to see him.  He came all the
way down to Palm Beach, talked to me all the time between trains, and
flew away north again.  He wanted to know how many rifle cartridges I
could make in a year, at a price, a very round price, how many in five
years.  He wanted to know if I could convert any of my plant into a
manufactory for shrapnel, and so on.  What interested me is that he
should take all that trouble over a small concern like mine.  It looks
as if someone saw a time when there would be a great dearth of
ammunition.  Two days ago Schroeder had gone away.  I was braced, while
in swimming, by a Russian gentleman.  He apologized and plied me with
the same sort of questions; I gave him the same sort of offhand answers
that I had given Schroeder, and then I asked him what it was all about,
and I told him about Schroeder without mentioning names.  He said he
could only guess, but that if I would sign a contract he would keep my
plant running full for five years.  It looks, doesn't it, as if
somebody had decided to change the map of Europe, and as if others
suspected the design?"

"Well, what came of it?  Did you land a contract?  Tell more."

"Nothing has come of it yet.  But I think something will.  I'm to meet
the Russian in New York shortly."

"Why the Russian?  The Baron saw you first."

"The Russian had better manners," said Fulton simply.  "I think he
liked me, and I know I liked him!"

Fulton asked me to dinner, but I refused, and so it was nearly four
days before I saw Lucy again.  In the meanwhile Harry Colemain told me
more about the Palm Beach trip.  The ammunition inquiries had, it
seemed, strengthened Fulton's nerves; there had been no repetition of
the hysterics.

"A man," Harry said, "must be even more down and out than Fulton not to
be braced by a prospect of good business.  From what he told me, if the
contract goes through, he stands to make a fortune."

"Is there anything peculiarly good about the Fulton cartridges, or is
Europe just out to gather up all the ammunition she can?"

"It looks rather like a sudden general demand.  But of course nobody
_knows_ anything except the insiders.  Fulton says if the contract goes
through he can die any time and be sure that his family will be well
provided for.  That feeling will stiffen his backbone.  But you haven't
told me if you said anything to Lucy?"

I had been dreading that question as one which could not be answered
with complete frankness.  I don't enjoy lying.  Not that my moral sense
revolts, but because I am lazy.  Lying calls for deliberate efforts of
invention.

"In a general way, yes," I evaded.  "But her own good sense has come to
the rescue.  John's absence gave her a chance to see how she really
felt about things.  She won't leave him.  Indeed, she'll try to make up
to him in every way she can for her failure of affection."

"If she does _that_," said Harry, "I daresay the affection will come
back.  The more you benefit a person the more you like that person.
The more you fail in your duty to a person, the less you like that
person.  I'm delighted with what you say.  With all her charm and
beauty she can make him happy if she tries."

"I think it's not a question of charm and beauty," I said.  "It's a
question of keeping house for him, and being a good mother to the
children, and being loyal to him and them."

"There are reservations?"

"She doesn't love him."

"Oh," said Harry scornfully, "_that_ sort of thing won't work."

"We know a good many cases where that sort of thing seems to work."

"It only works when the husband acts like a natural man.  Fulton won't.
For him only Lucy is possible.  There can be no substitute.  No.  In
this case it won't work.  He's too young and she's too good-looking."

"Then it won't work," I said shortly.

"She makes me sick," said Harry.  "She gets her board and lodging and
her clothes and spending money from him, and love and protection,
and--Oh, it isn't as if there'd never been anything between them.
After all, as far as he's concerned, she's no novice."

"The moment she stopped loving him she became spiritually separated
from him."

"Spiritually be damned!" exclaimed Harry.  "Don't talk to me.  There
are women in New York who to keep from starvation, will make love to
any man that comes along, for a pittance.  They do the very best they
can to earn the money.  I can't help admiring 'em.  But your
fashionable married woman, she's too refined, too delicately souled,
too spiritual to do anything but eat herself sick on her man's money
and spend him into a hole.  It's bad enough to be a prostitute who
plays the game, but it's a damned sight worse to be a prostitute who
doesn't."

"I'm not going to get angry with you, Harry.  We've been through too
much together.  But I think you have said enough.  Lucy is one of the
finest, purest-minded women in the world."

"Then she ought to be her husband's wife, or get out.  If she's not his
wife, she's no business grafting on him for board and lodging and
pocket money.  How long does a pure-minded, good-looking woman keep off
the streets if she can't raise the wind any other way?  Not long.  And
how many men can she graft on?  Plenty of 'em--once.  But not twice.
The word goes round about her.  'She's a beauty to look at,' says the
word, 'but she doesn't earn her money.'"

"Many marriages," I said, "_have_ to be re-arranged and compromised."

"Don't say _have_ to be, say _are_."

"Harry," I said with great firmness, "the country needs rain like the
devil."

After a moment, good humor returned to his face.  He said; "You've just
won an argument.  I also am dry as a bone."




XXIV

"This isn't the last ride together," said Lucy, "but almost.  This time
we are really going."

We had turned into Lovers' Lane, outward-bound, the ponies walking.

"John will have to be in New York for many days about this Russian
contract, and he doesn't want to take the long trip back.  So we're all
going together."

"I shan't stay here very long after you've gone."

"No, you mustn't."

"We'll have lots of nice parties in New York."

"John says he's going to sell our house here, or rent it, or get rid of
it somehow."

"Why?"

"Because he's been so unhappy in it.  He says unless his whole mind is
made over we'll never come to Aiken again."

She drew a long breath, and her eyes roved among the great pine trees
on either side of the road as if she wished to impress them forever
upon her memory.

"I love it all so much," she said simply.

"I'm so sorry," I said; "and it means that I won't ever be coming back
for more than a minute.  And I love it, too."

"We're to spend the summer in Stamford to be near the works.
_Stamford_!"

"You'll find lots of people to like, and bully sailing and swimming."

"And bully spells of white-hot, damp weather, and bully big mosquitoes."

"It ought to be cheap."

"Very cheap."

Then we both laughed.  Then we were silent.

"Tell me," I said, "how is the great compromise working?"

"I don't know.  I told him how I'd made up my mind to stick by the
ship, so that there wouldn't be any scandal, or anything to break up
his home, or hurt the children, and how I was going to be better about
money, and he said, 'Very well, Lucy, we'll try it for a while, but I
don't think compromises are much good.'  He wants me to do all I'm
trying to do, and be his wife too.  I thought he'd--Oh, I thought he'd
be pleased and grateful--instead of that he tries to be cold to me, and
is very sharp and stern."

"It takes time to settle down to any new modus vivendi."

"Well," she cried, "I'm not doing it because I want to, am I?  I'm only
doing it for his sake.  I'm doing every blessed thing I _can_ to save
the situation; and if there are things I simply _can't_ do--why he
ought to be generous and understand.  Oh, I know it isn't going to
work!  And all the time when he isn't being cold and stern, he--he's
trying to make me love him again, and come back to him.  And right in
the middle of that he'll fly into a rage, and say that I ought to be
_compelled_ to behave like a rational human being."

"But he wouldn't compel you to do anything you didn't want to do, Lucy.
Trust him for that."

"I don't know.  He's so different from the way he used to be.
Sometimes I'm afraid.  Sometimes I am afraid to be alone in the same
house with him.  If I didn't have you to back me up, and give me
strength I'd--but it can't last long.  I know it can't.  And I don't
know that it's worth trying."

"You are still fond of him, Lucy?"

"And sorry for him, Oh, so sorry.  But fondness and sorrow aren't
everything."

"It will be better when he has the new contract to occupy him, and keep
him away.  It won't be an all-day affair then.  And all the time you
and I'll be meeting to talk things over, and borrow strength to go on
with.  It isn't easy for me either, dear.  And of course, if after
trial we find it won't work, why then it will be our duty to ourselves
to cut the Gordian knot."

She turned toward me and we looked into each other's eyes for a long
time.

"I've given him all I can," she said.  "It isn't enough.  It never will
be enough.  Oh, if there are knots to be cut, let's cut 'em and have
done with it."

I dropped my reins, and leaning wide, took her in my arms and kissed
her many times.

"We are romantic children," I said, "to think that there could be any
other way.  God bless you, my darling, we'll cut all the knots, and
begin life all over again, and always be together."

She became then wonderfully cheerful and excited, and riding always at
a walk, no longer on roads, but through the deep woods, we made our
plans for the future.

Nothing was to be said to John until we were in a bigger place than
Aiken.  The bigger the place the smaller the scandal.  I offered (with
grave misgivings) to do the telling; but Lucy would not have it so.
"It's his right," she said, "to know from me."  John having been told,
would, we felt sure from what we knew of his character, be willing to
do the right thing.  It wasn't as if he had been dishonored in any way.
He would even be grateful to us for having been strong-minded and
aboveboard.  It would hurt him terribly.  Yes, but a sudden final hurt
was better than the lingering sickness from which he was now suffering.
There would, of course, be no question of alimony.  My father, much as
he might disapprove of the whole affair, was not only fond of me, but
fond of Lucy, and he would see us through.

It would take a long while to get a divorce.  That was the darkest
cloud on the horizon.  But we must face that cheerfully; our reward
would be all the greater when it came.

That John would be unwilling to give up Lucy even when he knew that she
loved someone else never occurred to us.  He belonged to that class of
men whose code is to give the women all the best of everything.  He was
too fond of Lucy to wish to see her hurt.  And if he wouldn't give her
a divorce, hurt she would be, for in that unlikely event we were
determined to jump on the nearest steamer and sail away for parts
unknown.

"Why not come in?" said Lucy, when we had finished our ride.  "You
haven't been near the house for days, so it won't be very noticeable."

"All right," I said, "for a minute."

It was between dusk and dark.  The lights had not been turned on in the
hall.  The opportunity seemed rare and sweet.  We stood for one brief
fleeting moment closely enlaced--and swiftly separated, and stood
breathing fast, and listening.

Lucy was the first to make up her mind.

She stepped swiftly to the dining-room door and flung it open.  She was
in time to see the trim shoulders and white cap of a servant
disappearing from the dining-room into the pantry.

"Who was it?"

"My new waitress."

"Hilda?"

Lucy smiled grimly.  "She'll leave tomorrow."

"Don't discharge her.  She might tell.  Perhaps she didn't see."

I joined Lucy in the dining-room, closed the door, knelt and looked
back into the hall through the keyhole.

"Could she see?"

I rose to my feet and nodded.

"He mustn't hear from anyone but me," said Lucy.  "I'll speak to her."

But Hilda was not in the pantry.

"I don't think she'll tell," I said, "and after all what does it
matter?  Let's take a chance."

Mentally I resolved to communicate with Hilda at the earliest possible
moment, and to use whatever influence I had upon her.  So I was no
sooner in my room at home than I took the receiver from my private
telephone and gave the number of the Fultons' house.  After an interval
I heard Hilda's voice.

"It's Mr. Mannering, Hilda."

"Yes, sir."

"I want to see you about something important."

"I know."

So she knew, did she?

"Can you meet me at ten o'clock tonight?"

"Where?"

"Leave the house at ten sharp, and walk toward the town; I'll be
watching for you.  You'll come?"

"Yes, sir."




XXV

Near the Fultons, fronting on the street, is a large overgrown yard
that has never been built on.  Here in the shadow of a great cedar tree
I waited and watched for Hilda.  On the stroke of ten I saw her coming.
She had a neat, brave, brisk way of walking, her head well up, as if
she was afraid of nothing.  A few moments later I hailed her from under
my cedar, and after glancing up and down the street to see if anyone
was watching, she joined me there.

It was very dark.  I could just make out her face.  She was breathing
fast and had one hand pressed upon her heart.

"Thank you for coming, Hilda.  You saw Mrs. Fulton and me in the hall?"

"And heard you."

"I'm throwing myself on your mercy, Hilda.  Mrs. Fulton and I love each
other.  When we get back to New York we are going to tell Mr. Fulton.
He will let Mrs. Fulton divorce him, and then we are to be married.
You'll be my friend, won't you, and not tell?   There's been nothing
wrong, Hilda----"

"Only kisses."

"But if he found out from anyone but Mrs. Fulton--you see he isn't very
well and he might do something crazy--something tragic.  You see if you
told him what you'd seen, he might act before anyone had a chance to
explain."

I was trying to make the matter sound more serious than I felt it to
be.  Whatever happened, I did not think that Fulton was the kind of man
who forgets his education and his civilization, but I wanted, if I
could, to frighten Hilda into secrecy.

"You'd not want to get me all shot up, would you, Hilda?"

She was silent for a time, as if weighing pros and cons in her head.
Then she looked up at me and said:

"When _I_ saw, _I_ didn't do anything crazy."

"Hilda," I said, "he has to be hurt and you have to be hurt.  That's
always been the way with love--it always will be."

She was silent again.  Then she said in a low voice that carried with
it a certain power to thrill: "He'd die for her.  And I'd die for you.
But he's only a worn-out glove, and I'm only a common servant.  She
thinks she'd die for you, and you think you'd die for her.  But you're
both wrong.  A woman that won't stand by her babies isn't going to die
for anyone, not if she knows it.  A man that gets to your age without
marrying any of the women he's gone with isn't going to die for anyone
if he can help it.  Wait till you've crossed her selfish will a few
times and see how much she'll die for you; wait till she begins to use
you the way she used him.  A whole lot you'll want to die
for--her--then----"

"I can't listen to this, Hilda."

"You _will_ listen, or else I'll scream and say you attacked me--a
whole lot she'll feel like dying for you _then_.  Servants have eyes
and ears and hearts.  There's servants in that house that know how
things used to be, who see how things are now, since you came
philandering around.  And do you know what those servants think of her,
and what I think of her for the way she's treated him?  Oh, they like
her well enough because she's gentle and easy-going, and good-tempered
and easy to get on with; but there isn't a servant in that house would
change characters with her.  We think she's the kind of woman that's
beneath contempt--lazy, selfish, spendthrift--always pampering number
one--and going about the world looking like a sad, bruised lily.  Do
you think the servants in that house don't know all about your goings
and comings, and the life you've led, the harm you've done and didn't
have to do, the good you might have done, and didn't?"

"But, Hilda----"

She motioned me to be silent.  Her ears, sharper than mine, or more
attentive, had heard voices.  They were negro voices, a man's and a
woman's.  We drew deeper into the shadow of the cedar.

"So you got no mo' use for me, nigger?"  The man's voice rumbled softly
and threatened like distant thunder.  "Yo' got to have yo' fling?"

Then the woman's voice, shrill but subdued: "I don' love you no mo',
Frank."

"You got er nice home 'n nice lil' babies, 'n you goin' to leave 'em
fo' a yaller man--is you?"

They were opposite us now, walking very slowly and occasionally
lurching against each other.

"Yo' ain't goin' ter make trouble, Frank?"

"I ain't goin' ter give you up, Lily."

"You ain't?  How you goin' ter fix fo' ter keep me?"

They came to a halt and faced each other, the woman defensive and
defiant, the man somber, quiet, with a certain savage dignity and
slowly smoldering like an inactive volcano.  You couldn't see their
features, only a white flashing of eyes and teeth in such light as
there was.

"You's one er dese new women," said the man softly.  "You's got ter be
boss 'n have yo' own way."

He stood for some moments looking down into her face, appraising as it
were her flightiness, and meditating justice.  Then he struck her
quietly, swiftly and hard, so that her half-open mouth closed with a
sharp snap.

She was not senseless, but she made no effort to rise.  He stood over
her, smoldering.  Then, his voice suddenly soft and tender, "I reckon I
is got ter learn you," he said, and he picked her up in his arms and
carried her from the roadside deep into the tangled growths of the
vacant yard--deeper and deeper, until no sound at all came to us from
them.

"That was Mrs. Fulton's laundress and her husband," said Hilda.  "She's
been trying to copy Mrs. Fulton; but _he's_ settled that.  He's a real
man, and he'll keep his wife.  Women like to be hit and trampled.  It
proves to them that they're worth while."

"That may be, Hilda.  I don't know.  I couldn't hit a woman. . . .  You
haven't told me that you're not going to tell what you saw."

"I don't know," she said; "he's suffered enough.  It ought to end."

"But I thought you--didn't want to hurt me?"

"I don't.  Still----"

"Still what?"

"Oh, favors aren't everything."

"What do you mean, Hilda!"

"Oh, I'm just a servant.  I suppose I could be bought."

"I thought better of you."

"Not with money."

"Not with money?  How then?"

She turned her face up to mine, then smiled and closed her eyes.  "A
kiss more or less," she said, "wouldn't matter much to _you_."

And I kissed her.

Then she opened her eyes and looked up at me until the silence between
us grew oppressive.  Then with a sudden, "Oh, what's the use!" turned
and hurried off.  But I caught up with her in two bounds.

"Don't go away like that."

"Oh," she cried, "I hoped you _wouldn't_.  But you _did_.  It's bad
enough to love you, but to despise you too!  Oh, don't worry.  _I_
won't tell.  I've been bought, I've _lived_."

I remained for a long time, alone, under the cedar tree.  I was
horribly ashamed and troubled, not because I had kissed her, but
because I had had the impulse to kiss her again, because I realized at
last that it takes more than a romantic love affair to make a silk
purse out of a sow's ear.  Because for a moment I saw myself as Hilda
saw me--because for a moment I was able to judge Lucy and me, as others
would judge us.

I remained for a long time.  The negro and his wife came quietly out of
the bushes, her arm through his.  She would not now run off with the
yellow man.  I watched them until the darkness swallowed them.

I leaned against the fragrant stem of the cedar, my hand across my
eyes.  And in that moment of self-reproach, dread and contempt of the
future, I too wished the most worthy and sincere wish of my life.

I wished that I had never been born.




XXVI

For once, with complete fervor, I wished that I had never been born.
And if I was to get back any glimmerings of self-respect, I must act
like a man.  Upon what grounds did I found the hope that Fulton would
not soon find out about Lucy and me?  Why, on the grounds of moral
cowardice, of course.  I dreaded to face any drastic, final issue.
There was no other reason.  Well, if I was to prove to myself that I
was not a moral coward, Fulton must be told and the issue faced, and
Fulton himself must be out-faced.  It was not enough to love and be
loved in secret.  That way lies stealing and cheating.  We must come
into the open hand in hand, proclaim our love and demand our rights.
If these were denied us--well, it would be too bad.  But at least we
would have come out from under the rose, and the consequences could be
flung openly and courageously in the faces of those who denied us.  And
it would be fairer to Fulton to tell him.  He was suffering torment.
With a definite cause to face, it would be easier for him to regain his
health and his sanity.

Strong in these resolutions, I felt as if a great weight had been
lifted from my shoulders.  But if you think that I went at once to
Fulton and told him, you have greatly misapprehended the mental
workings of a butterfly.

I went first to Lucy, and told her that I was going to tell.  And from
her, too, it was as if a weight had been lifted.

"We can't go on this way forever," I said; "we thought we could, but we
know we can't.  We love each other and we're human, and sooner or
later--Oh, it's best to go to him now with a clean bill, and tell him
that love is too strong for us all, and that he must come out on the
side of love no matter how much it hurts him."

"When are you going to tell him?"

"No time like the present, Lucy."

And I drew a long breath, for in spite of the bold words, I felt
panicky.  I felt as if the doctors had just set the time for the
operation, and that it was sooner than I expected.

"We ought to have told him long ago.  Where is he?"

"In the garden."

"It's a hard thing to do.  Give me a kiss."

A moment later I felt strong enough and noble enough to slay dragons.
And I found Fulton sitting on a garden bench in a recess of clipped
privet, Hurry on his lap.

"She isn't feeling very well, poor baby," he said; "it's the sudden
heat.  She couldn't eat any breakfast.  Did you want to see me about
something special?"

"Why, yes, I do.  But you're busy with Hurry."

"We were just going in to lie down, weren't we?" he said to the child.
"I won't be a minute."

He picked her up in his arms, and carried her into the house.  A few
moments later he returned, smiling, as if she had said something that
had touched his humor.

"Let's sit on the bench," he said.  "It's the one cool place in Aiken,
this morning."

Mechanically I sat down beside him and accepted a cigarette from his
case.

"I always dread the first hot spell for the babies," he said.  "I'm
glad we're going up early this year."

"You'll be in New York a while?"

"At the New Turner.  And then Stamford.  Poor Lucy dreads Stamford, but
I've got to be near the works.  What are you planning to do this
summer?"

"It depends a great deal on you, John."

Now he turned to me with a very grave expression on his face.  "On me?"

"I love Lucy, John, and she feels the same way about me."

His expression of courteous inquiring gravity did not change.  "So
_that's_ what was at the bottom of everything.  I told her she was
seeing too much of you, but she wouldn't listen.  Of course, my
contention was just on general principles.  I thought you were both to
be trusted."

"We only found it out just before you went to Palm Beach."

"You ought to have seen it coming.  A man of your experience and record
isn't like a college freshman in such matters."

"If I had seen it coming, John, believe me I'd have run from it.  But
all at once it had come, and it's a question now, not of what might
have been, but of Lucy's happiness."

"Yes," he said, "we mustn't think of ourselves now, or of the children.
We must think of what is best for Lucy.  And what is best for Lucy
can't be thought out offhand.  There's the complication of winding up
here, moving, and so forth.  What is your idea?  Yours and Lucy's?"

"We hope and trust that you won't want to stand in our way."

"Divorce?  Well, of course, it might come to that.  It's not, however,
an idea which I am prepared offhand to receive with enthusiasm.  Any
more than I propose to act upon the very first impulse which I had when
you told me."

"What was that?"

"I thought how delicious it would be to get my automatic and fill you
full of lead.  But you and Lucy, I take it, have so far resisted your
temptations, and I must battle with mine."

"I ought to have said _that_; our temptations have been resisted, John."

He shrugged that vital fact aside with, "Oh, I should have known if
there had been anything to know."

"I needn't say, need I, that I feel like hell about your position, your
end of it?"

"My position is not so bad as it was.  I have something definite to
face now.  But much as I appreciate your impulsive good will, I don't
think that your sympathy is a thing which I care to accept.  Lucy, of
course, feels that her fancy for you is a more imperative call than her
duty to her children and me."

"You've been in love, John."

"I _am_ in love.  I think we had better not discuss our several powers
of loving."

He rose from the bench and began to stroll up and down in front of it.

"I haven't," he said, "given this contingency any thought whatever.
You and Lucy will have to possess your souls in patience for a time.
It is all very sudden.  But supposing for a moment that I should
consent to a divorce.  Are you able to support a wife?"

"I have no money of my own," I said, "but my father, as you know, has
oceans of it, and gives me a very handsome income."

"And yet he might not care to support you above the ruins of a home.
In that eventuality what could you do?  Lucy is very extravagant."

"I could work my hands to the bone for her."

Fulton looked curiously at his own lean, nervous hands, smiled faintly,
and said: "Yes, and then be chucked aside like a worn-out garment.
Well, we'll cross that bridge when we come to it.  And now you'll be
anxious to see Lucy, and report.  Tell her that I swallowed the pill
without making too much of a face.  Tell her that I seemed inclined to
be reasonable.  Tell her also with my compliments that she must
continue to exercise self-restraint and patience.  Things are bad
enough.  If they were any worse I could not answer the consequences."

"All right, John.  Thank you for taking it so calmly."

"Oh, I'm not calm inside.  Don't worry about that."

I left him there--standing very straight in the garden path, his face
the color of granite, and of the stillness.




XXVII

"What did he say?"

Her face was brilliant with excitement and anxiety.  And I told her as
well as I could.

"He was preternaturally calm and easy," I said; "I couldn't imagine a
man being more well-bred about anything.  But he won't say anything
definite now.  Of course, he ought to have time to think.  We could
have counted on that, if we'd thought.  He will take plenty of time to
make up his mind, and then he won't change it.  But Lord, I'm glad he
knows now; and from us."

There was a quiet knocking on the half-open door of the living-room.

"Come in. . . .  Oh, John, you needn't have knocked."

He came in slowly and quietly, a gentle smile on his lips.  The gray
granite look had softened into his natural coloring.

"I must say you're a very handsome pair," he said.  "Don't go just yet,
Archie.  If we three are to talk things over in the future, we had
better have a little tentative practice.  Are we three the only ones
who know of this sensational development?"

"And Schuyler," I said.

"Is he for you or against you?"

"We thought we could be just great friends and see each other once in a
while.  He was for that.  But, of course, that was only romantic
nonsense."

"Yes, that was nonsense," said Fulton.  "It would have made my position
altogether too ridiculous.  Did it occur to you to be great friends,
and not see each other?"

"John," exclaimed Lucy, "you don't understand."

"I don't understand the importance which lovers attach to love?  Well,
perhaps not.  Drunkards hate to cure themselves of drink; smokers of
smoke; lovers of love.  Yet all these appetites can be cured, often to
the immense benefit of the sufferers and of everybody concerned.  And
so you thought you could lead two lives at once, Lucy?"

"I did think so."

"Gathering strength in romantic byways to see you through the prosy
thoroughfares?  It wouldn't have worked."

"We know that now."

"You couldn't have lied about every meeting with Archie--lied as to
where you were going and where you had been.  Truth comes natural to
you, even if you seem to have fallen down on some of the other virtues."

I _knew_ that he was laboring under a great strain.  And yet for the
life of me I could not read any symptoms of that laboring in his face
or voice.  His voice was easy, casual, and tinged with humor.  It was
almost as if he was relieved to find two such inconsequential persons
as Lucy and myself at the bottom of his troubles.  Now and then his
left eyebrow arched high on his forehead, and there would be a sharp
sudden glance in the corresponding eye.

"I wonder," he said, turning to me, "if people in your situation ever
look at it from the critical outsider's point of view.  Have you
considered that a passion for something forbidden is not a natural, not
a respectable passion?  According to all moral and social laws Lucy is
a forbidden object for your love and vice versa.  People are not going
to think well of you two."

"Oh, we know _that_," said Lucy, wearily.

"My dear Lucy, you mustn't show signs of distress so early in the game.
What we are discussing, or trying to throw a little light on, is the
subject which just now, by all accounts, should interest you more than
anything else in the world.  Furthermore, I really must insist on
consideration for myself and the children."

"No amount of talk ever made me do right--or wrong," said Lucy; "I just
do right or wrong, and of course _you_ think this is wrong.  So what's
the use?"

"Think it wrong," exclaimed Fulton, "of course I do.  Don't _you_?"
His voice expressed almost horrified surprise.  "Don't _you_ think it
wrong to fall out of love with your husband, into love with another
man, and to take no more interest in your children than if they were a
couple of wooden dolls made in Germany?"

"Caring enough makes everything right," she said, still wearily, as if
the whole subject bored her.

"Caring _enough_!" exclaimed John.  "Oh, caring _enough_ makes
everything right.  But do you care _enough_--either of you?  I may
change my mind, but just now, as a man fighting for what little
happiness there may be left for him in the world, this question of how
much you care is the crux of the whole matter.  If I thought that you
cared _enough_ I'd take my hat off to the exception which proves the
rule that all illicit passions are wrong.  If I thought that you cared
_enough_ I'd think that a great wonder had come to pass in the world,
and I'd give you my blessing and tell you to go your ways."

Lucy rose and went appealingly to him.  "John, dear," she said, "we
_do_ care enough."

He turned to me quickly.

"And you think that?"

"I care enough," I said, "so that nothing else matters--not even the
hurt to you."

"Do you care so much that no argument will change you?"

I think Lucy and I must both have smiled at him.

"No pressure of opposition?"

"Caring is supposed to thrive on opposition, isn't it?" said I.

"In short," said John, "if I refuse to be divorced you care enough to
run away together into social ostracism?"

Lucy smiled at me and I smiled back at her.  And at that Fulton's
calmness left him for a moment.

"My God," he cried, "I am up against it."

But almost instantly he had himself once more in hand, and was speaking
again in level, almost cheerful tones.

"Social ostracism," he said, "would be very horrid if you stopped
caring for each other."

"Why take it for granted that we'd stop caring?"

"I don't.  I'm taking nothing for granted.  But no girl, Archie, ever
cared for a man more than Lucy cared for me--and then she stopped
caring.  I know less about your stamina.  But this is not the first
time you've cared."

"It's the first time I've _really_ cared," I said.

"It's not the first time you've _said_ that you really cared, is it?"

I was unable to answer, and his eyes twinkled with a kind of automatic
amusement.  Then once more grave, "I never even _thought_," he said,
"that I ever cared about anyone but Lucy.  That gives me a peculiar
advantage in passing judgment on matters of caring--an advantage
enjoyed neither by you nor Lucy.  I wasn't any more her first flame
than she is yours.  But she was my first and only flame.  I can speak
with a troop of faithful years at my back.  But you and she have only
been faithful to each other for a matter of days.  I am not doubting
the intensity of your inclination, but I can't help asking, Will it
last?  Are you prepared to swear that you will love her and no other
all your days?"

"Yes," I said firmly.  And I loved her so much at that moment that I
felt purified in so saying and believing.

"How about you, Lucy'?  Never mind, don't answer.  You are thinking of
that day when you stood up before all our friends and swore that you
would love me all your days.  Naturally it would embarrass you to
repeat that with respect to another, before my face.  So I won't ask
you to . . ."

"John," said Lucy, "all this is so obvious.  And it leads nowhere.
Talk won't change us.  So won't you please say what you are going to
do?"

"Not until I know myself," he said.  "But there is one thing . . .  I
think it would be better all round if you saw less of each other until
something is decided.  I realize that Jock and Hurry and I are very
much in the way.  Jock and Hurry naturally don't care how much you two
are together.  But I do.  It isn't that I don't trust you out of my
sight.  You know that.  But the mind of a jealous man is a gallery hung
with intolerable pictures.  Merely to think of Lucy, Archie, giving you
the same look that she used to have for me is to burn in hell-fire."

He turned on his heel, and left us abruptly.  We could hear him calling
to the nurse to ask how Hurry was feeling, and we could hear his steps
going up the stair to the nursery.

"He's going to do the right thing, Lucy," I said.

"I wish he wouldn't talk and talk.  The milk's spilled.  I suppose
we've _got_ to keep more or less apart."

"Yes, Lucy."

I held out my arms, and for a moment we made, I suppose, one of those
intolerable pictures that hung in Fulton's mental gallery.  And then I
went away.

It was good to have told.  I was very deeply in love; I thought that
Lucy's and my future could soon be smoothed into shape, but I did not
feel happy.  I felt as if I had been through a great ordeal of some
sort, and had come off second best.  It seemed to me that I ought to
have stood up more loudly for my love, for its intensity and power to
endure.

In addition there had been about John Fulton an ominous quiet.  I could
better have endured a violent outbreak.  For there is no action without
its reaction.  After a storm there is calm.  But Fulton's calm was more
like that which precedes a storm.

His breakdown came after I had left.  Lucy told me about it.  He had
come back to her in the living-room, and said things about me that she
would never never forgive.

"I don't care what he says about me," she cried, "but if he talks to me
against you, I won't stand it."

"It's natural for him to feel bitter against me.  I'm sorry, of course.
But it doesn't matter."

"If he's got to feel bitter, let him feel bitter against me.  If anyone
is to blame, I am to blame."

"What did he say about me?" I asked.

"He said you were the kind of man that men didn't count when they were
counting up the number of men they knew.  He said you had always been
too idle to keep out of mischief.  And that no pretty woman would be
safe from you--if you weren't afraid . . .  Afraid!"

"That's quite an indictment."

"I said: 'Why didn't you say all that to his face, when he was here,
instead of waiting till you could say it behind his back . . .'"

Here she turned to me with the most wonderful look of tenderness and
trust.

"But I know what I know.  And you are the kindest and the truest and
the gentlest man . . ."

"Oh, I'm not!  I'm not, Lucy! . . .  But what does that matter, if I
never let you find out the difference? . . .  We mustn't take what John
says too seriously.  He's had enough trouble to warp his mind."

She still looked up into my face with that wonderful trust and
tenderness.  "And you are the most generous man to another man!" she
said.




XXVIII

The very next day Evelyn told a few old friends that she was going to
be married to Dawson Cooper.  At once Lucy felt that she must give a
dinner in the happy young people's honor, and to this dinner, as one of
Evelyn's oldest friends and of Dawson's for that matter, I had to be
asked.

In many ways, this dinner differed in my memory from other dinners.  To
begin with, it was exceedingly short, and well done.  The table was
decorated with that flower which some people call Johnny jump-up, and
some heartsease, and of which all that I can state positively is that
it is the great-grandmother of the pansy family.  We had some tag-ends
of Moet and Chandon '84 to drink and a bottle of the old Chartreuse.
In the second place, it was the last time I was ever to sit at meat
under John Fulton's roof.  The dinner had psychological peculiarities.
I was in love with my hostess; she with me.  Twice I could have run
away with the girl in honor of whose engagement the dinner was being
given.  My host, who personally had insisted on my presence, would have
been delighted to hear of my sudden death.  The waitress would have
died for me (I had her word for it), and at the same time she despised
me.  Within the week I had thrown myself on her mercy, and bought her
silence with a kiss.

What a dinner it would have been if we had elected to play truth; if
each person present could have been forced to say what he or she knew
about the others!

Personally I must have rushed out of the house, my fingers in my ears,
like Pilgrim.

But we didn't talk about embarrassing things.  We made a lot of noise,
and did a lot of laughing, and toasting.  But I was glad when it was
all over.  I was always catching someone's eye, and thinking how much
harm a man can do, if with no will to do harm, he follows the lines of
least resistance and drifts.  The harm that is done of malice and
purpose has at least a strength of conviction about it, and disregard
of consequences.  It is far more respectable to do murder in cold
blood, than to slaughter a friend because you happen to be careless
with firearms.

Among other things that dinner proved to me that it is possible to do
several things at once: to laugh, talk, and think.  I kept laughing and
talking and helping now and then to tease Evelyn and Dawson, and yet
all the while I was busy thinking of other things.  And all the
thinking was based on one wish; not that I had never been born, but
that I had my whole life to live over again.  Surely, I thought, with
another trial I might have amounted to something.  I had money back of
me, I thought, and position, and a mind--well, not much of a mind, but
when you think what that Italian woman does with half-wit
children--surely the right educators could have made something quite
showy out of me.  The energy I had put into acquiring skill at games
and in learning the short cuts to pleasure, might have been expended on
righteousness and the development of character.  Most at ease with the
great, I might, during the dearth of great men, have aspired to be an
ambassador.  I'd have married young, and have given all the tenderness
which various women have roused in me, to one woman.  And there would
have been children, and stability, and a home constantly invaded by
proud and happy grandparents.  Or if these fine things had not been in
my reach, at least I might have shaken the dust of futile places from
my feet, and closed my ears to the voices of futile people.  Often I
have had the valorous adventurous impulse, and the curiosity to find
out what was "beyond the ranges"--merely to resist it.  I am Tomlinson,
I thought.  I might have been Childe Roland.

Was there not still time to turn a new leaf--to be somebody, to
accomplish something?  Yes, I could make the woman who awaited me
beyond the puddle of scandal--happy.  I could--I must be unselfish and
fine where she was concerned.  The world might forgive me, it would
never quite forgive her.  The world would never believe that we had
played the game as fairly as it can be played.  There would be such
talk as, "Of course the moment Fulton found out what was going on, he
got rid of her."  Other people would say, "Well, damaged goods is all
he ever deserved, anyway."

Lucy, damaged goods?  I stole a look at her.  Little and lovely and
happy and full of laughter at the head of her table, there was no
shadow upon that pansy face.  She was, as always, living in the moment.
From all our troubles and complications, "a rose high up against the
thunder were not so white and far away."  Remorse would never greatly
torment her.  In time, too, Fulton's hungry stone-gray face of the last
weeks would fade from my memory.




XXIX

Beyond saying that he thought for various reasons we should see less of
each other, Fulton had made no effort to keep Lucy and me apart.  If he
had an adviser in this, that adviser was Schuyler.  The idea, I
suppose, was that Lucy, unopposed, would soon tire of the affair, as
she had tired of others in her extreme youth, and return to her duty,
if not to her affection.  But we only loved each other the more.  And
the various exasperations of delay became hard to bear.  Lucy, when
what seemed to her a reasonable time had passed, and Fulton had not yet
made up his mind about the divorce, was against delay.  We had warned
Fulton we had played the game, why should we lose time to do so?  I had
to argue with her against the next steamer for foreign parts, and to
persuade her (half persuade her) that in the long run patience would
serve us best.  "Now," I said, "we don't feel that we need anyone but
ourselves.  But we both love people--our own kind of people.  If John
won't play fair (we called it that) our own kind of people will be on
our side, no matter what we do.  But we should have John's word for it
that he is not going to play fair, before we take any drastic step."

The Fultons left Aiken, and after what seemed to me a decent delay of a
few days, I followed them to New York.  John seemed further than ever
from coming to a decision, so Lucy thought.  But she evinced a more
patient spirit.  For the young woman with credit and a fondness for
clothes New York is a great solace, even if she is half broken-hearted.

"The contract with the Russian has gone through," she said; "John will
make a lot of money.  I tell him that it's horrid to get rich by making
things that are used to kill people with, but he says there are too
many people in the world, and that most of them would be the better for
a little killing--so he's given me a fine credit, and I'm buying all
the clothes I need."

"Lucy, I don't think you ought to spend his money--any more than you
absolutely have to--considering."

"We spoke of that.  He said I'd hurt him enough, and that while I was
still ostensibly his wife, he wished me to have all that he could give
me."

"While you are still ostensibly his wife?  That sounds as if--Oh, as if
he was going to step out, Lucy, doesn't it?"

"Sometimes he talks as if it was all arranged.  He says, 'Next year, if
you shouldn't happen to be with me, I'll do so and so,' and all that
sort of talk.  At other times he talks of building a big house down on
Long Island--just the kind of house I've always wanted--just as if he
was sure that I would still be living with him."

Well, one day Fulton came to my hotel and sent up his card.  I went
down to him as quickly as I could finish dressing.  He said:

"Sorry to trouble you, but my time isn't quite my own.  This seemed a
golden opportunity.  We've a lot to talk over.  I've a taxi outside.
Will you drive around a little?"

"Certainly, if you'll just wait while I telephone."

I called up Lucy.

"I can't meet you this morning, I am to have a talk with John.  Somehow
I feel sure that something is going to be decided."  My heart was
beating quick and fast.  I was unaccountably excited.  This excitement
seemed to communicate itself to Lucy.  She said as much.

"I'm terribly excited," she said, and her voice had a kind of wild,
triumphant note in it.  "You'll tell me everything the minute you can?"

"Of course.  Good luck."

"Good luck."

We drove across Forty-third Street and up the crowded Avenue for
several blocks without speaking.  Then Fulton smiled a little and spoke
in a level, easy voice.

"Perhaps," he said, "the water is not so cold as it looks.  Shall we
take the plunge?"

"By all means," I said.  My heart was thumping nervously.  I hoped he
would not notice it.

"Lucy and I," he said, "as you know, were wonderfully happy for a good
many years.  Until last winter, I was never away from her over night.
And then, only because of a financial crisis.  I have never even looked
at another woman with desire, or thought of one.  Until last winter,
Lucy was the same about other men.  She was a wonderful little mother
to her kids, and the most faithful, loving, valiant wife that ever
belonged to a man full of cares and worries."

"I know all this, John," I said; "I could wish that you had been
unhappy together."

"I wish to make several things clear," he said.  "According to all
civil and moral law, I am an absolutely undivorceable man.  There is
only one ground for divorce in this state.  To clear the decks for you
and Lucy, I should have to smirch myself and take a black eye."

"But the people who count always understand these things."

"In order to secure my own unhappiness, to make it everlasting, I
should have to perjure myself.  I know that it is the custom of the
country for married gentlemen who are no longer loved to perjure
themselves.  But it seems to me a custom that would bear mending.
However, it is not yet a question of that."

"Still undecided?"

"No.  My mind is made up.  I am prepared to step down and take my black
eye on certain conditions."

I bowed my head.

"Lucy," he said, "doesn't love the children as much as I do.  She has
allowed herself to forget how dear they are to her, so it would have to
be understood among us three that I should retain the children.  You
see, I've got to keep something of what belongs to me--to keep me
going.  Lucy will agree to this, because just now all she wants is new
clothes and you.  There is another point upon which I feel that I must
be satisfied."

"What is that?"

"How long is your young people's infatuation for each other going to
last?  If it is to be brief and evanescent, it would be absurd for me
to take a black eye.  But if it is to be stable and enduring, I should
be ashamed to stand in the way of it.  Knowing something of Lucy's
history, how long do you think her fancy for you will last?"

"These things are on the lap of the gods."

"Well, then, yours for her?  Now, I know that my love for her, which
has been tried by fire and ice and time, will last until I die, or lose
my reason.  With me it is not a question of _thinking_, but of
_knowing_.  How long do you _know_ that your love for her will last?"

"That is an impossible question to answer.  I think it will always
last."

"Thought won't do, Archie, on this all-important phase of the
situation, we must have the light of definite knowledge.  Now, as a man
who has had many love affairs, some innocent and some not, you should
have a good working knowledge of your endurance in such matters.  If
you were cast away on a desert island with a very pretty woman, you to
whom women have always been necessary, you from whose hand there has
always been some woman or other ready to eat, how long would your love
for Lucy last?"

I was amazed momentarily by his question, but it was not one which I
could answer.

"A week?"  He rather shot this at me, and for a moment there was a
satiric gleam in his eye.

I nodded.

"You _know_ that it would last a week?"

I began to feel a little angry, and I said, quite sharply: "I _know_
it."

"A month?"

"Yes, a month."

Both our voices had risen.  His became easy and level once more.

"A year, Archie?"

"How can I know that, John?"  I tried to meet his quick change of
manner.  "I _think_ so.  I'm very sure of it."

"But you don't know?"

"I can't _know_."

"And if the very pretty woman on the island came to you in the night
and said she had seen hob-goblin eyes in the dark, and was afraid--how
long, though you still love her, would you be faithful to Lucy?  A man
like you, in good health, with an incompletely developed moral sense?"

"We are getting nowhere," I said, determined to keep my temper.

"We are getting to this," said he, "that if a year from today, you and
Lucy still love each other, and have been faithful to each other, and
still want each other--you shall have each other."

"A year?"  I think he smiled at the surprise and disappointment in my
voice.

"During which year," he said, "you will not meet each other except by
accident, and you will not correspond."

I said nothing, but he read my thoughts.

"It isn't fair to you and Lucy?  At least it is fair to me.  Nobody has
thought about me.  I have had to think for myself, and for the
children.  Admit this--if your love stands a year's test you will stand
a far greater chance of happiness than if you ran away together now,
unblessed by the man you had wronged, and unclergied.  Admit this,
too--that if your love doesn't stand the test, then my life has been
ruined for as futile, puerile, misbegotten a passion as ever reared its
head under an honest man's roof.  Admit it!  Admit it."

"I'm not sure that I admit any such thing."

"Then, my dear fellow," he said, "your mental and moral capacity are on
precisely the same plane. . . .  I'm sure you don't want to injure
Lucy.  Give her this chance to straighten out and get untangled.  If
there is any truth in your love for her you will see that this way is
best for her."

"I am thinking of her happiness."

"_Are_ you?"

"She's been very patient, John.  I can't tell you how patient."

"For God's sake don't try to tell me.  Haven't I had enough to bear?"

"I think Lucy won't be willing to wait a year."

"She must be made willing.  You must help.  A year soon passes--soon
passes.  If things then are as they are now, then I shall believe that
your love for each other is strong and fine, and I shall renounce my
claim with a good grace--a good grace."

"If we can't wait a year, John!"

"You mean if you won't?  In that case I shall not feel that Lucy is
entitled to a divorce, or either of you to any money at my hands.
Among the people who are necessary to you and Lucy, a wronged and
upright husband has great power.  If you are such children, such fools,
as not to be willing to stand a test of your love, you will have to be
punished.  It would mean that your passion has nothing to do with what
is understood by love.  You would merely be pointed at and passed up as
a rather well-known young couple with adulterous proclivities."

There was a long, charged silence.

"The law and the prophets are all on your side, John, but----"

"You'll not answer now, please.  You'll think it over.  And don't
forget all the pleasant things that you can do in a year.  There's that
hunting trip in Somaliland you used to talk about so much--there's
London and Paris--wonderful places for a man who's trying to cure
himself of an unlawful love."

"Trying to _cure_ himself?"

"Of course.  Jesting aside, don't you think that what you and Lucy want
to do to Jock and Hurry and me is _wrong_?  Of course you do.  You're
not a devil.  If, by uttering the wish, you could bring it about that
you had never loved Lucy, that she had never fallen out of love with me
and loved you over the heads of her children, that all might be as it
was when you first began to come to our house, wouldn't you utter that
wish?  Of course you would."

He was smiling at me now, very gently and cunningly, and there was, at
the same time, in his eyes an awful pathos.

"Why, yes," I said, "I suppose so."

"Just bear out what I've always maintained," said he; "I've always
maintained that you were a good fellow--at heart."

"Am I to see Lucy again--before the year begins?"

"Is it very necessary?"

"I suppose not.  But----"

"Well, I imagine Lucy will insist on seeing you.  It will be a pity,
but after all she's only a little child in some ways.  It's all going
to be very hard for you both, at first," he said gently.  "So you shall
see each other again--if she says so."

Suddenly he reached out his hand, and I took it.

"Oh," he said, "I needed your help."




XXX

It seemed to me, at the time, that I had showed myself very weak in the
conference in the taxi-cab.  It seemed to me that my acquiescence in
Fulton's proposals reflected on the strength of my love for Lucy.
Perhaps it did.  But in the clearer light of today it seems to me that
to his questions I made the only answers possible; and that only a
demented person could have found serious flaws in the logic of his
position.

When we had parted, I walked for a long time in the most crowded
streets, trying to reconcile myself to the long separation from Lucy,
and to the weakness which I thought I had betrayed in agreeing to it.

Could I endure that separation?  The world would be empty with no Lucy
to go to, no Lucy even to hear from.  I loved her too much to part with
all but the thought of her.  It did not seem possible that the mere
passage of time could dull the edge of my passion.  Yet cold memory
blinked at this very possibility.

I had parted from other women, thinking that thoughts of them must fill
the rest of my life to the exclusion of everything else; only to find
that after a little lapse of time their images faded, and even the
memory of what they had been to me had no power to think.

So might it be with Lucy.  "You know it _might_," said cold memory.
"Don't be a fool--you think it _won't_, but you know it might."

"But," I argued, "this is different.  No other woman ever loved me as
she does.  I may be a fool, but her eyes have spoken, and I know the
truth when I hear it."

"She _does_ love you," said my other self, which I have called cold
memory, "and she did love him, and before his time, others, if only
briefly.  Without the sight of you to feed on, her love will starve and
die.  It is almost always so."

"Almost."

"There are exceptions.  Is it likely, considering your records, that
you and she will be an exception?  It is not likely."

It wasn't.  John Fulton was probably right.  He believed that time
would cure us, and almost the whole of human experience agreed with him.

And wouldn't it be better if we were cured?  Far better.  I had to
admit that.  We ought, indeed, to hope that we should be cured; to help
with all our strength in the effecting of that cure.  And conversely,
Lucy ought to try to return to her affection for John and to her duty.

Suddenly I felt cold and shivery as before undergoing an operation.

Poor little Lucy!  Even now she must be listening to John's ultimatum,
as I had listened, but with this difference; she could not see the
justice and the logic of his position.  She would only see that she was
being cruelly hurt, and thwarted, and disappointed; that she was being
curbed and punished by forces too strong for her to cope with.  And I
pictured her, all reserve gone at last, a tortured child--just sobbing.
It seemed to me that I must go to her or die.  And indeed I went a
little way toward their hotel.  Then I thought, perhaps her sobs would
move him to a change of heart.  Perhaps he will weaken, and let her go.
Upon the strength of this thought I returned to my own hotel, rearing a
blissful edifice of immediate happiness.

I sat in the lobby in a position of reading, a newspaper before my
face; but I did not read.  I was listening for the boy who would page
me to the telephone.  Many names were called in the lobby, but it was
two o'clock before I started at the sound of my own.

Fulton was at the other end of the telephone, not Lucy.  He sounded
very much upset and depressed: "Lucy would like to see you right away,
if you can come round."

"Of course."

We said no more.

Her face was white and tear-stained.  I had no sooner closed the door
of their sitting-room behind me, than she flung herself upon my breast
and burst into a storm of sobs.  After a long time words began to
mingle with the sobs.

"It will kill me.  Why does he want me to die? . . .  I've only got
you. . . .  I want to belong to you--to you."

I talked and I talked, and I soothed and I soothed, but she was sick
with grief and pain and a kind of insane resentment, as if she had gone
through a major operation without an anesthetic.  It would have been
horrible to see anybody suffer so.  And she was the woman I loved!  The
strain was so great upon me that at last my powers of resistance
snapped.  I flung honor to the winds, and became strong with
resolution.  And now my words seemed to pierce her consciousness and to
calm her.

"It's all right, Lucy."  I had to speak loudly at first, as if she was
deaf.  "You shan't suffer like this.  I tell you you shan't--not if I
am damned to hell."

I knew now that she was listening, the sobs became muffled and less
frequent.  "It's you and me against the world now," I said.  "There'll
be no more flimflamming.  I promised John to wait a year.  That doesn't
matter.  A promise made at your expense won't hold. . . .  When is your
husband coming back?"

". . . hour," was all the answer I got. . . .

"Then there's not much time left.  Try to pull yourself together.
We've got to make all our plans right now, and there's not much time."

"You will take me away?"

"Of course.  Now listen.  There's no sense in putting your husband on
his guard.  Let him think that we are both agreed to the year's
probation.  I'll look up things and engage passage.  I'll do that this
afternoon.  Tonight I'll go to Hot Springs to see my father and get
money.  My own balance is very low, unfortunately.  Day after tomorrow
I'll be in town again.  Now, how are we going to communicate?"

I can't say that she was calm now, but she no longer sobbed, and her
mind was in working order again.

"By telephone," she said.  "Every morning when I know John's plans for
the day I'll let you know, and so you'll know when to call me up."

Already the anticipations of our great adventure were bringing back the
color to her cheeks and the sparkle to her eyes.  I smiled at her.
"Don't be too cheerful," I said; "we might get ourselves suspected."

"Couldn't we just tell John that we had decided to go--and go?"

"Better not."

"I hate to deceive and play act and be underhanded."

"So do I--but--Lucy, darling, you're going to trust me in more
important things than this.  I _think_ my way is best.  We don't want
any more agonies and recriminations and scenes.  _Do_ we?"

I took her in my arms and whispered, "It's only a few days now, but I
don't see how I can wait.  I don't see how."

And she burrowed with her face between my cheek and shoulder, and
whispered back, "And I don't see how I can wait."

There was a little space of very tense silence, during which my eyes
roved to the little silver traveling-clock on the mantel, and then I
said in a voice that shook:

"I'd better get out before he comes back."




XXXI

My parents, loafing North, via Hot Springs, were delighted to see me.
As soon as courtesy to my mother made it possible, I got my father
aside, and told him that my real purpose in coming was to raise the
wind.

"I need a lot of money," I said; "sooner or later you'll know why.  So
I may as well tell you."

My father's fine weather-beaten face of a country squire expressed an
interest at once frankly affectionate and tinged with a kind of
detached cynicism.

"I am going to run off with Lucy Fulton," I said.

"I supposed that was it," said my father, without evincing the least
surprise.

"You _did_?"

"Oh, we old fellows put an ear to the ground now and then," he
explained; "and sometimes sleep with one eye open.  Punch's advice to
the young couple about to marry was 'Don't.'  My advice to you and Lucy
is double don't.  Why not give yourselves a year to think it all over,
as John Fulton so sanely and generously suggests?"

Astonishment at my father's superhuman knowledge of events must have
showed in my face.  Still smiling with frank affection, he said, "John
put me in touch with the whole situation before he left Aiken.  The
year of probation was my suggestion to him."

"But Lucy and I can't agree."

"Then you can't.  Do you sail, fly, entrain, or row--and when?"

"We sail, father, next Wednesday."

"A week from today.  I am profoundly sorry.  It's very rough on Fulton,
just when he has closed with this Russian contract and is by way of
getting rich."

"It's our _one_ chance for happiness, father."

He cocked an eyebrow at me.  "And I think it is your one sure road to
misery."

"But you'll see me through?"

"Come to me a year from today.  Tell me that during that time you have
neither seen Lucy nor communicated with her, but that you still love
each other--_then_ I'll see you _through_."

"My dear father, it's so much better for you to put up the money than
for me to borrow it from one of my friends."

"Only because the friend would expect you to pay him back.  How would
you live when his money was gone--keep on borrowing?"

"Why, father, you're acting like a parent in an old-fashioned novel.
Are you threatening to cut me off?"

"My son," said he, "a man who had done well, and who deserved well of
the world came to me and showed me his heart--a heart tormented beyond
endurance with unreturned love, with jealousy, and with despair.  He
threw himself upon my mercy.  And I said that I would help him, with
whatever power of help I have at command.  I don't love that man, my
son.  I love you.  But I am on his side.  All my fighting blood is
aroused when I learn that still another American husband has been
wronged by his wife, and by an idle flirting bachelor.  God keep me
firm in what must seem to you like cruelty in one to whom you have
always turned with the utmost frankness and loyalty in your
emergencies.  And from whom until this moment you have always received
help."

I was appalled and thunderstruck.  After a while I said, "Father, she
sobbed so that I thought she would break a blood vessel.  I couldn't
stand it.  I had to say I would take her away.  If I don't, I think she
will die or kill herself."

My father drew himself up very straight, and looked very handsome and
stern, for a moment.  Then his frame relaxed and his eyes twinkled, and
he said, "Die?  Kill herself?  My grandmother!"

"Oh, father," I cried, "don't!  Don't!  She is all the world to me.
You talk as if----"

"I talk as if she was an excellent example of the modern American wife
in what the papers call 'society.'  And that is precisely what she is.
You know that as well as I do.  Just because you love her is no reason
for pretending that she's a saint and a martyr and the victim of a
grand historical passion.  She _is_ lovely to look at.  She _is_
charming to be with.  But that doesn't prevent her from being a bad
little egg."

"Father," I said, as gently as I could, "I love her with all my heart.
Why, she's like a little child, and she's being so hurt.  You've never
refused me anything.  Help me to make her happy."

"When she has gotten over her fancy for you, when Fulton has plenty of
money for her to spend, she will be as happy as she deserves to
be--until she makes herself miserable again by indulging in some affair
similar to this.  Now, my dear boy, go back to her, tell her that you
haven't enough money to elope on and no way of getting it.  Tell her
also that if at the end of a year's probation you and she still want
each other, nobody will oppose you, and that you, on the day of your
marriage to her, will be made a rich man in your own right."

"Father, I _want_ her so."

"And I _want_ champagne so," said my father.  "And the accursed doctor
has forbidden it.  Do I torture myself?  Not at all.  I turn for solace
to an excellent bottle of Scotch whiskey.  And this has at least the
effect of making me want the champagne less.  Don't get confused
between psychology and physiology.  If I were in your boots I'd slip
over to Paris--and drink Scotch whiskey."

So I went back to New York, and, as soon as possible, I talked to Lucy
over the telephone, and told her about the interview with my father.

"But," I finished, "we'll do whatever you say.  We can't very well land
in Europe without any money; but I've still got most of the passage
money; and if you say so, we can stay right in this country and live on
that for a few weeks, while I try to get a job.  I could borrow some
money, but it would have to be paid back.  Oh, Lucy, this is such a
humiliating confession to make, but what _can_ I do?"

"Everybody is against us," she said, "everything--I don't suppose
there's any use struggling."

She sounded cold and tired.

"I suppose," she went on slowly, "we'll have to wait, the way John
says.  Shall we?"

"You say it, Lucy.  Don't make me say it."

"So we'll wait," she said; "not see each other, and not communicate.  I
don't see how I can stand it, but I suppose I can. . . .  A whole
year--a whole year!"

"At the end of it, my darling, all that there is in the world for me,
nobody will stand in our way; there'll be plenty of money and a long
life before us."

"Listen . . . all the long time will you take care of yourself?"

"Yes, Lucy."

"And not notice any other ladies?" . . .

"Lucy . . . let's take a chance on what I have got."

A long silence.  Then: "Oh, no.  I suppose John's right.  Everybody's
right. . . .  But"--there was a valiant ring in her voice, "we'll show
'em they were wrong and cruel.  Won't we?"

"Yes, Lucy."

"Good-by, then, and God bless and keep you."

"It's only for a year, Lucy."

I heard a short, dry sob.  It was mine.




XXXII

I don't know how I got through the next ten days.  After three of them
had passed I began to fear a mental breakdown, because my mind kept
working all by itself, without orders.  If I wanted to think forward,
to the end of the probationary year, I couldn't.  Always I kept
thinking I ought to have done, or said, so and so.  I ought to have
been firmer.  I was always reviving that drive in the taxicab with
Fulton, or that last interview with my father.  If my love was strong
and fine I ought never to have knuckled under.  They had had too easy a
time with me.  I had played into their hands, and they had treated me
like a child.  From pure humiliation I could not sleep at night.

And what was Lucy doing?  How was she bearing it?  What sort of life
was she leading, the poor, abused child?  The world seemed to have all
joined against me in a conspiracy of silence.  Nobody mentioned Lucy in
my hearing.  Although the same city held us, until they moved to
Stamford, I had no accidental glimpse of her.  Our last talk had not
been in the least satisfactory.  It seemed to me that I must see her
once more to preach courage and hope.  During those first ten nights I
hardly slept at all.  Sometimes I would picture out Lucy's whole course
of life during the next few months.  And I imagined that, grown at last
utterly indifferent through suffering, she might drift back into her
former relations with Fulton, if only because he loved her so much, and
no one can keep on saying no forever.  Such imaginings had sometimes
the vividness of scenes actually witnessed and threw me into tortures
of jealousy.

Not until a short period of the tenth day was Lucy ever actually out of
my mind.  I had been sitting in a chair staring at a newspaper, all my
nerves tense and hungry, when suddenly they seemed to have relaxed and
to have been fed.  The skin of my face no longer seemed tightly
stretched.  I felt as if I had waked from a refreshing sleep; but this
was not the case.  I had simply, without deliberation, forgotten Lucy
for half an hour, and been making agreeable personal plans for the year
of probation.

"Good Lord," I thought; "has living without her, already begun to be
easier?"

It had.  I began to take pleasure in seeing my friends; to look forward
to the Newport season, to the international tennis, to the golf
championship at Ekwanok, to the thousand and one things that make for
the happiness of a butterfly's summer.

After a month of Newport, days passed with only hurried thoughts of
Lucy.  Chance mention of her name gave me no uneasiness; they affected
my heart, like sudden trumpets, but I knew that my face had become an
inscrutable mask, and that my voice was in perfect control.  Those who
had thought that there was something between us began to think
differently.

And then, after days of suspense, surmise, and real consternation, the
legs of civilization seemed to have been knocked from under it, and the
greatest nations of Europe flew at each other.

Now indeed there seemed an easy way to the year's end.  The Germans
rolled through Belgium and into France, outraging humanity.  It looked
as if they would roll right into Paris, and sow salt where the world's
first city had stood.

I rushed up to Bar Harbor to tell my parents that I was going to France
to enlist in the foreign legion.  Oh, how swiftly the time would fly, I
thought.  That I might get crippled or killed never occurred to me.  I
thought only that having failed at everything else, I must obviously be
possessed of military genius.  I pictured myself climbing the bloody
ladder of promotion to high command and winning the gratitude of that
country which next to my own I love the most.

My mother, to whom I first broached the news, did not cry or make a
fuss.  But I saw that I had distressed her terribly.

"It isn't our war," she said; "and what use will one more enlisted man
be to _them_?  And besides, my dear, _only_ sons are always the first
ones to get hurt; only sons and men whose families are dependent upon
them.  But . . ." and here she gave me a wonderful look . . . "I think
I know why you want to go.  And that makes me very proud."

"I think you _do_ know, Mumsey," I said.  "It's because we'd rather get
hurt trying to do something worth while, than go on the way we've
always gone on, amounting to nothing, and disappointing everybody."

Then she got me in her arms, and cried over me a little.

My father, as usual, took my decision with the most good-natured
indifference.

"Fine experience," he said, "for any man that's free to go.  Makes me
wish I were younger and without obligations.  Still I can enjoy the
music at the swimming-pool with a free conscience; because I'm sending
over all the money I can spare. . . .  How did you reach the conclusion
that you could go?"

"_Could_ go?"

"Yes.  Of course you've no complication in your life that should keep
you from going.  Well, I'm glad of that."

"It seems to me that if anyone is free to go, I am."

He smiled upon me, somewhat too playfully for my comfort, and shook his
head slowly.  "So Fulton and I were right about the year's probation.
I'm delighted.  How soon did you and Lucy find out that absence
_doesn't_ make the heart grow fonder?"

"Oh," I said, "it isn't _that_.  What has that to do with it?  There's
a year to be got over, and fighting's the most agreeable and the
quickest way I can think of just now."

My father looked disappointed.

"I hoped you had got over caring.  And--you haven't?"

For a few moments I met his eyes.  But only for a few moments.  He
didn't laugh.  "I'm glad," he said simply.

I tried to explain exactly how I felt.

"Of course not seeing her or hearing from her--why--you see--but when I
do see her it will all come right back.  I _know_ that."

He smiled a little grimly.  "Normally," he said, "there are years of
pleasant living before you.  But not if you get yourself killed--not if
you lose an arm or a leg, or come back with half your face shot off,
and your one remaining ear stone deaf from cannon fire.  But anyway I'm
glad the Fulton business is over.  Your love has cooled and, even if
Lucy's hasn't--there could never be anything between you now?"

He was speaking sarcastically.  He went on in the same vein: "The year
over--even if you found that Lucy was still wrapped up in you, that her
happiness depended on you, you would not, of course, feel that you were
under any obligation to _pretend_ that you still cared for her and to
do a gentleman's best to make her happy."

"I get your point, father," I said; "and of course if she still cares,
I must try to make good.  Of course I must."

"Suppose," he said, no longer sarcastically, but very earnestly,
"suppose the year is up.  Suppose Lucy still cares, and as a reward for
her faithfulness and her patience there is nothing but your grave
'somewhere in France'?  This is why I asked you if you _could_ go."

"I'll look like a fool," I said.  "I've told several people that I was
surely going."

"That's too bad," he said; "but you'll have to stand it.  You have a
good reputation for physical pluck, though, and nobody will say
anything very nasty.  And as for us," his voice rang a little, "who are
on the inside, we know that it is braver of you to stay than to go."

"Anyway," I said, "if she--if Lucy--doesn't care any more--why I can go
then."

"You can go _then_.  But it seems to me that a man of education is
wasted in a trench.  That, however, is a matter of taste."




XXXIII

It was not until the early winter that I saw Lucy.  It was by accident.
I sat just behind her at a musical comedy.  She was with her husband.
They looked very prosperous.  They seemed to be comradely enough.
Mostly I saw only the back of her head; once, her full profile; and
then at last she turned half around in her seat, and saw me.  I don't
know what I did.  I think I smiled, half rose to my feet, and lifted my
hand as if to take off a hat--which of course I didn't have on.  She
nodded, and smiled brightly; but her eyes had that expression of
praying that I have so often mentioned.

It was long since I had thought of her for more than a few minutes at a
time.  But now my heart began to beat furiously and all my sleeping
love for her waked in my heart.

And now she was telling her husband _who_ was sitting just behind them.

I went out after the act, intending to stay out.  But Fulton followed
so quickly that he caught me just as I was leaving the theater.
"Hello, Archie," he said.

"Hello, John.  How are you all?"

"Pretty well," he said; "and you?"

"Pretty well.  Cartridges still looking up?"

"Yes.  We're doubling the capacity of the plant for the second time
since the war started.  Have a drink?"

We walked to the nearest saloon.  "We heard that you were going to
enlist."

"I did think of it, and then I got cold feet."

"Like hell you did!"

"Well, reasons against it were found for me.  Reasons which I ought to
have thought of for myself.  Here's how."

"Santé!" said John.  A moment later, "Going to Aiken?" he asked.

"Why, it depends."

There was an awkward silence.

"Lucy is very anxious," he then said, "to open our house again this
winter."

"As a matter of fact," said I glibly, "I've more than half decided on
Palm Beach."

A bell rang shrilly.

"Time to go back," he said.

"One moment, John.  I'm not going back--of course.  How is Lucy?"

"Oh, pretty well," he said stiffly; "I think she'll come through all
right.  Had a tough time for a while."

Upon that he hurried off to rejoin her, and I turned my face once more
to the bar, and gave an order.  I felt as if I had been through a
terrible ordeal.  I was all in.

From now on I heard more often of the Fultons, for they were leading a
conspicuously gay life.  Somebody had loaned them a house for six
weeks, and by all accounts Lucy was making money fly.

I saw her in the distance three times.  Twice to bow and exchange
smiles.  The other time she didn't see me.  Seeing her meant two or
three days of torture; then her image and desirability would begin to
fade once more.  But at least no other woman interested me in the least.

Presently they went to Aiken.  A few days later I entrained for Palm
Beach; but found that I could not stand the place or the pace for long
periods of time, and fell into the habit of commuting with New York.
It was the war, I think, which made me so restless.  It seemed to me
that the night had not been well slept, nor the most promising day well
begun until I had read the headlines in the papers.  My hot wish to
fight as a soldier had cooled.  More and more I wanted to be of
service, but in some way which seemed to me more imaginative and
intelligent.  But I could not hit on the way.  I must go to Paris, I
thought, then surely the inspiration of helpfulness would come.  But I
could not very well go to Paris until the year of probation was up.  If
Lucy still cared--well, it would be easy enough for me to care.  I knew
now that her physical presence was sufficient to make me care--at any
given moment.  "Oh," I thought, "I can't lose.  Either I'll go to Paris
and be useful, or I'll begin a new life with the girl I love who loves
me."

Late in February Harry Colemain joined me at Palm Beach.  He had
wintered at Aiken, and I had all the Aiken news from him.  The place
had never been so full--people who usually went abroad, etc.,
etc.--some delightful new people, about all the old standbys.  It was
not a sporting winter.  Most of the men were feeling too poor for high
stakes.  Would I believe it, the golf course was crowded all day?  The
new hotel?  It looked as if it was going to be a success.  The clubs
were having the biggest year in their history.  The golf club would be
able to reset the green with Bermuda grass.  Some of the holes had come
through the summer splendidly.  Some were better than they ever had
been, others were worse, etc., etc.

I asked him about this and about that.  At last I said: "How are the
Fultons?"

"Well, John comes and goes.  He seems to have gotten back his health.
The kids are fine . . . of course they are not what they _were_ as a
family.  That's obvious.  But Lucy seems to have come to her senses.
She was very gay at first.  Then she went round looking--well, she
looked frightened.  Lots of people noticed it.  It was as if the doctor
had told her she had lung trouble.  She quit riding and dropped out of
everything--except very quiet little dinners.  Then she got very
interested in her yard, and had experts over from Berckman's and did a
lot of new planting . . ."

"But why did she look frightened?  There wasn't anything the matter,
was there?"

"Well, you know the trouble she made for John, wouldn't be his wife and
all that?  Well, he seems to have won her round to his way of looking
at compromise--or she got more or less fond of him again.  I don't
know."

"I don't quite understand what you're driving at."

"You _don't_?  Why, she's to have a baby.  And everybody who knew there
had been trouble says, 'Thank God for that.'"

My hands began to tremble so that I had to hide them under the table at
which we were sitting.

"Bully, isn't it?" said Harry; fortunately he had turned his head to
look at two very lovely young women who had strolled into the palm
garden.

"Bully," I said.

"See those two, Archie?" he said in a guarded voice.

"Sure I see them."

"One of 'em's the famous Mrs. Paxton, who----"

"I know."

"Met her last autumn at----"  He rose suddenly to his feet, and
advanced to meet the two women.  "Hello, there!  Glad to see you."

Mrs. Paxton's cool demure face broke into a delighted smile.

"Why, Harry!" she exclaimed.  "Miss Coles, let me introduce Mr.
Colemain."

A moment later Harry had dragged me forward (literally) and I was being
introduced.  Miss Coles had very beautiful brown eyes, very white
teeth, and a very deep dimple.

"Why," said Harry, "shouldn't all you good people dine with me?"

"Why not?" exclaimed Mrs. Paxton.

I started to say that I had a pressing engagement, discovered Miss
Coles' exceedingly beautiful eyes lifted to mine, and saw upon her face
an expression of the most alluring mockery, and so--"Why not?" said I.

We had a long and a merry dinner.  I felt defiant of life, a man
without responsibilities, who owed nothing and to whom nothing was owed.

After dinner we went strolling in the moonlight.  Harry and Mrs. Paxton
strolled in one direction, Miss Coles and I in another.

Miss Coles looked very beautiful, and she wore an expression of
childlike proprietorship which was very becoming to her.

"Why are you _Miss_ Coles?" I asked.

"I'm not--really."  Her voice was little more than a whisper.  "It's
more fun to be _Miss_ while the divorce is pending.  I'm from
California--nobody knows me here."

"And you're getting a divorce?"

She nodded slowly.  And then with a flash of engaging frankness: "No,
I'm not," she said; "_he_ is."

"Oh!"

We strolled on in silence for a moment, and then as if by agreement
came to a sudden halt and looked at each other.

Then she laughed softly, her head tilted back, and her round bare
throat showing very white in the moonlight.

I threw my cigar into a bed of scarlet flowers.




XXXIV

I had passed through one of those stages of mental and spiritual
depression during which a man does not even ask forgiveness of himself
for any of his acts.  If "Miss" Coles had wished me to marry her I
would have done so; but the suggestion was never made by either of us.
We parted, a little gloomily, but not unhappily, and before there was
even a breath of scandal.  It was just after she heard that her husband
had secured his decree against her.  That hard cold fact, that proof of
things which no woman likes to have proved against her, seemed to sober
her, you may say, and bring her up with a round turn.  From now on she
was going to be good, she said.  No.  I mustn't blame myself for
anything.  Everything was her fault.  Everything always had been.  I
was ashamed too?  She was glad of that.  We'd always be good friends.
Why, yes!  From a friend, yes--if he was really as rich as all that.
It would help her to look around, to get her bearings for the new and
better life.  It had been a frightfully expensive winter.  It had been
sweet of me to keep her rooms so full of flowers.  She loved
flowers. . . .  Oh, nobody was hurt much, and nobody but us anyway.

Reform is a great thing.  I learned from Harry that the very night I
left Palm Beach she lost all the money I had "conveyed" to her at
gambling, and only the other day she ran off with a man I know very
well indeed--and a married man at that.  I hope she won't talk too much
in the first few weeks of her infatuation.

I reached New York feeling like the cad that I suppose I am.  But it
was pretty bitter hearing about Lucy, and the baby.  At least I had
kept faith longer than she had.  I wondered if she once more loved her
husband.  Did I hope so?  Yes, of course, in the same way that you
express conventional horror when you hear of the latest famine in China.

Well, for better for worse, I was a free man again.  Free--if it is
free to be tormented by remorse, to feel cheap, futile, a waster--a
thing of no account to anyone.  If this is freedom it isn't good to be
free.  No man is happy who comes and goes as he pleases.  There must be
responsibilities to shoulder, and ties which bind him.  If he lives for
himself alone and for what, in the first glad bursts of unattachment he
imagines to be pleasure, a day will come when the acid of self-contempt
begins to corrode him.

I determined to go to France, via London for I needed clothes, and if I
had a definite place it was to volunteer as a nurse in the American
hospital.  So I took out a passport, and engaged my passage.

A few days later, while crossing from Madison Avenue to Fifth, I found
myself suddenly face to face with Hilda.  She averted her head and
tried to pass without being recognized, but I called her name, and she
stopped short and turned back.

"It's just to ask how you are getting on, Hilda."

"I've just left Mrs. Fulton," she said; "I'm going home."

"Home?"

"England."

"You don't mean it!  But why?"

"Oh," she said, "it's all gotten on my nerves--the war.  I want to
help.  I've saved enough money to take me over, and to keep me if I
have to look round a bit."

"I'm going over, too," I said.

"To help?"

"Oh, Hilda, I don't know.  I _hope_ so."

"Oh, I hope so, too, Mr. Mannering."

"But, Hilda, I want to talk to you.  There may not be another chance.
Where are you going _now_?"

"I'm staying with friends till I sail."

"Well, tell them you're going for a motor ride with another friend, and
to dine somewhere along the Sound, will you?"

"Oh, I couldn't, not very well."

"Hilda," I said, "there are so many things I want to know, and only you
can tell me about Stamford--about last winter--is it true that Mrs.
Fulton is going----?"

"Yes, she is."

We were silent for a moment.  Then she spoke.  "Do you still----?"

"No, I don't _think_ so, Hilda."

"Then I'll come--if you want me to, and think I ought.  But if any of
your friends----?"

"Do I have to tell you that you are one of the smartest looking people
I know, Hilda?  They'll think you are the Marchioness of Amber----"  I
glanced at her red hair, which did have amber lights in it, "and
they'll envy.  So do come.  Will you?"

I borrowed a fine new racing runabout, and at six o'clock called for
her at the address she had given me.  She had gotten herself up with
the most discreet good taste, and looked perfectly charming.  She must
have read the approval in my glance, for the color flew to her cheeks,
and she looked triumphantly pleased.

"Going to be warm enough?"

"Yes, thank you."

"It's mighty nice of you to come."

"Oh, when you held out half an excuse to me, I couldn't help coming."

"What's your idea--for England?  To be a nurse--or what?"

"A nurse, sir."

"I'm not _sir_, please.  I'm going to be a nurse, too.  I told you once
that I'd always be your friend.  And a friend isn't ever sir.  So don't
do it again."

"I'll not," she said.

Presently I began to ask her about the Fultons.  At first her answers
were short and unsatisfactory, but presently she began to warm to the
topic.

Stamford?  Oh, it had been awful.  The house had never been divided in
its allegiance, but nobody could have remained callous to Mrs. Fulton's
grief.  Meals were especially awful.  Mr. and Mrs. Fulton tried to make
conversation.  Sometimes just when it seemed as if she was going to be
a little cheerful--phist! her eyes would fill with tears, and she would
bolt from the room.  At such times Mr. Fulton's face was a study of
pity for her and grief for them both.  She was good to the children; no
question about that.  Sometimes she grabbed them into her arms and
hugged them too hard.  It was as if she was trying by sheer physical
effort to give them back what she had taken away from them.

Sometimes one thought one heard little Hurry crying very softly and
bitterly, and it would turn out to be Mrs. Fulton, locked in her
bedroom.  Pressure of business, success, kept Mr. Fulton going.
Sometimes the two tried to talk things over.  But it was an irritating,
mosquitoey house.  Always their voices ended by rising to the point
where they could be heard all over the ramshackle paper-thin dwelling.

It stood on a lawn that sloped to tidal waters, very ugly and muddy at
low tide.  A long gangway reached to a float for boats; here the water
was deep enough to dive into at half tide.  Often at dawn, if the tide
was right, and you happened to be awake, you might see Mr. Fulton
descend the wet lawn in wrapper and bare feet for the swim that seemed
to make up to him for his sleepless nights.  You knew that he was in
trouble by the way that he took to the water.  It's always a little
shivery at dawn, but he never hesitated.  His wrapper was coming off by
the time he reached the float--it was too far off to mind watching
him--and into the water he'd go, head first, as quick as he could get
in.  It was almost as if he was afraid he'd die before he got to it.
He was a fine swimmer, but oftenest he just lay about, sometimes with
his face under.  Then he looked like a drowned man.  Sometimes he went
in earlier than dawn.  She had seen phosphorescence off the float in
the black night, and heard the clean, quiet splash of his dive.

Once he stayed in so long that Mrs. Fulton called to him from her
window, "_Please_ come in, John, I'm frightened."  Oh, yes, she wanted
to be free from him, perhaps she still does, but not that way.  If
anything had happened to him, if he had taken his life, for instance,
one imagined that in the first agonies of remorse she would have taken
hers too.

It must have been terrible for her--at first--never hearing from _you_,
not knowing where you were, or what you were doing, whether you were
sick or well.  Of course she wanted you to be happy, but with _her_.
It would have been a comfort to know that you were suffering as much as
she was.  And she couldn't know.

She had a calendar in her room.  She kept tab on it of the days as they
passed, beginning with the first day of the probationary year.  She'd
draw a line through each day--each day when she went to bed, and hoped
that the day was really over.  She had her bad, wicked, black,
sleepless nights, too.  You could always tell by how late she was in
the morning.  She had a child's happy faculty of being able to make up
for lost sleep.  Well, when the day seemed over she drew a line through
it.  One day the chambermaid came below stairs (it was the first we
knew of it) and propounded a conundrum.  "When is a day not a day?"  No
one could guess.  So she said, "When Mrs. Fulton doesn't draw a line
through it."  So it seemed that the forty-ninth day of her probation
had not been a passage of time.  Time had stood still.  Why?  Well, in
the afternoon Mrs. Fulton had gone as crew with a young gentleman who
owned a knockabout, and they had got wet to the skin, and had won a leg
on some pennant or other after a close, well-sailed race.  Mrs. Fulton
had come home about dark, drenched, blooming, buoyant, and chattering
about the events of the afternoon.  She had had her first heart-felt
good time of the probationary year.  For once, time had not dragged.
Time had stood excitingly, exhilaratingly still.  She had forgotten to
scratch off the day.

Things went better after that.  Twice a week, rain or shine, she was
crew of the young gentleman's knockabout.  Often they went for practice
sails.  Sometimes they took Jock and Hurry.  In hot weather they wore
bathing suits.  The young gentleman?  He was to be a Yale senior, come
autumn.  He rowed on the Yale crew.  My! you should have seen his arms
and legs--so strong and so brown, so becoming to his dark blue bathing
suit.  His hair was so sunburnt that it looked like molasses candy.  He
could stay in the water all day and fetch from the bottom anything that
was thrown in for him.  Sometimes he came to meals.  He was very quiet
and shy.  He blushed a good deal.  And there was a weight on his mind.
He had a condition to make up--political economy.  He could hold Jock
and Hurry out at arm's length, one in each hand, but the weight on his
mind was too much for him.  Every time the Fultons mentioned it to him,
he groaned.  He was truly comical when he groaned.  Toward autumn he
began to get gloomy.  Summer was over, college would open.  No more
sails; no more Mrs. Fulton.  Below stairs one knew that he was in love
with Mrs. Fulton.  How?  Well, when one let him out at the front door,
he always drew in a sigh that he held all the way to the front gate.
One waited to hear him let it out.  It would have blown out a gas jet
across a good-sized room.  There were other ways of telling.  And since
the forty-ninth day that was not a day, no one had heard Mrs. Fulton
crying.

He came to say good-by.  One never knew just what happened.  They were
in the front hall.  Suddenly the front door must have opened.  Fulton
must have come in, for suddenly one heard his laugh.  It was the
strangest laugh in the world, full of joy, full of laughter, and full
of scorn.

He saw the young gentleman to the front gate.  He clapped the young
gentleman on the back, and said (the parlor maid had heard); "Don't
worry!  It's all right!  Don't make a mountain out of a mole-hill!" and
then in a different voice, "Bless you, my son!"

Then he had come back to the house still laughing, and one heard him
shouting, "Where are you, Lucy?  Come here!  The game's up now!  You
must see that for yourself!  Don't be a goat!"

Did she see for herself?  Oh, yes.  She hadn't loved the young
gentleman, not really.  She had liked him enough to get over you being
a life and death matter to her.  That was all.  She had liked him
enough to let him kiss her at parting.  That must have been what Mr.
Fulton had caught them at.

"But, Hilda," I interrupted, "why didn't he tell me that it was all
over, when I saw him in New York--just before Christmas?"

"Well, they couldn't know how you felt, could they?  Maybe he wanted
you to have your full year.  Maybe he thought you'd fall down as she
had, and that she'd hear of it and that it would be a lesson to her.
How should _I_ know?"

She told me more.  The very night of the young gentleman's departure,
late, a telegram had come to Mr. Fulton.  She, Hilda, had gone down to
the front door, signed for the telegram, and carried it to Mr. Fulton's
room.  He did not answer to her first light knock; nor to a first or
second loud knock.  She pushed the door open.  The room was full of
moonlight.  Mr. Fulton's bed was empty.  It had not been slept in.

Hilda tiptoed to the end of the corridor, laid the telegram on the
floor in front of Mrs. Fulton's door, knocked very firmly, and the
moment she heard someone stirring within, turned upon her heel and fled.

So much for the average strength of those grand passions upon which so
many marriages are wrecked!

"Are they happy now, Hilda--the way they used to be?"

Oh no, not happy, fairly contented.  She would never love him the way