"Mercy on us!" she exclaimed, when her son came bounding through a gap
of the cactus hedge.  "Praise be to Allah thou art still alive and
well!  I have kept a bowl of lentils hot for thee, which is more than
thy deserts, O shameless one!  O my despair, ever to have borne such a
son!  When--when wilt thou learn discretion?  Why didst thou express a
hope that thy Emîr would foul the beard of the Father of Ice, and that
in the hearing of the son of Costantîn?  Here have the ladies been
again to-day, railing against thee as the worst of malefactors.  By
Allah, I can keep thee here no longer.  Yet whither canst thou go,
unhappy boy, for now I learn that thou hast angered thy Emîr?  Thy
uncle, the respectable Abdullah, has been here in great trouble for
thee.  He has this day returned from Beyrût, that great, splendid city,
and I thought that he had come to tell me of its progress and high
fashion.  But no, it was for thee he came.  In the town, on landing he
had heard the tidings of thy downfall.  Why hast thou hid the truth
from me these many days?  I could have fallen lifeless when I heard him
say that thou art nothing, that Elias is the friend of thy Emîr.
Whence came that money thou didst show me?  Was it stolen?  Tell me, O
unfortunate!  I am thy loving mother, and shall not condemn thee."

Iskender laughed at her concern.

"It is true," he said, "that my Emîr did for a time prefer Elias.  But
now, praise to Allah, all is well again!"  And he proceeded to relate
what had happened that morning in the orange-garden.

"May Allah reward our father Mîtri!" his mother exclaimed.  "But I
would not have thee go too far in friendship with him, on account of
the missionaries, who may yet forgive thee.  To-day when I condemned
thy conduct fiercely, their hearts, I could see, were touched with pity
for thee.  Now if I drive thee forth, and vow never more to look on
thee, there is a chance they will forgive thee quite.  It is certain
that they do not love Asad as they loved thee.  By Allah, I should like
to see my son a mighty clergyman.  Then I would wear fine Frankish hats
in their despite; and thou couldst wed the Sitt Hilda, though she is
old for thee.  To-morrow, therefore, seek some new abode. . . .  Allah
cut short thy life!  Thy wits are wandering.  Is the matter of my
speech so light, O misbegotten?"

Iskender, who was half-way through the mess of lentils, protested with
his mouth full that he had heard and would obey.  But his tone was so
indifferent as to increase his parent's wrath.  To one deep in thought
of the valley of gold, her words seemed trash.  She stormed unceasingly
till they had both lain down to rest and the night-light was burning
fitfully on the ground between them.  Then at last came peace; she
snored aloud; while Iskender thought of the valley full of gold, whose
true existence had been miraculously revealed to him, and then of the
career as a church painter offered to him by the priest Mîtri.
Anything was better than to be the fatted slave of the missionaries,
who, he felt sure, hated him.  His desire was to be loved.

In the morning early he returned to the house of Mîtri.  As he reached
it a noise of chanting in the little church informed him that the
priest was at his duties; so he squatted down in the shade of the
ever-green oak, and waited till the service should be ended.  Presently
a group of brown-legged boys came tumbling out, smiting one another and
shouting the minute they had passed the threshold.  A few girls
followed, all discreetly veiled, in one of whom he recognised Nesîbeh;
and then some older people, turbaned men and white-veiled women, among
them one blind sheykh with hands outstretched; and finally, after an
interval, the priest himself.  Iskender sprang to him, and kissed his
hand.

"I seek a boon of thee, O lord of kindness!"

"In the name of Allah!"  Mîtri seized the suppliant's hands and pressed
them to his heart.  "Say on; I listen."

Iskender told him how the hatred of the missionaries had reached such a
pitch that his mother was obliged to cast him out.  He had come to the
priest, his best friend, for advice in this dilemma, thinking that he
might recommend him to a lodging.

"Now may Allah house thee!" said Mîtri with a thoughtful frown.  "Allah
knows thy mother does great wrong thus to cast thee abroad, a young
unmarried man; unless she wishes to debauch thee utterly.  For who but
the worst of characters would take thee in, to share the intimacy of
their wives and daughters, except it might be as a traveller, and for a
single night?  Wallah, I am at a loss how to advise thee.  There is not
at present among us an old childless couple, nor yet a bachelor, whose
dwelling thou couldst share.  By the Holy Gospel, I see no resort for
thee except a khan. . . .  I have it!"--his perplexity was lightened
suddenly, and he raised his eyes, till then downcast.  "Thou shalt
lodge at the hotel of Mûsa el Barûdi, where thy patron dwells.  Mûsa is
of my congregation, and he loves me well; while, as for Selîm and Daûd,
his two sons, I taught them their duties and chastised their youthful
conduct.  Wait here, and I will write a word to them, how thou art
tired of the vain beliefs of the Brûtestânts, and wouldst tread the
path of Salvation."

"Write all that pleases thee, our father!"

Iskender waited to receive the missive; and then, with blessings on the
priest and all belonging to him, sped with it to the hotel.  To be near
his sweet Emîr both night and day fulfilled his dearest wish.

The sons of Mûsa had not yet risen when he entered the hall; and the
black doorkeeper, accustomed to see him come in every day without leave
or question, betrayed astonishment when asked to bear a letter to them.

"To which of the twain?" he asked, with a dubious grin.

"By Allah, that I care not; for see, by the superscription, the message
is to both alike."

"I will show it to the Khawâjah Selîm," the negro muttered, and went
off, holding the paper wrapped in his white robe.

He returned almost immediately, on his heels Selîm the son of Mûsa, who
cried gladly:

"Thou art welcome and thrice welcome, O my dear!  The praise to Allah,
and good luck to thee!  Our father Mîtri must be mad with joy; for thou
art the first that ever came from them to him, while they have stolen
many from his flock, though not of late.  The Holy Orthodox Church
invites no proselyte, so the more credit to the man who comes to her.
She resembles some old-fashioned, quiet merchant, too dignified to
compete with Frankish cheapjacks.  Our house is thy house; dwell here
as long as is convenient to thee, and may Allah preserve thee always."

Iskender murmured his thanks, standing reverently, with hands folded
away and eyes downcast.  Then, when Selîm had gone back to his
dressing, he crossed his legs upon the pavement of the hall and mused
on his good fortune, praising Allah.

Elias came into the hall and greeted him.

"I have news for thee," he whispered; and Iskender, remembering the
Valley of the Kings, gave eager ear; but just then Selîm, the son of
Mûsa, called from an inner room:

"Iskender is a convert, O Elias.  He returns to the bosom of the
Church.  The praise to Allah!"

"Is it true?" cried Elias, starting back and staring at the youth.
Perceiving no denial, he embraced him fondly, crying: "Our Lord bless
thee!  Allah knows I always loved the soul of thee, though the
Brûtestânt stank in my nose; now from this day forth I am thy brother.
By the Most High, thou shalt lodge nowhere but in my house."

"May Allah reward thy hospitality, O Elias," cried again the son of
Mûsa.  "The honour thou wouldst have is mine already."

"A pity!" sighed Elias, seeming really disappointed.

But the next minute, hearing steps upon the stairs, he brightened up,
and said in Iskender's ear:

"The Emîr descends!  Ah, I assure thee by the Holy Gospel, I have news
for both of you."

The Frank stayed only long enough for salutations, then passed again
from sight, going to breakfast.  But though they were long alone,
without a listener, Elias refused to impart the matter of his news,
bidding Iskender wait till the Emîr gave audience.

"Ah, I assure thee, news of price!" he repeated, hugging himself, with
big round eyes of mystery.




CHAPTER XIV

The news, when Elias did at last reveal it, was simply another of his
wondrous stories.  The Frank, however, listened to it with some
interest as the three walked out together.

In the watches of the night Elias had remembered how years ago a
muleteer, by name Mansur, had brought a piece of gold to show him
secretly.  This man had been upon a journey to the Wady Mûsa with some
English gentlemen of the kind who seek adventure in wild places.  Out
in the desert, far away from any house, he had the misfortune to be
separated from his company, and wandered alone for three days in vain
attempts to rejoin them.  At dusk one evening he found himself in a
wild ravine, its cliff-walls honeycombed with caves, in one of which he
chose to pass the night.  No sooner had he lain down than he imagined
that he heard unearthly music; but by dint of repeating the name of
Allah the trouble left him, and he went to sleep.

In the middle of the night he woke with a start, to find the cavern
lighted up, and full of people talking angrily.  By their pointed ears,
domed heads, and slanting eyes he knew them for the dwellers
underground.  Fear paralysed and kept him silent; which was lucky, for
he learnt presently that their wrath concerned him.  They were there,
it seemed, to guard a treasure-ground against intruders; and were
debating in what manner they should kill him, when Mansur, who was a
Christian, lifted up his voice and cried:

"In the name of Allah, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit!"  They vanished
instantly with horrid yells.

In the morning, when Mansur arose and went to the cave-mouth, he saw
that the bottom of the ravine was strewn with lumps of gold.  In
delight he ran and gathered of the stuff as much as his bags would
hold, and then set forth.  But he had forgotten to give thanks to Allah
for the burden; and in consequence of the omission it was not made
light to him.  For relief he was forced to thrust a hand into his
placket, to pull out lump after lump and drop it on the road, till
there remained but one piece, small as compared with the rest, but
still enough to make his fortune in the world of common men.

Allah blessed his journey, and he reached his home at last.  There,
after a consultation with his wife, he resolved to submit the nugget to
some man renowned for probity and wisdom.  He brought it, therefore, to
Elias, who believed it to be gold, but, loth to trust his judgment,
advised Mansur to show it to a certain jeweller of high repute, as well
for virtue as for craftsmanship; and Mansur did so.  The jeweller asked
Mansur to leave it with him for a day or two, that he might apply
certain tests, and when asked for a receipt, appeared so hurt, called
so loudly upon Allah and the neighbourhood to attest his honesty, and
in all respects bore himself so nobly, that Mansur retired convinced
that he had left his treasure in clean hands.

But when he returned after two days, that jeweller informed him that it
was not gold.  Mansur then asked for it to be returned, saying that if
it were only brass it would be worth preserving.  The merchant replied
that he had thrown it away, and told the muleteer to go and hunt for it
upon the rubbish-heaps outside the city gate.  Mansur then called him
thief.  The jeweller cried "Ya Muslimin!" and roused the neighbours,
who fell upon Mansur, and beat him soundly, leaving him for dead.  But
before he lost consciousness he heard the jeweller exhorting the
multitude not to spare him, for that he had stolen a lump of fine gold
from the Sultan's treasury.

"What you think of that?" said Elias, when he had made an end.

"A truly wonderful story," rejoined the Emîr.

Their walk had ended on the sea-beach, where they now, all three, lay
stretched upon the sand.  The Emîr, with his straw hat tipped over his
eyes, threw a stone from time to time into the azure ripples, as dark
in contrast with their foam as ink on paper.  There was a moment's
silence.  Iskender whispered in his lord's ear:

"It is all a lie.  He made it up last night."

"There may be some truth in it; you never know!" replied the Emîr in
the same tone.  He added aloud for Elias, who was staring fixedly out
on the sea, still entranced by the vision he had just related:

"If the place is guarded by nothing more terrible than your genis, I
should like to go there."

"Ha, ha!" laughed Elias.  "That's all tommy-rot about the jinnis."
Nevertheless he glanced around in haste, and muttered an exorcist
formula beneath his breath.  "The Bedouins they're more real to be
afraid of.  But neffer say die; you square them easy with a few
dollars.  Iskender, he know the way there, so all serene!"

"I told Elias all about it, sir, last night," said Iskender sheepishly,
in reply to a glance of surprise.

"Yes, sir, he tell me, and I'm goin' to helb you all I can.  Trust
Elias, sir, he knows his way about!"

"Well," said the Emîr after a little meditation, "I feel inclined for
the adventure, provided always that it doesn't cost too much."

"We soon see what that's a-going to cost."

In a trice Elias whipped out from his breast a greasy pocket-book,
stuffed with testimonials from travellers, which, by the violence of
their owner's haste to begin calculations, were scattered on the sand.
As there was no wind, Elias let them lie there for the present, and
holding the pocket-book close to his nose, fell to dotting down Arabic
numerals on the tablet allotted to memoranda.

Iskender glared at him.  The wretch who yesterday had been crushed and
all-submissive, to-day aspired to take command of an expedition the
very idea of which was all Iskender's.

"This was gif me by one American gentleman," Elias remarked of the
pocket-book.  "Well, come along then!  You take camels or mules?
Camels hold the most, but mules much nicer.  We say fifty mules.  Then
you want a cook, and a waiter, and 'bout ten muleteers, and five--six
big tents.  I think you do it easy, grub an' all, sir, for 'bout five
hundred bound."

"Good Lord!" ejaculated the Emîr.

"Well, I do it for less, much less, but you be uncomfortable."

Iskender, then awaking from his trance of horror, grasped the
dragoman's arm and shook it angrily.

"What do we want with fifty mules, O ass?" he asked in Arabic.  "One
mule would carry enough to make us all as rich as Mûsa el Barûdi."

"By Allah, thou art an ass thyself!  Is it not well to bring away the
most we can," returned the visionary, sore dismayed; when, seeing how
their talk apart made the Frank suspicious, he relapsed into English
with a genial smile:

"Yes, fifty too dam' many; we take ten.  A friend of mine got three
nice tents--a bit old, but neffer mind!  He let you haf 'em cheab,
because he luf me.  Then three horses for you and me and 'Skender.  How
far you say it is?"  He turned to Iskender.  "You know the way."

"About nine days from here, accordin' to the baber which my father
wrote.  My mother kebt it to this day."

"Well, sir, I think you get there under one hundred bound, and once you
got the gold you not care a dam' what it coss comin' back."

"No," said the Frank firmly.  "I want to know the expenses there and
back, and I can't afford more than fifty pounds for the whole
expedition."

At this unlooked-for ultimatum Elias opened his eyes very wide and
sucked his pencil, staring ruefully at his scattered testimonials.  He
declared it to be "no go."

But Iskender, seeing the opportunity for self-assertion, stood by the
Frank, undertaking recklessly to arrange the whole expedition, on a
smaller scale, for the sum stipulated.

Elias shrugged to the ears.

"Be careful to keep this secret," he said sullenly in Arabic.  "By
Allah, if the others, who dislike thee already, get to know of it, they
will go mad with rage and probably take thy life.  Abdullah, thy uncle,
himself would wish to slay thee.  For a missionary or a resident in the
country, and out of season, it might pass.  But this is a lord of
wealth, a prince, the best sort of traveller!"

"Canst thou not perceive, O my dear, that the desire of his Honour is
for rough adventure, and not luxury?  And verily, to travel in the
style of thy proposal would simply be to invite every bravo of the
wilds to come and rob us."

This Iskender uttered in a tone of high impatience, and he was pleased
to observe, out of the corners of his eyes, that his patron approved of
that tone being used towards one who had designed to overcharge him.

"Well, Allah reward thee; for thou canst make no profit on it, that is
certain," said Elias with another shrug, and after that kept silence
for some minutes, resigning all part in the discussion.  But soon, as
that discussion grew more animated, and the vision of the sea of gold
came dazzlingly before his eyes, he forgot his dudgeon and chimed in
once more, thus tacitly accepting the leadership of Iskender, who was
satisfied.

"When shall we start?" asked the Emîr at last.

"Wheneffer you blease, dear sir," replied Iskender.

But Elias thought profoundly, visibly, with finger laid to brow.

"I think you better wait a bit, Iskender," he said presently.  "I tell
you why.  Just now there's no trafellers comin' to the country, so the
dragomans just stand around and jolly well watch all what you do.  We
go now, it make a talk.  Wait a month or two, in the name o' Moses,
then there's lots o' trafellers; they think about makin' money, and go
hang!  I shan't want no trafellers this year.  No jolly fear, by
George!  I stick to you.  Like that they think you got a brober
dragoman and all serene!"

This was sound advice, and, as it was proffered with the right
humility, Iskender commended it to his beloved.




CHAPTER XV

On the day following that council on the sea-beach, something happened
which pushed the Valley of the Kings into the background for a time.
This was the arrival from the land of the English of a fine new
paint-box, which the Emîr presented to his henchman with most gracious
words.  With this beside him and his sketch-book on his knees Iskender
heard the talk around him with but half an ear, and, when referred to
answered without thinking, thus assenting to propositions and accepting
responsibilities the onus of which dismayed him when he came to realise
it.  For instance Elias earnestly desired to know if Iskender could
have included the services of a first-rate cook in his estimate for the
expedition.  The best of cooks, he vowed, was necessary for the honour
and contentment of their dearest lord.  How was it to be done?

Iskender with eyes intent upon a spot of colour newly laid, with brush
in air, replied:

"Have no fear, O beloved.  I shall find a man; and, if not, I myself
will do the cooking."

"But canst thou?"

"By Allah, I am a known professor of the art."  And again when Elias
spoke of other services certain to be required upon the journey,
Iskender undertook, in default of trained servants, himself to make the
bed and wait upon the Frank at table.

The Emîr was greatly pleased by this alacrity of the absorbed artist;
seeing which, Elias cried:

"No, no, by God, you can't do all the work, I help you, 'Skender.  Let
me wait at table."

Iskender saw Elias waiting on their lord alone, breathing his pleasure
in the great man's ear!  Yet he assented gratefully.  Elias was not to
go with them at all, he had firmly resolved; but there was no need to
tell him so just now, in this time of preparation when his experience
was sure to be useful.  In Iskender's mind the Valley of the Kings was
little more than a romantic pretext for a ride alone with his Emîr.
But Elias thought of nothing but the gold.  His eyes seemed to have
grown larger in these days, and were fixed wide open to contain the
vision.  He treated Iskender with a kind of worship as the repository
of that precious secret, showed great care for his health, and was in
all things his loyal helper.  But the young man did not trust him.  He
kept the details of the expedition to himself as organiser; and, though
Elias pestered him with questions concerning the whereabouts of that
desirable valley, he would reveal nothing.  By dint of thus withholding
information, he himself acquired the firm conviction that there was
really information to withhold.

It was not till more than a week after the coming of the famous
paint-box that Iskender found time to go again to the house of Mîtri.
Repairing thither in the glow of a fine evening, following a rainy day,
he was surprised, as he drew near the place, to see his mother talking
with Mîtri in the doorway.  She was wrapped from head to foot in a
great shawl, and seemed in some trepidation, casting frequent glances
up and down the road.  In so doing she caught sight of Iskender, and
raised hands to heaven.  She ran to meet him.

"What is this?" she cried.  "Day after day have I been here to seek
thee, because the whole world says that thou hast joined the Orthodox,
and my heart yearned towards thee; but I dared not go openly to the
hotel where thou art known to lodge, having sworn to the missionaries
that I would never see thee more.  Here, too, I am in terror of my
life, for if it were known that I held intercourse with Mîtri, they
would cast me off.  Well, thou hast no more hope from them, thanks to
thy rashness.  Why couldst thou not shun the priest here, as I told
thee to?  Now, with all the Orthodox boasting of thy conversion, thou
art more than ever accursed in their sight.  Even at me they look
askance, I fancy, as if I had a finger in the mess.  Come indoors where
we can talk privately.  The worthy priest will let me enter with thee.
What made thee go and change thy faith just now?"

"I have not yet changed it, O my mother.  I do but hear the reasoning
of our father Mîtri."

"Well, that is something.  I will tell them that."  She held her tongue
suddenly, finding herself within the hearing of Mîtri, who, however,
took no notice of her, but welcomed Iskender fatherly and bade him
enter.  She entered with them unrebuked, and sat by while they argued,
feasting her eyes upon her son's good looks.  The girl Nesîbeh came
occasionally to the door of the inner room, and exchanged mischievous
glances with Iskender, who was on the watch for her.  His mother's eyes
were quick to notice this, and, leaning to his ear, she whispered:

"Cunning devil!  Thy plan is not amiss, for she is comely, and her
father stands well with the highest in the land.  Thou wilt mix with
the Barûdis and the rich Azîz."

Iskender shook her hand from off his arm, and brushed her words away as
stinging insects, in terror lest the priest should overhear.  The
priest rebuked her for the interruption.  But she continued unabashed,
and sat on smiling to herself, and nodding at Iskender when she caught
his eye.

After that Iskender went to the priest's house every evening, and his
mother often stole so far to meet him, hurrying, chin on shoulder, in
evident terror of pursuit by the missionaries.  She endured all Mîtri's
reprobations with a shrug, content so long as he allowed her to embrace
her boy.

"Poor people must eat bread.  Our Blessed Lord knows that and will make
allowance for me," was her reply to the accusation of hypocrisy.  But
she now seconded Mîtri's designs upon Iskender, gratified by the notion
of an alliance with the priest's family.  "It is different with him,"
she admitted, "since they have cast him out.  Let Iskender follow the
guidance of the Spirit.  Doubtless the congregation will take care of
his future, for he has forfeited a great career for conscience' sake."

Iskender, however, still held back, from no conscientious reluctance,
but merely to prolong a hesitation which he found delicious as giving
him value in the eyes of the girl Nesîbeh.  Her delight when any of his
objections went down before her father's reasoning and the triumphant
private glance she shot at him made a joy not lightly to be forgone.
When all his veritable doubts had been demolished, he invented others
to prolong this happiness.  He cherished definite hopes, dream-like as
was the nature of his mental process, of obtaining her for his own,
when he returned full of treasure from Wady 'l Mulûk.  The big priest,
it was clear, had conceived a liking for him, and had come to count on
his visits of an evening, loving an argument; her mother always blessed
him when he came and went, and baked choice sweetmeats for his
delectation.

It was not long before Iskender received evidence that the question of
his change of faith possessed a lively interest for others besides the
priest Mîtri and his lovely daughter.  One day, returning from a walk
with the Emîr, he heard that the missionary had been inquiring for him
in his absence; and the following evening, on the road to Mîtri's
house, he was overtaken by the Father of Ice in person, who got down
off his horse and addressed him very kindly.

Why did Iskender never come to church nowadays? why had he not been to
visit the ladies? why had he refused their offer of employment in the
house, which would probably have led to better things, perhaps to his
appointment as assistant master in one of the Mission schools?  Even
now it was not too late to reconsider; they, on their side, were quite
willing to forget bygones.  It had grieved them much to hear that
Iskender was drifting into bad company, and entering on a vicious
course of life; still more to learn that he showed an inclination to
forget the enlightened religious teaching which he had received in
childhood.

His words moved Iskender more than he desired to show, arousing in his
mind a thousand happy memories, reproachful now.  He replied in Arabic
with the sullenness that masks emotion:

"I am a son of the Arabs, and I return to my own kind.  Allah knows I
am nothing to be considered."

"What do you mean?" asked the missionary in a colder tone.

"Your Honour and the ladies could not make of me an Englishman.  It is
for that you cast me off."

"We tried to make of you a Christian man."  The missionary's face grew
stern, and his ice-green eyes gave forth a sword-flash.  "Well, go your
way; God grant it lead not to perdition!"  He nodded his head in the
direction of the two palm-trees which marked in the dusk the
whereabouts of Mîtri's house.

Iskender, glancing in the same direction, discerned the tall black
figure of the father of Nesîbeh in the road, looking out for him.  The
idea of evil in connection with the jolly priest suddenly struck him as
perverse and ludicrous.  He laughed in the face of the missionary.

"My friends are no worse than your friends.  And which of us will be
lost, which saved, will not be known until the last judgment.  May Our
Lord forgive your Honour for such bad thoughts."

In a white rage, the Father of Ice remounted his horse and rode away,
disregarding the ironical salute of Mîtri, who stood out before his
door, awaiting the arrival of his catechumen.

"What didst thou say to the hog to make him snort like that?" was the
priest's first question of Iskender; and, when the youth informed him,
"By Allah, it was a true word," he chuckled heartily.  "They think all
men should be on one pattern--the pattern of their wondrous selves,
whom they esteem perfection.  They suppose that what is good for their
race must be good for all the others, thus ignoring the providence of
Allah, Who made the peoples of the earth to differ in appearance,
speech, and manners.  They know nothing of our beliefs and ways of
thought, so call them wicked, since they are not theirs.  They condemn
men freely, sitting in the seat of judgment, unaware that they
themselves will be judged at the last day.  By Allah, there is only one
of all that breed whom one can talk to as a human being--I mean the
little preacher Ward, who runs their errands.  He has not been here for
three months or more.  From much travelling among the villages, he
knows the customs of our people and respects them.  Moreover, he is
modest, while the rest are arrogant. . . .  But, merciful Allah, what
is this I see?  What ails thee, madwoman?"

The mother of Iskender, stealing forth from the priest's house, had
cast herself upon her son, with fearful moans:

"O Holy Virgin!  O my terror!  Please God, he did not see me where I
stood in the doorway!  Some one has informed him where I go--it must be
Costantîn, the spy and liar--and now he rides at dusk to try and catch
me.  I shall not come here again; it is too dangerous.  Come thou to
the house sometimes quite late at night.  Farewell, O beloved, and may
Allah keep thee!"

"Allah is greatest!" ejaculated Mîtri, with a shrug and a gruff laugh,
as he watched her flight along the twilight road.  "Now let us enter
and dispute together."

But the shock of his encounter with the missionary had left Iskender
with no wits for argument.  He took leave earlier than usual; and, as
he walked back to the hotel in the dark, he realised that the last
vestige of his Protestantism had that evening been demolished.  His
baptism would follow as a matter of course, in the mind of Mîtri; and
he was by no means prepared to receive it, since the priest, for the
triumph of his congregation, was certain to demand a public ceremony,
and Iskender feared the scorn of his Emîr, whom he imagined to be
something of a sceptic.

Moreover, it would entail a full confession of his inmost thoughts,
which, with Wady 'l Mulûk in mind, he could not face; and at least it
ought to be postponed till after the great Fast, which the Orthodox
observe with cruel rigour.

To stave off the ordeal he saw himself forced to invent a new set of
doubts and objections.  On his next visit to the house of Mîtri, he
owned himself convinced of the vanity of the Protestant faith, but
hinted at an inclination towards the Catholic.  The big priest stared
at him with mouth agape.

"Curse thy father!" he exclaimed.  "Wouldst thou turn from bad to
worse, and rush straight to Jehennum.  Thou hast studied history, so
knowest that the Latins are our ancient enemies.  They slew us with the
Muslims when their armies took by storm the Holy Places, and enslaved
the remnant of us in a cruel slavery.  They have statues, rank idols,
in their churches; and is it not the worst idolatry to concentrate the
power which belongs of right to the whole Body of Christ, and adore it
in the person of one living man?  Their lips have corrupted the creed:
they have no baptism, so can have no orders.  Their Pope of Rome
himself is nothing but an unbaptized layman.  Speak of that again, and
I will drive thee from my house with beatings!"

Iskender, greatly alarmed, made haste to explain that he had spoken in
jest.  He had caught an angry look from the girl Nesîbeh.

"Jest not upon what concerns thy soul's salvation," said the priest,
letting his wrath evaporate.  "Thou knowest not what harm those Latins
do us, tempting souls astray.  They allow proselytes to retain our
beliefs, our language, and our form of service, so only that they
acknowledge the supremacy of the hound of Rome, which means perdition,
truly, in the next world, but foreign protection in this.  It is little
wonder that they have seduced many. . . .  What hinders thee from
receiving at my hands the inestimable boon of baptism?"

Iskender murmured that he still had doubts.  The angry glances of the
girl Nesîbeh made him shame-faced.

"Show me thy doubts that I may straight resolve them."

Iskender was muttering that he must think them out, that they were not
yet quite clear in his mind, when Nesîbeh cried from the inner room:

"Hear him not, O my father!  The low dog is mocking thee.  Force him to
be baptized, or drive him forth!"

"Silence, shameless one!" the priest cried sternly; nevertheless he
took her suggestion and, turning to Iskender, whose brow was throbbing
painfully, inquired: "Hast thou one good reason to desire delay?"

"Yes, O our father!"  Iskender blurted out the truth at last.  "I know
not how my patron would regard it.  On him I depend entirely for the
present.  I have heard him scoff at all who change the faith that they
were born in.  Wait a little, I beseech thee, until he is gone!"

"Is that in truth all?" replied Mîtri, fully satisfied.  "The right is
with thee.  We must wait awhile.  But Allah grant thou die not in the
interval."




CHAPTER XVI

The season recommended by Elias as most favourable for their adventure
now drew near.  Each steamer that touched at the port disgorged a
little crowd of travellers.  The Emîr being no longer alone in the
hotel, his radiance suffered eclipse.  Other Franks of distinction came
and went continually; dragomans, splendidly attired, hung about the
entrance, tugging at their moustachios, tapping their riding-boots with
silver-mounted whips, and spitting superbly, as became men whose
special province it was to order the lords of gold about like dogs.
Merchants and pedlars, as many as could get permission from the sons of
Mûsa, spread out their wares on the floor of the hall, and smiled
allurement on the visitors.  The servants of Cook and other Powers of
Europe and America strutted about and gave command like princes.

Iskender, for his footing in the house, helped the servants wherever an
extra hand was required, and in that way learnt to wait at table, to
polish boots and brush clothes, and acquired some inkling of the art of
cooking.  The positive need of these attainments for the coming journey
made him quick to learn.  The Emîr himself admired his general
usefulness, and the sons of Mûsa paid him money for his services.  As a
result of all this bustle there were fewer visits to the house of
Mîtri, while the book and paint-box were perforce laid by.

The excitement of Elias grew with every day.  He never tired of asking
whether all was ready, of reminding Iskender of the need of this or
that small comfort, and urging him to fix a date for their departure.
Indeed his eagerness became a visible disorder, and, seeing him mingle
freely with the other dragomans, Iskender went in hourly fear of
indiscretions.  One noon when, after a spell of work in the hot
kitchen, he had rushed to the outer door to breath the air, he fell
upon a group of persons splendidly arrayed, who welcomed his appearance
with unfriendly glee.  Yuhanna Mahbûb, the bully, seized his arm, and
threatened him with his whip not altogether playfully.

"Confess the truth!" he commanded, with his cruel grin.  "Thy journey
with the Emîr is not for pastime.  Thou hast a secret; it is useless to
deny it, for we know the fact from thy partner Elias.  I, with others
of thy friends, resent this great preferment of Elias.  Reveal thy
secret now immediately, and if it is of worth, I too will go with thee."

"What words are these?" Iskender cried out in extreme amazement.  "A
secret!  I possess a secret!  It is some lying fable of that mad Elias!"

"That, Allah knows, is possible," put in a bystander.  "Elias is the
very prince of fable-mongers."

Yuhanna still kept grinning in Iskender's face.

"Wilt thou swear by the Blessed Sacrament that thou knowest nothing of
the whereabouts of any treasure?"

"Art mad?  How should I know of any treasure?"

"Swear by the Blessed Sacrament!  Nought else will serve; and if
hereafter it should prove that thou art perjured, I will beat thy
filthy soul from out thy body."

"By the Blessed Sacrament I swear!" replied Iskender.

"That is well!" Yuhanna curled his long moustachios.  "Then why does
Elias refuse every other engagement?  It is not likely thy Emîr will
pay him much."

"By the same pledge I know not!  Ask the man himself!"

"Thou seest, 'Hanna, as I told thee, it is all a lie," laughed a
bystander, the same who had before spoken.

Iskender escaped from them, bearing the conscience of a perjured
wretch.  He called Allah Most High to witness how the sin was forced on
him.  It was some comfort to reflect that he was still technically a
Protestant, so might be taken to have sworn by the sacrament of that
sect which he knew to be without Divine significance.  But all the same
his crime was very heinous.

Early in the morning following this grave event, Iskender was engaged
in sweeping out the entrance-hall, when his uncle strode in out of the
sunlight, of which he seemed an offshoot in his splendour of apparel.
More respectable than ever through pride in the command of a company of
high-born English bent on sight-seeing, he addressed his nephew from
the height of condescension:

"O son of my brother, I start this day upon a journey of ten days with
my party, and would say a word to thee before I go.  Elias tells me
that both thou and he propose to ride forth with the young khawâjah,
and show him something of the land.  That is well.  Elias, though
sometimes foolish, has experience; and I have told him to instruct thee
fully in our business.  Go not too far, for travel in wild places is
too arduous for one so young; and Elias has little acquaintance with
the desert ways, and that little disastrous, he and all his party
having been captured and held to ransom by the Bedû, because he forgot
to pay the tribes their proper dues.  Be cautious and observant.  In
sh' Allah we shall all return in safety."

"In sh' Allah!" echoed Iskender in great astonishment; for it had that
minute occurred to him that he had no real knowledge of the whereabouts
of the place to which he had undertaken to conduct his patron, beyond
what Elias had implied, that it was somewhere in the neighbourhood of
Wady Mûsa.  His first sentiment on the discovery was one of
thankfulness, because he had not sworn falsely in his oath to Yuhanna.

His next was one of self-abasement before Allah.  Was not His mercy
boundless, like His power?  During the few days which remained before
the start, he spent much time in prayer, and offered votive candles to
be burnt in Mîtri's little church beneath the ilex-tree.  Why should he
not find his way to the Valley of Gold, by the blessing of the All
Powerful?  Did not his vision of the place, and the strange
concatenation of chances which had led him on to the adventure, seem to
indicate that he was destined to find it?  Even if he failed, the Emîr,
he told himself, would have had a pleasant outing, and could not in the
nature of things be very angry.  Thus he lulled his fears.

The one thing left to trouble him was the adherence of Elias, and he
tried by every means to throw him off.

"We cannot afford a horse for thee," he told the dragoman.  "Allah
knows I have enough to do to make the money suffice for the bare
necessaries."

"What did I tell thee?" said Elias cheerfully.  "When thou hast hired a
cook and baggage animals, I know, by Allah, there is nothing left.  No
matter, I will hire a horse on my own account."

Iskender next informed his friend in confidence that there was no real
intention of going to the Valley of the Kings.  It was all a joke
between himself and the Emîr.

"Ha, wouldst thou leave me out?" exclaimed Elias, with a laugh.  "No,
no, my soul.  I am not to be gulled so easily!"

Iskender despaired of ever getting rid of him, when Elias himself
unexpectedly afforded him the opportunity.  Two days before the start,
the Emîr asked for an account of the arrangements, and Iskender gave
it, in the presence of Elias.  His Honour was to ride the horse which
he had lately bought; Elias would provide his own.  Iskender himself
would act as cook and waiter and his Honour's body-servant, and also
assist in his functions the single muleteer, who provided three mules
and one horse.  A good-sized tent, a little the worse for wear, a
collapsible bed, a table, a chair, and cooking utensils completed an
outfit of which the whole cost amounted to little more than half the
sum which the Frank had assigned as a limit.

The Emîr was greatly pleased; not so Elias.  When Iskender had made an
end, the dragoman flung up his hands.

"That only!" he cried to heaven; "and for an Emîr, a great one, like
our friend here!"

It was a crime unheard of, an abomination!  Their beloved would die of
discomfort in a single night.  No, that should never be, so long as he
(Elias) enjoyed life and health, with some slight credit among honest
people.  He would himself provide two upright men, a cook and a waiter,
at his own expense.  He knew them well.  They had retired from
business, but they loved him dearly and would come forward willingly,
he felt sure, to save so excellent a prince from vile indignity.

This outpour of his indignation was addressed to Iskender in fierce
Arabic.  When his proposal was translated, the Emîr pooh-poohed it,
declaring Iskender's arrangement to be all he could desire.  Elias
then, in a frenzy, fell down at his feet, imploring him with tears to
reconsider.

"Beeble'll think we're some common fellows and be rude to us," he
moaned.  "Neffer mind the exbense, sir; that not matter a blow.  These
beeble friends o' mine, they come for nothin' 't all.  You gif them
what you dam' blease!"

His agony was terrible to witness.  Iskender had the feelings of a
murderer as he looked on.  Their patron stroked his small moustache and
smiled uneasily.

"You not go like that, sir!" pursued Elias, starting up.  "It is a
shame for you!  I go to the consul now direc'ly; make him a-stob you!
Now I'm off!  My friends of which I sbeak lif long way off; but I be
back with them in two days, the time you start.  Bromise to wait till
then!  All right!  Ta-ta!"  With a final casting-up of hands to heaven,
the enthusiast was gone.

"We had better start at once, or he'll spoil everything," said the
Englishman, when he recovered from his astonishment.  It was precisely
what his henchman had been thinking.  By no word had they pledged
themselves to abide his return.

Iskender went at once to hasten the preparations.  But their muleteer
proved sulky on the sudden change of plans; and it was only as the
result of a dispute which lasted the whole afternoon that Iskender
wrung from him an assurance that all would be ready when the sun next
rose.




CHAPTER XVII

Iskender, having roused his dear Emîr, went out to inspect the train.
It was then some half-hour later than the time appointed; yet neither
mules nor man were in sight, only the horse of the Emîr, with its neat
leather saddle and bridle, was being led up and down before the hotel
by a bare-legged boy.  In a rage Iskender hastened to the khan whence
at the recommendation of Elias he had hired his muleteer.  There his
reproaches caused extreme amazement.  The man, he was told, had
received his order as for the following day.  He was not on the
premises, and his house was some way off.

An idle witness of the youth's despair volunteered to go and fetch the
defaulter; he set off at a run, but was gone for more than an hour.
Iskender tired of waiting, and strode back angrily to the hotel.
Tidings of his dilemma having gone abroad, he was escorted by a little
crowd of the curious, among them some muleteers who were loud in their
offers of service.  From a distance he beheld the missionary, with back
towards him, conversing with his patron at the door, and quickened
step; but before he could come up the dialogue, whatever it concerned,
was ended, and his enemy had moved on.

"Not about you this time," his beloved laughed; "though he declares
that you are none of you to be trusted out of sight.  He has just been
warning me against our friend Elias, who, he says, once played a trick
upon some tourists--bribed the Bedouins to take them prisoner, and let
him rescue them.  I assured him that Elias was not going with us; but
he seemed to doubt my word, and I shall begin to doubt it myself unless
those mules turn up.  What has become of them?"

"The man bretends I told him for to-morrow.  That is a lie, because I
sboke as blain as anythin'.  I think it some trick of that Elias to
detain us here."

By that time all the unemployed muleteers in the town had joined the
growing crowd that watched their conference.  One man had gone so far
as to bring a good-looking mule ready saddled with him, as a sample of
what he could provide.  Iskender paid no heed to the prayers of all
these suppliants, whispered confidentially by those in front, shouted
with fierce gesticulations from those behind, any more than he gave ear
to the counsel of the sons of Mûsa that he should employ one of them.
He still had hopes of the person he had first engaged, who appeared at
length, but without any mules, and in a state of indignation even
greater than Iskender's.

The clash of words when they met electrified the whole street; the
mouths of the rival muleteers, now mere onlookers, grinned all
together, showing milk-white teeth.  Accused of laziness, of breach of
contract, the delinquent hurled back the accusations in Iskender's
face.  He said he knew his business, and was not going to start without
proper orders.  The Khawâjah Elias, the responsible dragoman, was away,
and might Allah end his life immediately if he set forth without him at
the call of a beardless boy.

So the truth was out.  Iskender reported to his patron that the man was
a mere creature of Elias.

"There's nothing for it," said the Emîr with a shrug.  "We must engage
another man."

"But I baid this one already some money."

"Never mind.  It will cost us more than that if we wait for Elias!"

So that muleteer was dismissed and retired, conscientiously objecting
in terms abusive and obscene; while the man who had had the wit to
bring a mule already saddled was promptly engaged in his place.  This
individual had attracted the Frank from the first by his cheerful
looks, and the way he kept aloof from the group that pestered, only
smiling now and then to the Englishman and patting his mule
significantly.  He now showed great alacrity, kissing first the Emîr's
hand, then Iskender's, asking where the tent and other baggage might be
found, and promising by the cloak of the Prophet, to have all in
perfect readiness within an hour.  The other candidates then fell away,
one or two volunteering to help the winner with his preparations, the
majority sitting down on their heels in the shadows of neighbouring
walls to watch the outcome of it all, the actual start.

The new muleteer was punctual to his word.  But by the time the laden
mules came up, luncheon was ready, and the sons of Mûsa insisted on the
Frank's partaking of the meal.  An invitation, the first he had ever
received, to join them at their private table, reconciled Iskender to
this new delay.  He told the muleteer to go on in advance, indicating
the road he was to take and naming a good place for that night's
encampment; and saw the mules start off with jangling bells, leaving
behind the horse he was to ride, which was tethered in the yard of the
hotel.

After the meal the Frank was lazy with repletion, and asked to rest
awhile; so that the afternoon was far advanced before they got on
horseback.  The Frank was then for a gallop; but Iskender warned him
that that pace was not for travel, and kept him down to the walk.
Passing the house of Mîtri, he looked for the girl Nesîbeh, hoping she
would see him riding at his lord's right hand, but in vain.

After an hour's journey, having left the orange-gardens far behind,
they forsook the highway and followed a bridle-path through fields.
Big scarlet tulips shone among the green cornstems.  Here and there
upon the fertile plain stood forth a grove of olives, their foliage
looking nearly white by contrast with its own dark shadow; a village of
mud-houses set upon a knoll and plumed with palms, with attendant barns
and ovens shaped like beehives; a man with oxen ploughing or a camel
browsing in the custody of a small child.  The breeze grew fresher as
the sun declined.  The colours of a dove's breast played upon the
barren heights which walled the land to eastward.  The sun sank lower
and lower; shadows grew upon the plain; the sea-coast sandhills became
clearly outlined; soon rays went up like fire from off the sea, and the
whole rampart of the eastern heights became empurpled; then a shadow
rose, a cold breeze roughed the corn, and presently the evening star
shone out in a soft sky.

It was dark when they reached the appointed halting-place, in a wady of
the foothills, close to a village which possessed a spring of water.
They found their tent well-pitched, a good fire burning in the shelter
of a cunning wind-screen, and the kettle boiling.  They had tea at
once, and afterwards Iskender went to cook the supper.  His lord soon
followed with desire to help.

"It's splendid fun!" he cried.  "You are a trump, Iskender!"

Iskender answered nothing, but gave praise to Allah.




CHAPTER XVIII

About the third hour of a cloudless day Elias Abdul Messîh crossed the
sandhills from the northward, traversed the gardens, and approached the
town.  He was riding a showy horse, which he caused to prance whenever
any one was looking; and had assumed the panoply of the fashionable
dragoman.  His slim but manly figure well became a tight and
many-buttoned vest of murrey velvet, a zouave jacket of blue silky
cloth, and baggy trousers of the same material, whose superfluous
lengths were tucked away in riding-boots of undressed leather.  A
scarlet dust-cloak streamed from off his shoulders.  The tassel of his
fez, worn far back on the head and dinted knowingly fluttered on the
breeze; the tassels on his bridle led a dance.

In his wake followed two fat, middle-aged men, set one behind the other
on a donkey's back, of whom the hindmost held a rope which led four
mules laden with all the requisites of Frankish travel.

Elias flourished in his hand the silver-mounted whip of rhinoceros-hide
which he had long ago reclaimed from the Emîr.  The pride of a leader
of men informed his bearing as he brought his train at last through the
crowded market, shouting loftily to clear a way.

Arrived at the khan where he was accustomed to hire beasts of burden,
he was preparing to dismount, when a man ran out and, stooping, kissed
his stirrup.  It was the muleteer who had been first retained by
Iskender.

"May Allah keep thee, O my dear!" exclaimed Elias, cheered by such
worship in a public place.  "What news in the town to-day?"

The muleteer raised hands and eyes to heaven.

"Grave news, O my lord Elias.  They sent me about my business, and are
gone without thee."

"Merciful Allah!" cried Elias, stupefied.  "Gone, sayest thou?  They
are gone, the miscreants? . . .  But it is impossible.  Gone, sayest
thou?  When and how did they go?"

In vain did he strive to discredit the muleteer's story, throwing doubt
on every point as it arose; it was only to remove all ground for doubt
concerning it.

"Merciful Allah!" he exclaimed again, in tones of horror.  "May their
fathers be destroyed, their mothers ravished.  Wait till I catch thee,
O thou pig Iskender!  The good Emîr will perish of discomfort; for that
treacherous boy is ignorant of all things that pertain to travel.  Y'
Allah!  Let us make all speed to overtake those wretched ones!"

But his companions, Aflatûn the cook and Fâris the waiter, were in no
such hurry.  They were hungry from much riding on an empty stomach, and
flatly refused to proceed another step until replenished.  Cursing
their greed, Elias was forced to resign himself.  He indulged in
eating, as he told himself, to pass the time; but afterwards, when it
came to coffee and narghîlehs, he squandered more than an hour in
boasting with what speed he would catch up the fugitives, how suddenly
and effectually he would repay the beast Iskender.  It was Aflatûn the
cook who reminded him at length that time wore on.  Once on horseback,
his eagerness again became active, and, in a measure, practical.  He
knew the direction Iskender had proposed to take, and, stopping before
the hotel for a minute, he learnt from the sons of Mûsa the name of the
first halting-place.

Amused by his indignation at the start without him, those old friends
mocked him, crying:

"They have fled from thee.  Sooner than endure thy converse any longer,
they have thrown themselves on the mercy of Allah.  They would rather
face wild beasts and savage warriors than have thy sweet voice always
at their ears."

Cursing the ancestry of such heartless jokers, Elias rowelled his
horse's flanks with the sharp corners of his stirrups, and went off at
a furious gallop.  Through the orange-gardens, out on to the plain, he
sped like the wind, until his steed gave signs of fainting and he had
to stop.  Looking back along the way he had come, he could not see his
companions and their string of mules, though the ground was open and
the air quite clear.  Evidently they had not yet left the gardens.
With horrid malediction of their religion and parentage he rode on at a
foot's pace.

At the third hour after noon he reached the spot where Iskender and the
Frank had passed the night, and stood staring at the ashes of their
fire with teeth and hands tightly clenched.  A fellâh from the
neighbouring village told him they had set out very early that morning
with the avowed intention of making a long day's march.

These tidings sent Elias raging mad.  They were fleeing towards the
valley full of gold, of which Iskender, alone of all men, knew the
whereabouts; and he, Elias, their predestined chief, was left behind!
His fiery spirit craved to mount at once and gallop day and night till
he rejoined those treasure-seekers; but the frailty of his horse
precluded any such transports, and the snail-like pace of his adherents
bound him down.  At present he was obliged to wait for Aflatûn and
Fâris and the baggage animals, while conscious of the fugitives
receding rapidly, sucked in irresistibly to a whirlpool of living
light, his mind's image of the object of desire.

Having procured some barley and chopped straw for his horse, he left
the beast in charge of some of the villagers, and climbed alone to the
summit of a rock hard by, which commanded the plain.  His retinue
appeared, a great way off, mere dots upon a certain cornfield.  The sun
was high when he first descried them; it had touched the sea before
they came in hail.

"Make haste, accursed sluggards!  Yallah!  Onward!  They fly before us!
We must march all night," he cried in anguish.

But they said:

"Wait a little!  All the beasts are tired.  We will not march through
the night.  In truth we are minded to have done with this mad business,
which is the same as hunting the shadow of a flying bird.  Allah alone
knows whether we shall catch those people; but we ourselves are able to
perceive that we are tired and hungry."

"May Allah shorten your days!" roared Elias furiously.  "Would you fail
me now and betray me, O treacherous dogs?"

They still refused to travel through the night; and when he persisted
in requiring it of them, took umbrage, and vowed that they would leave
him then and there.  For hours he remonstrated with them, but they only
ate and drank and smoked, then slept, unheeding.  He lay down by their
side, but could not sleep.

At the first breath of dawn they were still snoring, when Elias rose,
prepared his horse, and rode away.  After all he felt well rid of such
unsoulful hogs.  He could travel much more quickly by himself; and the
fewer reached the Valley of the Kings the better, for some are thieves,
and gold corrupts true men.  So he rode on, pushing his mount to the
utmost, in and out among the stony hills, inquiring at every village
and of all he met in the way for tidings of the Frank and his
companion.  In the heat of the day he paused for an hour, to bait and
water his horse, which, nevertheless, was quite worn out ere sunset.
Elias was forced to dismount and lead him slowly.

The mountain slopes were hung with vineyards, fields and gardens.
Sauntering groups appeared upon the path, which now began to assume the
aspect of a proper road.  Rounding a shoulder of the terraced hill,
Elias had a view of the chief town of the region, clothing half the
mountainside, beneath its famous mosque.  He determined to enter the
place and make inquiries, though the Muslim mob, he knew, was fierce
and dangerous.

Going straight to the house of a Christian of his own Church, he asked
for hospitality, which was granted to him in Allah's name.  Having
cared for the horse, he went indoors and told his errand, seeking
tidings of the chase; and presently his host went out to make
inquiries.  He returned to declare, upon authority of an officer of the
watch, that no party resembling that described had entered the town.

Now Iskender had named this city many times as lying in the direct road
to the seat of treasure.  His avoidance of it, therefore, must have
been of purpose to elude Elias--his best, his truest friend!  The
outraged dragoman called God to witness.  It was evident that Iskender
meant to be the only one to find the golden valley.  Having used his
money as the means to get there, he would doubtless make away with the
Emîr.  Elias wept at picture of the cruel fate which awaited that
unsuspecting nobleman.  However, he himself was not yet beaten.  He
still had hopes that, by minute inquiry, he might come upon their
tracks and overtake them.

But when the morrow came his horse was useless.  Having money, he went
out to hire another.  But while he was about the business, soldiers
came to him and asked to be shown the permission by which he travelled.
He produced a document, but it was out of date.  They told him so.  In
some alarm, he swore by Allah he was in the service of an English
prince as mighty as the Sultan.  They straightway asked to see the
prince in question; and Elias had to own that he was not forthcoming.
Then they laughed him to scorn--the dragoman without a tourist.  One
took a fancy to the knife that decked his waist-band.  Another admired
his whip, and promptly took it.  His pistol too was gone.  In vain he
looked for help or sympathy; the crowd of fierce-eyed, turbaned Muslims
only jeered at his despair.  At a threat to put him in prison, he flung
them all the money he possessed, then cast himself upon the ground with
face buried in his arms.  Seeing he was finished, his tormentors left
him thus; and the crowd, when they were gone, advised him friendly,
bidding him look to Allah for redress.

Scared in his very soul, Elias rose at last and crept back to the house
of his co-religionist.  There he sat and moaned through all that day,
refusing food and every other comfort.  Disarmed and penniless, he
could proceed no further in that lawless region.  It was all Iskender's
fault--the cunning devil!  The valley of the gold seemed now his legal
birthright, of which he had been defrauded by a wicked malefactor, who,
not content with that, was leading out the good Emîr to kill him in the
desert.  Iskender had bribed Aflatûn and Fâris; Iskender had lamed his
horse; Iskender had set on the soldiers to despoil him.  By the time he
started on his homeward way, the world was poisoned by Iskender's
wickedness; he could not look at rock, or myrtle-bush, or wayside
flower without groans and gnashing of teeth; and wherever he reposed at
noon, or spent the night, he told his wrongs.  The story ran before him
through the countryside.  When he came at last to his own door, it was
to find a crowd awaiting him, anxious to know the truth of strange
reports.  Several of the dragomans were there, including Abdullah,
uncle of Iskender, who questioned Elias in no peaceful tone.

Awed by the sternness of so respectable a man, Elias dissembled his
rage, and spoke in sorrow:

"Alas! it is too true.  Allah knows, it grieves my soul to relate it.
Iskender, whom I loved as my own eyes, has led the good Emîr into the
wilderness, meaning to rob him there and take his life."

"It is a lie!" cried Abdullah furiously.  "Take back those words this
instant, or thy blood shall pay for it.  Allah knows thou wast ever the
chief of liars."

"That is true," agreed the bystanders.

"That is true, perhaps," Elias owned; "yet in this case I speak the
truth.  Those two had learnt the hiding-place of a great treasure, and
Iskender means to have the whole of it.  I had secret warning of his
wicked purpose, and went to bring good honest men to defeat it.  But
he, suspecting what I was about, persuaded the Emîr to start without
me.  Moreover, he dismissed the muleteer whom I had chosen, engaging in
his stead a murderous ruffian.  My soul died within me when I heard of
their departure.  Allah witness how I strove to overtake them.  But the
rogue had set every one upon the road against me.  I was delayed at
every turn, flouted and finally robbed of my weapons and all my money."
He exhibited his empty belt.  "So I returned, despairing.  May God have
mercy on that kind Emîr, and let his soul find peace."

These words, and still more the heart-broken manner of their utterance,
made a profound impression upon all who heard them.  They were received
as true by every one there except Abdullah, who talked of hiring
ruffians to assassinate the wicked slanderer.  He swore at once to
clear his nephew's honour.  But his excitement was regarded with mere
pity, as natural to a man afflicted in so near a relative.




CHAPTER XIX

Abdullah's furious indignation with Elias was complicated by a strain
of keen anxiety upon his own account.  Though most of the story seemed
absurd to his intelligence, there remained enough of possible and even
probable to justify dismay in so respectable a man.  It seemed more
than likely that his nephew, that unlucky boy, had led a British
subject into lawless regions quite unknown to him; if harm ensued there
would be trouble with the consul; and the power called Cook was so
careful for its dragomans that the mere relationship to one whose face
was blackened might involve dismissal.  The bare idea of this
contingency swamped Abdullah's intellect in pure amazement, for since
his vision of the Blessed Virgin years ago he had believed that the
breath of scandal could not come near him.  He crossed himself
repeatedly and muttered prayers.  But these misgivings were secreted
from the world, before which he appeared as the intrepid champion of
his absent nephew, prepared to refute the story in its entirety.

His first thought was to make Elias eat his words either by bribes or
violence; but a little reflection sufficed to show it worthless.  For,
once pronounced, those words were all men's utterance; the town, the
countryside, was now ablaze, and Elias but a fuse that had done its
work.  Abdullah demanded on behalf of Iskender that all who professed
any knowledge of the matter should be called and questioned in the
hearing of the group of dragomans.  The proprietor and servants of the
khan, who had beheld Iskender's mad excitement on the morning of the
start, the discarded muleteer, Aflatûn and Fâris, who still lingered in
the town in hopes to recover their expenses from Elias, with others
quite unknown, bore witness to the suspicious manner of the young man's
flight, and the dance he had led each and all of them.  Abdullah gnawed
his heavy grey moustache, with eyes downcast, when Elias turned towards
him with expressive hands.

From the scene of this inquiry, which was the tavern in the ruined
cloister, looking through shadowed arches on the purple sea, a
professional errand led Abdullah to the hotel of Mûsa el Barûdi.  The
sons of Mûsa sat on stools before the door, as did also the priest
Mîtri, taking coffee with them.  "What news?" they asked.  Abdullah hid
his face.  Could it be that they had not yet heard those wicked lies
about Iskender?  He enlightened them forthwith with fervent crossings
of himself and prayers to Allah; and confessed that he was at his wits'
end, since all the evidence obtainable tended strongly to confirm the
insane story.  The laughter of his hearers did him good.  They
ridiculed the very notion of Iskender's guile; and they were men of
position, respectable men, whose opinion was worth having, while the
rest were riff-raff.  Abdullah went home greatly comforted.

But the story spread and grew in all the land, with variations and most
wonderful additions.  People came to Abdullah for the rights of it, and
were visibly disappointed and incredulous at receiving a flat denial.
They wanted the true story to replace the false, and Abdullah knew no
more than that Elias was a liar.  He sat still in his house for hours
together, gnawing his thick moustache and staring at the ground.  Then
he bethought him to call on the mother of Iskender, who might have
knowledge of her son's true purpose in this mad excursion.  If he had
abstained from visiting her till now, it was in the hope to keep from
her a scandal which was sure to wound her.  Now the time had come to
try her value as a witness.  Though the weather was bad, he could not
wait for sunshine, but, taking his umbrella, walked out on to the
sandhills through the pelting rain.  His boots were caked with mud when
he reached the little house; he would not enter therefore, but spoke
from the doorway, sheltered by his umbrella.  It seemed she had nothing
to tell him.  It was only from the voice of common rumour that she knew
that her precious son had left the town, and since then reports had
reached her which made her wash her hands of him for ever.  When those
reports came to the ears of the missionaries, as they were sure to do,
it would ruin his mother in their eyes for ever.

"Take no thought for him, O Abdullah!" she cried furiously.  "He is no
son of mine, but a changeling of the children of the Jânn.  Doubtless
my true son, whom I loved and nursed, is with the devils somewhere in
the Jebel Kâf.  Allah knows he was too good for me; my pride in him was
too great!  And so they took him, and put a miscreant, a devil, in his
place.  They say he has a mighty treasure written in his name, so that
none but he can free it from the spell that guards it; that shows us
what he really is, for who but a jinni, a vile changeling, would hide
so glad a secret from his loving mother?  Thou sayest, Has he killed
the good Emîr?  He may have done so, for I say he is no child of mine;
he is a devil.  Tell all the world my son is lost to me, carried off to
the Jebel Kâf or some lone ruin; and a jinni masquerades in his
likeness, doing evil."

She screamed her parrot-scream; she could not talk.  It was one of her
black days when the world was turned to madness.  Abdullah retired from
the vain attempt to get some sense from her with hopelessness increased
instead of lessened.

That same evening, as he sat in his house, enjoying a ray of pallid
sunshine sent through the branches of a leafless fig-tree which
stretched its gnarled, grey twisted arms before his door, Yuhanna
Mahbûb came to him with an angry brow.

"What is this I hear about Iskender?" he inquired.  "Within this hour I
have returned with my party from El Cuds.  He has gone with the Emîr to
find a treasure; is it true?  I came at once to thee, his near
relation.  For know that he swore to me by the Blessed Sacrament, in
the presence of witnesses, that he knew nothing of any treasure, nor
was his trip with the Emîr concerned with aught save pleasure.  This I
tell thee that thou blame me not hereafter if I take dire vengeance on
the perjured dog."

"Wait a little, O 'Hanna," said Abdullah pacifically, "thou wilt learn,
in sh' Allah, that he did not swear falsely.  All this scandal is the
produce of Elias, whom all men know for the very father of lies.  Wait,
I tell thee, and the poor lad's innocence will be seen."

"Aye, wait I must perforce, for he is absent.  Were he here among us, I
should not have had recourse to thee unless as bearer of his dead body.
He swore, I tell thee, by the Blessed Sacrament!  Shall such a wretch
live on, to practise sacrilege?"

"May Allah, of his mercy, show the truth to us," replied Abdullah,
while Yuhanna went off, breathing threats against the perjurer.  He
prayed to God that his nephew might not have sworn falsely and so
incurred the punishment of everlasting fire.  Yet there was much
treasure lying undiscovered in the land, and it might be that his
nephew had got wind of some of it.  He knew not what to think, but
spent most of the night in prayer, prostrate before that tiny picture
of the Mother of God which he had set up to commemorate his radiant
vision.

In the morning came the finishing blow.  He stood in the doorway,
watching his chickens pecking amid the wet litter of refuse round the
trunk of the fig-tree, when the sound of a horse's hoof-beats reached
his ears, and presently from a narrow opening in the neighbouring wall
emerged a Frank in black clothes, black, leaf-shaped hat and yellow
riding-boots--the Father of Ice in person.  The missionary dismounted,
tied his horse by the head-rope to a loose stone of the wall, and came
forward, stooping to escape the branches of the fig-tree.

"Welcome, sir!" exclaimed Abdullah, smiling and bowing, though his mind
misgave him.  "My house a boor one, sir, but at your service."

"Good day to you," replied the missionary coldly, and passed in before
him.

"I have come about this shocking business of your nephew," he observed,
declining to sit down, though Abdullah brought forth cushions.  "The
news reached me only yesterday, and I have been this morning to see
that man Elias.  His story seems quite clear, in spite of all the
nonsense about buried treasure.  The young Englishman doubtless took a
considerable sum of money with him, and Iskender has beguiled him by
the story of the treasure, meaning to rob him, if not worse."

"Oh, sir, it's all a lie, by God!" exclaimed Abdullah; but the Father
of Ice paid no attention to him.

"I grieve to think of that misguided boy.  He was like a child of our
own at the Mission, till bad companions led him into evil ways.  Of
course, now he must pay the penalty of his transgression.  You natives
must be taught once more that the life and property of British subjects
are not to be lightly made away with.  I wrote to the consul last
night, directly I had news of this atrocious affair.  Iskender, poor
misguided boy, will bear the punishment.  But in my opinion, and in the
sight of God, there are others more to blame than he in the matter.  I
mean those who led him astray, who first suggested to him a life of
fraud and peculation."  The missionary looked straight into Abdullah's
eyes with the sternness of a righteous judge.  "It is of no use to deny
your own part in it, for I have spoken with the mother of the wretched
lad, and she has told me how you were the first to propose that he
should attach himself to this young English visitor with a view to
making money, how you egged him on and taught him all the tricks of the
trade.  Are you not ashamed of yourself, an old man, with death close
before you?  But all you natives are alike conscienceless, blind to the
truth as if a curse from God was on you.  Be sure that I, for one, am
not blind to your guilt in this affair, and that I shall mention it to
Cook's agent at the first opportunity.  You have led the boy to
renounce his faith, and now to crime!  I hope you are proud of your
handiwork!  Good-day!"

Abdullah found not a word.  He stood staring at his feet, stunned and
trembling.  The whole structure of his pride caved in on him.  He, the
Sheykh of the Dragomans, the respectable of respectables, made so by
especial favour of the Blessed Virgin, to hear such words from one of
those very English whose esteem upheld him!  He soiled his face with
mud and camel's dung and sat in his house, lamenting, refusing every
comfort that his wife or the sympathising neighbours could devise to
offer.  Some two hours after noon there came a storm with terrifying
flashes.  The thunder shook the house, the solid earth.  At one moment
the gnarled and twisted branches of the fig-tree were seen black
against a sharp illumination, the next smoke-grey and weird amid the
inky gloom.  They seemed like snakes approaching stealthily, and then
like loathsome arms intent to seize his soul.  The storm gave place to
steady rain; the world was lightened somewhat, but without relief.
Abdullah, though a prey to all the horrors, sat there quite still till
evening, when suddenly the force of life returned to him.  He rushed
out to the nearest tavern, called for arac, and drank heavily.  The
honour which had resulted from his vision now seemed torn from him; and
since She withdrew her favour, he was free to break his vow.  That
night, returning home, he snatched the sacred picture from its shelf
and trod it under foot, to his wife's terror.




CHAPTER XX

Southward and eastward rode Iskender with his loved Emîr.  Crags
succeeded crags; the sky was turquoise.  At noon the very gorges held
no shade; but in the morning and the evening there were halls of
coolness, while the sunlight made the heights as bright as flower-beds.
Wild-flowers shone everywhere among the rocks; and in the open places
blew wide fields of them.  Whenever they came to a village, and pitched
their tent beside the well, the inhabitants bustled out to do them
service in return for stale scraps of news from the outer world; and
Iskender told them of the greatness and the power of his Emîr, till
they esteemed it a rich reward merely to peep through the hangings of
the tent at such a potentate.  Even supposing that they never found the
Valley of the Kings, this ramble together through delightful solitudes
was worth the money spent, it seemed to him.  The valley full of gold
was a pretext only, giving the taste of purpose to their doings and
clothing them in the glamour of romance.  And his patron seemed to view
it in the same reasonable light, for he evinced no hurry, but when they
reached some pleasant spot, would waste a day there, prowling among the
gullies with his gun, while Iskender sketched.  If the worst came to
the worst, Iskender considered, he could always declare in anguished
tones that he had lost the way--a matter of no wonder in the pathless
desert.  And he still trusted that Allah, of His boundless mercy, would
lead them straight to the gold.

But one night there came a sudden storm of wind and rain when they were
encamped upon the summit of a rocky mound at the junction-place of two
wild gorges.  Their tent was blown away, and they were drenched to the
skin.  It was found impossible to raise the tent again because of the
strong wind hurtling through the ravines.  The rain soon ceased,
however; they managed to protect the fire, and sat close round it,
trying to make a joke of the disaster.  But in the morning the Emîr's
face had changed its colour, he kept shivering till his teeth
chattered, and was very cross.  Happily they had with them a supply of
quinine.  Iskender, who knew something of the ways of English people,
administered a dose at once.  He was for going back, seeing that the
theatre of these misfortunes was a place remote from any dwelling; he
warned his friend that they would find no village in the waste before
them--nothing but scattered wells, and chance encampments of the Bedû,
who might or might not prove friendly.  But the Emîr announced his
fixed intention to go on, whatever happened; and when Iskender ventured
to remonstrate, told him angrily to hold his tongue.  Was it likely he
was going to turn back now, having come so far?  He drank some whisky
neat, and then felt strong enough to mount his horse.

They went forward miserably in the chill, wet morning.  The sky was
nowhere seen; damp mists obscured every feature of the landscape.  The
muleteer, with head wrapped up in a shawl, intoned a kind of dirge,
pausing sometimes to ask Allah to improve his plight.  The Emîr's teeth
chattered and he cursed at intervals.  But most hapless of all three
was Iskender, who now knew that his lord was bent on finding the gold,
and valued the pleasant days already spent, their adventures by the
way, their friendly converse, solely as conducing to that end.

About the fourth hour the sun made itself felt; the mists began to
disperse, and depths of blue appeared.  The afternoon was fine and, in
the sunshine, the Emîr recovered cheerfulness.  He apologised for his
ill temper of the morning to Iskender, who strove to regard the stern
resolve he had expressed to see the Valley of the Kings as likewise
part of the attack of fever; but his mind misgave him.

That evening, after supper, the Emîr remarked that they had come an
eight days' journey at the lowest estimate, so, by the guide's own
showing, must be near the place.  He spread out his map between them,
and asked Iskender to point out its exact position.  Forced to decide
that instant, or arouse his friend's distrust, the poor youth breathed
a heart-felt prayer to Allah for direction and, after some show of
examining the chart, laid finger firmly on a certain spot.  The Emîr
then marked the place in pencil with a tiny cross, and reckoned up the
distance by the scale provided.

"It is quite near," he cried.  "We ought to be there to-morrow before
midday."

He talked of nothing else till sleeptime.  Iskender listened with an
anxiety that was physical pain.  He wished to Allah that Elias had been
there to assure him that the place had real existence.  Lying on the
ground, wrapped in his coverlet, he spent the night in prayer.  Allah
is all-powerful; at His mercy all things are and are not; even if the
valley lay not where Iskender had placed it, Allah could convey it
thither in the twinkling of an eye; even if no such place existed in
the world, Allah could create it as easily as a man can yawn.  By
dwelling thus in imagination on that Boundless Power, he gained at
length a certain comfort in dependence such as the baser sort of slaves
enjoy.

This mood of resignation was still upon him when he rose at daybreak.
There remained nothing possible for him to do; and in the fresh
morning, when the rocks in sight presented each its separate mass of
living colour, he could not believe that the Emîr would quarrel with
him, even if he knew the worst.  The Emîr was a rich man; what did he
want with gold?  And had not Iskender proved himself his faithful
servant?  Surely the great one felt some love for him, sufficient to
condone a little fiction which had been kept up simply for his Honour's
pleasure.

But the Frank had his map before him in the saddle, and he more than
once dismounted to consult the compass on his watch-chain.

After three hours they reached a plain of alternating sand and rocks,
where nothing grew except some prickly shrub.  On one side, not far
off, a lake was seen, with many palm-trees mirrored in its tranquil
waters.  The Frank stared at it in amazement, remarking that it was not
in the map.  Iskender guessed it was mirage, and was soon confirmed in
that opinion by the gradual disappearance of both lake and palm-trees.
But the vision tended to reassure him, seeming a word from the Most
High.  If Allah, he thought, could thus imprint a perfect likeness of
trees and water on the hot, still air, He would have no difficulty in
painting a few rocks golden.

The sun was fierce.  For miles they saw no shade, but only strange
rock-ledges rising no higher than a doorstep above the sand, which grew
low, prickly shrubs.  A range of hills before them seemed hopelessly
remote.  Near the middle of this waste, the Emîr drew rein.

"The valley should be here," he said with finger on the map; and
Iskender in the tension of his nerves was going to shout out "Praise to
Allah," for the sand just there was full of shining particles; when the
next words came and froze him to the marrow: "There's no valley;
nothing but this beastly plain.  Are you a liar?"

A trace of kindness or dry humour in his tone would have compelled
Iskender to confess the truth, with self-accusal.  As it was, he cried:

"Haf batience!  Wait a minute!  I had counted wrong.  See, there are
mountains!  Surely the wady will be there among them."  Inwardly he
prayed Allah to make good his words, to save him from the scorn of one
he loved so truly.

"Well, come on!" said the Emîr, with a shrug; and they toiled in
silence towards the range of hills.

"You, who know the way, point out this valley," said the Emîr as to a
dog, when they were near enough to observe the configuration of those
heights.

Iskender pointed to what seemed an opening; but knew that his gesture
carried no conviction.  The Frank's cold looks askance at him deprived
him of the power to play his part.

"We shall see," said the Emîr, urging his horse forward.  At the
entrance to the wady he dismounted, and Iskender, who was then some way
behind, could hear derisive laughter.  It was no valley at all.  The
shadow of a big projecting rock had been mistaken in the distance for
an opening.  The Frank was sitting calmly in that shadow when his
friend came up.

"I can see no gold here," he observed politely; "but you have better
eyes.  Look well about you!"

Three parts unconscious, the unhappy youth obeyed.  Alighting off his
horse, he scanned the heights above, the ground at his feet, the sandy
plain on which their mules were seen at a great distance.

"No gold! no gold!" he murmured idiotically.

"Give up this acting!" cried the Frank with vehemence.  "Confess it was
all a lie!  Say why you brought me here.  We are man to man just now,
and may as well arrange our business before your friend the muleteer
comes up.  That missionary told me to look out for villainy."

Iskender bit the dust and wept aloud, calling on Allah to attest his
innocence.  To be accused of acting, when his heart was broken; to be
suspected of a purpose hostile to his patron, when he would have shed
his blood to bring a smile to that beloved face!

"Confess!" the Emîr repeated; and, hearing the voice of the Father of
Ice, Iskender lied, as he had always lied, through fear, to that stern,
upright man.

"No, it is true, sir, but we went wrong somehow.  My God, it is true,
sir; Elias said so too!"

"Elias is a liar. . . .  Confess now that you never knew the way, and
that your father never in his life saw any valley such as that you've
so often described to me."

But Iskender would not admit that he had lied at all; to do so would
have been to justify his patron's cruel scorn.  Indeed, the fiction of
the gold had grown so natural that he believed, even now, that it was
partly true.

"You never knew the way; your father never left you any paper.  It is
pretty certain that he couldn't read or write.  What a fool I was not
to think of that before!  If there were such a paper you would have it
with you.  Show it me!" the Emîr insisted.

Iskender appealed to Heaven against his lord's unreason.  Was it likely
that his mother, to whom it of right belonged, would let so important a
document out of her own keeping?  He had read it through and copied it,
but lost the copy yesterday, he knew not how.  It was owing to that
loss that he had missed the way.  His memory had played some devil's
trick to shame him.  The sand at his feet, the plain, the rocks beside
him seemed all flame, reminding him poignantly of his vision of the
place of gold.  The air upon his face and hands was the breath of an
oven, the sky a blackness overhead.

The Emîr rose and walked towards his horse.  The contemptuous movement
stung Iskender like a lash in the face.  He clutched at his patron's
raiment, sobbing and blubbering, imploring forgiveness for his one
mistake.  The Emîr beat him off with his whip, and, springing into the
saddle, rode off slowly.  Leading his own horse by the bridle, Iskender
followed after him, with piteous appeals.  Nothing mattered save their
mutual affection.  What was truthfulness as compared with human love?
Appalled by the prospect of life, if deprived of his lord's regard, he
put forward his limitless devotion as a claim for kindness, and fancied
that his friend was listening, not unmoved.  It was with disappointment
that he heard again, in icy tones:

"You knew from the first that it was all a lie."

Nay, he protested, how could he be certain?  He had not been alone in
declaring that the gold was there; Elias had said so too.  Why should
he alone be made responsible?

The Emîr deigned not so much as to look on his despair.

Returning thus across the plain, they met the mules.  The driver's
mouth fell open at the Frank's command to turn back, just when they
were near the limit of that arid waste and all the beasts were tired.
It was some time before this man, Mahmûd, had mind for aught beyond his
own complaints; but when at length he realised that Iskender, his good
friend, was in disgrace, he also made entreaty for his pardon.  The
Emîr, with him on one side and Iskender on the other, took alarm.  He
laid his hand on the revolver at his belt, and commanded both to keep
their distance.

Mahmûd with a shrug dropped behind, calling out to Iskender that it was
the sun, and asking Allah to restore the poor khawâjah; but Iskender
still adhered to his beloved lord, wishing that he would carry out his
threat and shoot him dead.  Then perchance his righteous anger would be
turned to sorrow; he would regret the blind devotion of his willing
slave.

A sudden shout from the muleteer made them both look round.




CHAPTER XXI

A swarm of mounted Arabs, shadows in the sun-haze, was careering
towards them, leaving a dust-cloud trailing on the distant plain.
Their lance-points glittered.  They were nearing rapidly.  Iskender
stood gaping, awestruck at the sight, when a whip-lash scored his face.

"You infernal scoundrel!" snarled the Emîr through his clenched teeth.
"So this is why you've brought me all this way.  They made it worth
your while, no doubt.  I might have guessed.  That missionary warned me
plain enough."

Iskender nursed his wounded face, and writhed with pain.  For the
moment he could neither hear nor think nor see.

The wild horsemen galloped in a herd to within a hundred yards of the
travellers, when they fanned out neatly and surrounded them.  The Frank
had plucked out his revolver.

"Don't do that, sir, for God-sake!" Iskender shrieked.  "You make them
cross."

Still with hands pressed to his wounded face he blessed the assailants
loudly, and asked how they did.  For answer they told him to make his
companion drop the pistol; which, when the order was conveyed to him,
the Amir did sullenly.  The Arabs then rode near, and stared in the
faces of their captives.

They were a ragged-looking troop, clad every one in armour, were it but
of leather.  Queer helmets showed beneath their dirty head-shawls, and
a few wore tattered coats of mail of high antiquity.  Only their fierce
bold eyes, strong spears, and clean-limbed horses kept the laugh from
them.  Their husky speech was full of words and phrases strange to
Iskender.

When all had satisfied their curiosity, the throng rode off, leaving a
sufficient guard to follow with the prisoners.  Iskender learnt that
they were surprised to find so small a company.  Having heard of the
approach of a great prince of the English, their chief expected to
receive a visit from his Highness, with supplication in due form for
leave to journey through his territory.  When he learnt that the Emîr
had entered his realm without so much as a salâm aleykum, he resolved
to make the mannerless cub his guest by force.  For this purpose he had
sent forth all his braves in war trim, supposing that the English chief
had power to match his insolence, only to surprise a train which a
blind man could have taken single-handed!

Bitterly did Iskender curse his own vain-glory which had led him to
boast at every village of his patron's greatness, and the absolute
power which he wielded in the land of his birth.  He was separated now
from his dear one in the cavalcade, catching only an occasional glimpse
of his back, which had a sullen hunch.  He forgot the pain of his own
face in fears for him.

At the end of an hour's slow riding, the barren waste gave place to
slopes of coarse grass, where a number of camels, sheep, and goats were
feeding peacefully.  The camp of the Bedû appeared--a little town of
black tents in a hollow, from which shouts, neighs, and much barking of
dogs proceeded.  Once there, Iskender lost sight of his Emîr, who, as
the prisoner of importance, was taken straight to the chief's tent.  He
himself was left standing with Mahmûd among the tent ropes, in some
peril from the heels of tethered stallions.  A smell of hairy beasts
defiled the air.  Dark-skinned women and children came to stare at
them.  The girls expressed compassion for Iskender's wounded face, and
cried shame on the man who had disfigured it, supposing him to be one
of their own people.  The muleteer, a Muslim, made profession of his
faith, attesting the Unity of God and the Mission of Muhammad loudly,
in the evident persuasion that his hour had come.

Iskender wondered what his lord was undergoing, and then as the day
grew cooler, gave up thinking altogether, happy to lie down and rest.
The women told him he was free to walk about, but for long he felt no
call to use the privilege.  At last, however, seeing his horse was
tethered close at hand, he went and took from the saddle-bags his book
and paint-box, and began to make a likeness of the scene; the women
gathered round and cried: "Ma sh' Allah!"  They took the lines and
spots for magic writing, and gathered shyly round them, half expecting
apparitions.

He was in this employment when men came in haste and dragged him to the
chief's tent.  He managed to stow the paint-box in his trousers, but
the book was lost.

"Allah have mercy on thee, O Iskender!" groaned Mahmûd, as he was led
away.  "They have slain the khawâjah; now they come for thee.  Well I
am a Muslim, and resign my cause to God!"

In the tabernacle of the chief, superior only in size to the rest of
the tents, the elders of the tribe were set in council, the Emîr before
them.  At the moment of Iskender's entrance there was a puzzled look
upon each bearded face, directed towards the Frank in perfect courtesy.
The arrival of an interpreter was hailed with exclamations of relief.

Iskender, having made obeisance, was invited to take a place in the
circle.  From the join of two camel's hair curtains screening an inner
tent, he fancied he could see bright eyes of women peeping.

"Is this the great Emîr, of whom report has reached us?" he was asked.
"And if so, how comes he to travel with so small a retinue?"

The Frank's eyes dwelt upon Iskender's face with an intensity of
distrust that neighboured actual hatred.  He still believed his friend
in league with the marauders.

"It is true; he is an Emîr of the noblest, O my lords," Iskender
answered; "but, may it please your Honours, he has not that wealth to
which his rank entitles him.  Indeed, for one in his position, he is
poor."

The chieftains of the Bedû nodded comprehension, for poor Emîrs were
not unknown among them.  They murmured of compassion saying:

"May Allah make him very rich and powerful!"

But one objected:

"Why then does he travel?  The rich among the Franks come hither for
adventure and to rest their stomachs after too much feasting; their
learned come to find out ancient ruins, and study the writings of the
idolaters which are found here and there among the rocks.  But why
should this poor noble youth have wandered hither?"

"Aye, answer us that, O Nazarene!  Why, why, and for what reason?" came
the chorus.

Iskender found himself at a loss, being loth to revive his lord's anger
by naming the valley of the gold in his hearing; he was looking up and
down in the vain search for inspiration, when the Emîr himself came
unexpectedly to his relief.  With an ironical glance at the
interpreter, the Englishman mustered all his Arabic and, turning to a
sheykh who was his neighbour, asked:

"Is there a wady named Wady 'l Mulûk?"

"Wady 'l Mulûk!" cried all the elders in surprise; and then, in the
twinkling of an eye, their foreheads cleared from all bewilderment.
Wady 'l Mulûk!  Ah to be sure!  The vale in which lay scattered all the
treasure of the ancient kings.  So that was what his Honour came to
seek!

Iskender was no less perplexed than was his lord by all this outcry,
when the chief of all the tribe leaned towards him, saying:

"I understand.  He seeks the Valley of the Kings," and touched his
forehead meaningly.  "May Allah heal him!  The Lord forbid that we
should plunder such a one, or detain him beyond his pleasure.  All such
are favoured of Allah!  Be our guests from now."

And he gave his orders for a feast to be prepared.

All the old men fell to petting and caressing the Emîr, grieving to
think that one so young and comely was spoilt for the commerce of life
by a deranged intelligence.  Iskender, too, they treated as a friend.
Their original intention, they confessed, had been to hold his Honour
up to ransom; but now they offered gifts instead of claiming them.

Iskender, the moment he could do so with politeness, went out and
searched the camp till he regained his sketch-book.  Mahmûd, the
muleteer, called to him from the mouth of a tent where he was feasting
as the guest of a tall Bedawi.  He proclaimed the safety of their lives
a miracle, attributable solely to the fact that he himself had not
ceased to assert the Unity of God from the moment he was taken captive
till men came and blessed him.  All gave praise to Allah.




CHAPTER XXII

In the morning, Iskender's face had swollen where his lord had whipped
it, half-closing one of the eyes.  The chiefs of the Arabs cried out at
sight of it and asked to know the cause of its disfigurement when their
guests prepared to set forth in the morning under the escort of two
armed and mounted tribesmen.  He put them off with the story of a fall
from his horse.  The Frank glanced but once at his handiwork; and then
looked down and bit his lip, contrition and annoyance at war in his
demeanour.  After riding long in gloomy silence, he inquired:

"What made them change?"

Iskender, wishing to take all the credit of the deliverance to himself,
and at the same time to avoid mention of Wady 'l Mulûk, replied:

"I told them you are mad."

"You told them what?" exclaimed the Emîr from frozen heights of anger.

"That you are mad, sir."

A storm of abuse, couched in language he had never heard among the
missionaries, stupefied Iskender, who had expected compliments upon his
cleverness.

"You dared to tell them I was mad."  The Emîr seemed thunderstruck.  He
presently announced his resolve to return at once to captivity; but
Iskender with a courage unexpected by himself, assured him that would
be to prove his madness.  The palpable truth of this contention angered
the Frank, like a blow.  He flushed crimson and turned upon Iskender
with whip raised.

"Leave me, you infernal fool," he cried.  "Clear out, I say!  Let me
never see your cursed face again! . . .  Don't grin, you ape!  Get out
of my sight, or I shall murder you."

Iskender turned his horse and rode off slowly with many a backward
glance of pure dismay.  Who would have dreamt that his Emîr, the
easiest of men, could ever be transformed into this raging tyrant?  The
tragedy of his own disgrace seemed insignificant beside the wreck of
his dear lord's intelligence.  For the Emîr was mad, not a doubt of it;
Iskender had not lied in his report to the Arab sheykh.  He went back
till he met the baggage animals, then turned his horse and rode beside
Mahmûd.  The latter paused in his journey-chant to ask:

"What news, O my dear?"

"The Emîr has driven me away," Iskender blubbered.  "He wishes never to
see my face again."

"May Allah cure him of his illness!  It is sure he is possessed with
devils more than one!  Be not so mournful, O my soul!  After an hour,
in sh' Allah, he will have forgotten anger."

"In sh' Allah!" Iskender echoed, weeping bitterly.

The muleteer resumed his road-song, and they fared along through a land
of sunbaked rocks, where spots of shade were welcome to the eye as
springs of water, the mule-bells clanging ceaselessly, until they
scaled a ridge whence the whole rough sea of uplands could be surveyed.
Their Arab guides had stopped here, clearly wishing to return, and were
trying to make the Emîr understand their purpose by shouting in his
ears.

"Go thou, Mahmûd, and hear what they have to say.  Inquire the road of
them and point it out to the Emîr," Iskender murmured.

He himself stopped short, fearing his lord's fresh anger.  The Emîr had
descried him, however, and came riding towards him.

"What are you following for?  Didn't I say that I had done with you?"

"Oh, sir!"  Iskender burst into a flood of tears.  "Haf mercy!  Drife
me not away!  I luf you so! and how can I leaf you in this wilderness.
You loose your way, and I--I die of fear!"

His tears and piteous words only displeased his lord the more.  But it
seemed to be the livid weal upon his face that quite incensed the
Frank.  The moment his eyes fell on that, his wrath leapt past all
bounds.

"You lying, cringing cur!" he yelled.  "Get out, I tell you!  The sight
of you's enough to drive one mad.  If I catch you following again, I'll
give you such a thrashing as you never had in all your life."

With that he gnashed his teeth and rode away.

Iskender remained where he was.  The two Bedawis, departing, wished
good luck to him, but swore that, for their part, they had liefer feed
on prickly shrubs than serve so mad a master.  He could hear Mahmûd
objecting to go on without him, and the Frank commanding, threatening,
till with a shrug the muleteer gave way, and shouted: "Straight on!"
for Iskender's guidance.  The clangour of the bells broke out anew.

Iskender waited till the little train was lost to sight, then followed
miserably.  His love was very ill, there was no doubt, and needed
better tendance than Mahmûd, with the best intentions, could afford
him.  The muleteer could only, at the best, cook country food, while
cleanliness and comfort were unknown to him.  He could not make a bed
or clean a riding-boot.  Iskender clenched his teeth and swore it
should not be.  At all risks his sick lord must be made comfortable.
So when, at sundown, he came in sight of the tent, he dismounted and
tethered his horse out of sight, then walked up boldly.  Mahmûd was at
the fire behind the wind screen.

"Welcome, O my eyes!" he whispered, giving place.  "Allah knows I
cannot cook a Frankish supper; yet his Honour will not hear of thy
return.  Now, praise to Allah, he is sound asleep, being tired from the
journey.  Make no noise, however, for, if he found thee here, he might
well shoot thee.  He is very mad indeed; may Allah heal him!"

Iskender stayed and cooked a tempting meal out of the provisions given
by the Arab sheykh.  Then taking food and water for himself and his
horse, he returned to his hiding-place, where, in the shelter of a
rock, he spent that night.

In the dawn he listened for the sounds of starting, and heard the
mule-bells die away before he mounted.  He had saved a piece of bread,
a date or two, on which he broke his fast at noon; and not long after
saw the tent shine forth, white in the yellow landscape, beside the
flat roofs of a village terracing a steep hillside.  He recognised the
place as one of those where they had rested happily upon the outward
way.  The sheykh received him in his house; his horse was cared for.
Towards sunset he approached the tent.  Mahmûd, from afar off,
signalled that the coast was clear.

"The Emîr has wandered off among the rocks," he told Iskender.  "There
is no cooking to be done this evening, he has no appetite except for
fruit and arac.  His sickness tightens hold, it is well seen.  Enter
now, I pray thee, and make straight the bed.  I cannot do it in the
manner thou didst teach me.  I myself must go into the village and buy
fruit of some kind."

Iskender made the bed with loving touches, full of thoughts of his dear
lord.  He was finishing the work, when a shadow came across the sunset
at the tent-mouth.  The Emîr stood there as one transfixed with horror.
Iskender clasped his hands, and drooped his eyes.  An oath rang forth,
a fierce hand clutched his throat, a whip descended on his back and
limbs; it burnt like fire.  Iskender, maddened, closed with his
assailant, wrenched the whip from his hand and flung him off.  The Emîr
fell heavily.  Iskender flung away the whip, and fled in terror.

What had he done?  The Emîr was weak through illness.  His known
inferior in strength had thrown him easily.  Iskender would have shed
his life-blood to recall the blow, would have borne the beating to the
end unflinching.  He prayed to Allah that no hurt had come to his
beloved.  Returning after dark, he interrogated Mahmûd, who assured him
the Emîr was just the same, no worse, no better.  That was some small
comfort.

Sadly he followed in his loved one's track, through places which had
seen his former glory, secreting himself always in the village next to
which the tent was pitched, and stealing forth at evening, when the
Emîr rested, to cook the supper and consult Mahmûd.

"His madness grows much worse," the man informed him.  "He throws
things at my head and often beats me, because I cannot do things that
are not my business, or fail to understand his words.  My soul is angry
sometimes, and I long to show my strength; but behind the weakest of
these Franks there is the consul standing; and indeed it were a sin for
any man to punish one so afflicted.  His face is yellow, his hands
shake.  I often fear that he is going to die!"

"Allah forbid!" exclaimed Iskender fervently.  It was his daily prayer
that they might reach the town and its conveniences before his sickness
quite disabled the Emîr.  It seemed as if this prayer was to be
answered.  They had returned to within a few hours of their
starting-place, and had pitched their tent upon the coastland plain at
the foot of the hills, when Iskender one morning, in his hiding-place,
listened in vain for the accustomed noise of starting.  Alarmed at
length, he quitted cover, and drew near the tent.  Mahmûd sat out
before it in the sunshine, cross-legged, and staring gravely at his
mules, which were browsing the coarse grass.  From time to time he
pushed his turban back to scratch his head with a perplexed expression.

"Allah is merciful!" he exclaimed at sight of his friend.  "The Emîr
still lags a-bed.  He will not hear me, though three times I have
coughed from soft to loud in his presence, and knocked the chair
against the table with progressive noise.  His sleep seems troubled,
for I hear him utter unknown words.  God grant that he may awake
refreshed and free from madness!"

Iskender advanced on tip-toe to the tent and entered its deep shadow.
The Emîr turned on the small camp-bed and spoke his name
affectionately.  With a bursting heart Iskender flung himself upon the
ground, confessing all things, asking pardon for his crimes.  It was
long ere he realised that his beloved was not present, that what had
greeted him so friendly was the demon of delirium.  His very marrow
froze on the discovery.

Then, in that moment of his greatest need, his thoughts flew straight
to his old foes, the missionaries.  Though harsh and arrogant in times
of health, they had not their like in the land for kindness when a man
was ill.  He told Mahmûd to take the horse of the Emîr and ride for his
life to the Mission.

Having seen the messenger depart he went back into the tent, and sat
down on the ground beside the sick-bed.  He sullied his face with
earth, and moaned to Allah.  When some fellâhîn from the village near
at hand became spectators of his grief, he asked them to provide fresh
milk, a lot of it, having heard that milk was salutary in the treatment
of a feverish illness.  The milk was brought to him, with scorn of
payment.  He gave a cupful to the Emîr, and repeated the dose at
intervals thereafter, with ceaseless prayers to Allah for his lord's
recovery.

It was the third hour after noon when he heard foreign voices and the
tramp of several beasts before the tent.  The priest of the Mission
entered gravely with the Sitt Carûlîn.  The Sitt Hilda followed,
looking fresh and tempting despite the sorrow painted on her face.
Iskender sprang to greet them, giving praise to Allah; at such a time
he had no thought of bygones; but the ladies turned from him in
disgust; the Father of Ice bade him begone and hide his infamy.  Going
out in obedience to that harsh command he found a litter with two mules
waiting in charge of Mahmûd, in addition to the thoroughbred horse of
the missionary and the donkeys of the two ladies, which were guarded by
Costantîn, the father of Asad.

"May Allah comfort thee, O Iskender!" exclaimed the muleteer fervently.

"May Allah have mercy on thee, rather," chuckled Costantîn malignantly;
"for thou art like to suffer death for this last exploit!"

Iskender scarcely heard.  He ran until he was out of their sight, and
then lay down among some rocks and wept his fill.  When he returned
towards the camp an hour later, meaning to make himself useful
unobtrusively, it was to find nothing left on the spot where all his
interest in life had been so lately concentrated except an empty tin
and some bits of paper.  That, and the ashes of their last night's
fire!  He stood a long while staring fixedly at these memorials.




CHAPTER XXIII

More from subconscious attraction than from impulse Iskender trudged
for hours across the wide coast plain till he reached the sandhills and
beheld the house of the missionaries.  It was then towards midnight,
and the moon was rising.  He sat and watched that house, with scarcely
a movement, till the dawn came up, and the moon became a symbol in the
lighted sky.  With the cries of waking birds, with the return of
colour, his blood flowed warm again.  He arose, and turned towards his
mother's house.  The sun appearing as he reached the cactus hedge, he
paused a moment to survey the well-known scene in that moment of
transfiguration, when the sea caught light, and shadows stretched
themselves luxuriously.  He felt the paint-box at his breast with hope
revived.

Through the open door he could see that his mother was at prayers,
kneeling before the picture of the Blessed Virgin which he had painted
for her long ago before he knew the way of it.  From time to time she
lowered herself upon her hands until her forehead touched the ground.
He stood without upon the sand till she had finished.

Her first expression was of glad thanksgiving, as she ran and clasped
him to her breast; then, in a trice, her voice resumed its ancient
scold, with an addition of real anger.

"May thy life be cut short!  What devil brought thee hither, of all
places in the world the one where thy foes are most sure to seek thee?
Fly, I tell thee!  Fly, O accursed malefactor!  They have complained
against thee to the consul."

Iskender begged for food, which she could not refuse, though she
produced it unwillingly, and stood over him while he ate, adjuring him,
for the love of Allah, to make haste.

"O my terror, my despair!" she wailed.  "All the slaves of power are
out in search of thee.  They have been here already, threatening me
with torture.  And the missionaries also have been here each day,
maligning thee, and forcing me to join the hue and cry.  They have spat
their venom also on Abdullah, thy paternal uncle, even blackening his
face with Kûk!  The poor good man has been forced to return to his
drunkenness.  Have I not grief enough already that thou must needs fly
hither and increase my terrors?  What ailed thee to mislead the young
Emîr?  I warrant thou hast made no profit by it.  And that fine
treasure written to thy name, predestined for thee, hast brought back
any of it, luckless boy?"

"I missed the way, O my mother.  The Emîr fell ill; we were captured by
the Bedû; all things warred against me."

"So I could have told thee!  It is a judgment on thee for keeping
secrets from thy loving mother! . . .  For the love of Christ, make
haste, have done with eating.  If Costantîn or one of the ladies were
to catch thee here, or if the soldiers come and slay thee before my
eyes!"

Something of her anxiety communicated itself to him.  With the rest of
the food in his hands he departed hastily.  But after running for,
perhaps, a hundred paces, he shrugged his shoulders and resigned his
cause to Allah.  On all hands homely objects wooed his gaze: a lone
fig-tree down in a hollow, among whose branches he had perched and
dreamed as a small boy; the path, now scarce defined, by which he went
to school, choosing always to rush up the steepest part of the dune
through excess of energy; the tamarisks round the Mission, and its high
red roof; minarets and a dome of the town peering above the dark green
wave of gardens.  All looked so pleasant in the early sunlight, it
forbade him to feel concern for his own fortunes.  Even though, by
cruel misconstruction of his motives, he were disgraced for life, all
this remained to him.  In attaching his desires to this he ran no risk
of being wounded, as he had been by the human things he sought to love.

Strolling thus in reverie, he came upon the house of Mîtri with
surprise.  The thought of the priest as a protector at once occurred to
him; for Mîtri was a favourite with the Muslim rulers, and the Orthodox
Patriarch, his ecclesiastical head, could oppose a power almost
consular to any attempt to persecute a member of his flock.

On the sunlit open space before the church, in the centre of which rose
the ilex-tree, pigeons and a few lean fowls were pecking and dusting
their wings, with rapturous coos and chuckles.  No one appeared at the
doors of the hovels, all of which stood open, nor did any voice but
that of hens proceed from thence.  But through the door-way of the
little church came a sound of high monotonous chanting, interrupted at
regular intervals by loud ejaculations from an audience.

Iskender pulled off his boots, and went in.  The little nave was full
of people, some standing, a few kneeling, the most part lying prostrate
on the beaten earth which served instead of pavement.  Through the door
of the sanctuary, he could see the priest Mîtri, gorgeously arrayed,
serving at the altar, bright with many candles which leaned this way
and that without the least arrangement.  Now he walked all round it
swinging a little censer, now stopped before a largeish book upon a
stand, reciting all the time in nasal tones.  Nor was this all his
business; for, except when the curtain was drawn at the moment of the
Sacred Mystery, he kept an eye on the behaviour of some little boys who
sat demurely on the doorstep of the sanctuary, and, catching one of
them at some mischief, interrupted the service to fetch him a cuff on
the ear and ejaculate, "Curse thy father, child of Satan!"  Among those
of the congregation who lay face to the earth, Iskender presently
recognised Elias; and close to him, both standing, were Selîm and Daûd,
sons of Mûsa.  No one seemed to have remarked his entrance.

The service ended, all pressed forward to kiss the hand of the
celebrant, and, having done so, one by one, streamed forth into the
sunlight.  Iskender soon thought himself alone in the church watching
the priest put out the altar-lights.  But suddenly out of the darkest
corner a man rose up and made a step towards the sanctuary, with arms
outstretched in fierce appeal; then cried aloud and, burying his face
in his hands, ran stumbling out.  Despite the untrimmed beard, the
dirty clothes, Iskender recognised Abdullah, and a shudder ran through
all his bones.

The priest, having disrobed, at length emerged from the sanctuary in
his everyday costume of black cassock and tall cylindrical headpiece;
when Iskender knelt before him with choice blessings, and implored his
aid.  In the shadow, with eyes yet dazzled from the radiance of the
tapers he had just extinguished, Mîtri could not make out who it was,
but holding the suppliant's hands led him up to the light.  "Ma sh'
Allah!" he exclaimed when he identified Iskender; and holding his hands
more tightly, took him to his own house.

There, having sent his wife out on an errand, he called for Iskender's
tale without delay, saying:

"I am much distressed on thy account; for the whole world speaks evil
against thee.  It is said that thou hast robbed and slain the English
Emîr who trusted thee.  A lie, no doubt; but still I fear for thee, for
the common voice outcries the truth down here.  Moreover, it is said
that thou hast sworn falsely by the Blessed Sacrament; Yuhanna Mahbûb
has vowed to kill thee for it.  That is a heinous sin if it be true.
Answer that first, before we proceed further.  Art thou indeed so
perjured?"

"No, O our father.  By Allah, I swore truly when I said I knew of no
treasure, as will appear from the full confession I now make to thee,"
Iskender answered, with eyes full of tears.  He was going to embark
upon his story when the figure of a woman closely shawled appeared
before them in the doorway.

"May Allah reward thee, O our father Mîtri," cried his mother, as,
stooping, she kissed the priest's black robe.  "In pity save Iskender
from those hounds of hell!  All that they speak against him is a lie.
It was the Frank led him astray, not he the Frank.  I guessed he would
fly straight to thee, the known friend and protector of the wronged,
and my soul desired to be with him and hear his story."

Relieved of the fear of the missionaries which pervaded her own abode,
she now embraced her son and, sitting beside him, took his hand in hers.

"Proceed with the story, O my son!" said Mîtri.

When all was told the woman wept aloud, exclaiming:

"Woe upon us!  It is worse than was supposed.  Iskender is a loser.
Iskender is most innocent of all men living.  Oh, who will show the
truth to those who hate him?  He has shown himself a fool--a perfect
fool!"

Therewith she rose to go, explaining that she dared not stay another
minute for fear the ladies of the Mission should go to the house in her
absence, and grow angry and suspicious at not finding her.  It was
their usual morning for the visit.  Once more she embraced her son,
exclaiming:

"This is upon us from the hand of Allah, unto whom be praise!  Yet--by
the Gospel!--I had thought thee more intelligent!"

Having made sure from the threshold that no one from the Mission was in
sight, she shuffled off along the burning road.

For some time Mîtri sat immersed in thought; while Iskender, on whom
the business of narration had brought back despair, hid his face in his
arm.  At length the priest pronounced:

"In all thy conduct as related I discern no grievous sin, but only
folly and a youth's wild fancies.  The Franks will call thee sinful and
a liar; but they, I think, have never known the youth which we
experience--the warmth, the wonder and the dreams of it.  The lad who
has been taught to read, or fed with stories, is dazzled by the vision
of the world, its sovereignties, its wealth, its strange encounters.
He pictures himself a ruler or a lord of riches, and invents a store of
marvels for his own delight; and that because he would admire himself,
and cannot do so in the daily tasks and mean surroundings of his actual
life.  I myself, when at the seminary, considered the Patriarch's
throne as mine of right, and should not have been greatly surprised to
find myself installed there with my copy-book in my hand.  But
by-and-by the world enlarged.  Its distances and depths appeared more
clearly.  I perceived how, in order to become a Patriarch, I must lead
the monastic life, renouncing homely joys; and even thus stood little
chance of gaining my desire, since all the chief among the monks are
foreign Greeks who despise us sons of the Arab, and would keep us down.
The face of a girl I loved soon exorcised ambition; and behold me a
small parish priest, a friend and equal of poor fellâhîn.  Now thy
dream was to be a Frank in all save birth, to associate with thy Emîr
on equal terms.  To that end all thy follies were invented.  The wish
was foolish only, but to put it into practice, that was fatal to
thee--a crime in all men's eyes!  'O dreamer, sit still in thy chamber,
thou art a prince: air thy princeship, men will teach thee thou art an
ass!'  The world defames thee, as is only natural.  It would have done
the same for me, had I, a poor young student, actually claimed the
honours of a Patriarch.  Allah made thee a son of the Arabs.  Accept
the part allotted, and give up aping that which thou canst never be.
The charge of perjury at any rate, is groundless as against thee.  I
will send word to Yuhanna, lest he harm thee.  And now the moral is: I
wish to help thee, but cannot well do so whilst thou art a heretic.
Promise to let me baptize and anoint thee without more ado, and Allah
witness I will make thy cause my own."

For the first time since their meeting in the church, the priest here
smiled.

"I swear it," said Iskender; "though Allah knows I care not what
becomes of me.  I pray thee, tell my uncle Abdullah what I have told to
thee, that his mind may be healed."

"That is useless, O my son; for I have reasoned with him.  His grief is
neither for thy deeds nor what is said of thee, but for some words
thrown at him by the English missionary.  He set such store by his
respectability and the esteem in which the Franks all held him, that
now, in his humiliation, none but Allah can relieve his mind."

While thus expounding, the priest took up his staff and exchanged his
thin house slippers for stout walking ones.  With the last words he
departed, bidding Iskender wait till he returned.

The youth sat still in dejection, hypnotised by the bright edge of
sunlight on the threshold, seeing nothing else.  He believed himself
alone, when a hand touched one of his--a hand as cool and lissom as a
serpent's skin.  The daughter of Mîtri knelt on the ground beside him.
She kissed his hand, and pressed it to her childish bosom.

"May Allah comfort thee!" she whispered.  "Look not so miserable, I
entreat thee, for it makes me cry.  When my father sent my mother out,
I hid behind the oven, and so heard thy tale.  If it is true, thou
didst well; and if it is false, I care not, thou didst well!  Praise to
Allah, thou art no longer a Brûtestânt; thou art one of us, and I can
call thee brother."

Up to this point her voice was full of love; but when, awake at last,
he tried to draw her to him, she cursed his ancestry and broke away.
She had supposed him quite disabled by misfortune.  Running fast across
the space of sunlight, she sat down in the shade of the oak-tree, where
he could still see her in the frame of the doorway, and fell to singing
softly to herself.

She was still sitting there, at play with some glass beads, when her
father returned.




CHAPTER XXIV

"Praise be to Allah!" exclaimed Mîtri, striding in and sitting down
beside Iskender.  As soon as he recovered breath, he told his story.

He had seen the secretary of the caimmacâm, and from him had learnt
that the English consul was Iskender's chief accuser.  Having no
influence to oppose to so powerful an adversary except that of the
Patriarch, Mîtri had decided in his mind to make appeal to His
Beatitude, who was sure to feel kindly disposed towards a convert from
Protestantism; when a message was brought to the functionary, whose
manner changed at once.  A telegram just received from the consul
himself declared the young man guiltless of the crimes imputed to him.
So pursuit was at an end.

Iskender thanked the priest, and praised his name.  In the warmth of
kindly treatment after many hardships, he cast aside reserve and
caution as mere winter garments, and, the girl Nesîbeh being still
before his eyes, kissed Mîtri's hand and owned his passion for her.
Already he loved Mitra as a father.  He prayed to Allah he might some
day be in truth his son.  That was his dearest wish, the one hope left
to him.  The priest regarded him with pure amazement for a space, then
burst out laughing.

"Thou son of a dog!" he cried.  "What words are these?  Is this the
season for such talk?  The girl is young to marry.  And thou art
overbold, a youth with nothing!  If thy mind is still the same, say
three years hence, then let thy mother approach her mother, who, I
think, would scorn such wealth as thou couldst offer.  Now to talk
sense.  Thou canst no longer lodge at the hotel, though Selîm and Mûsa
have maintained thy innocence, and, for themselves, would still have
welcomed thee.  But Mûsa, their father, has forbidden it.  He says, and
justly, that thy dwelling there would bring discredit on the house just
now, when every traveller has the tale of thy misdeeds and hates thy
name.  Come, and I will show thee thy lodging in the house of an old
couple on whom Allah has bestowed male offspring only.  It is but a
step from here."

Again Iskender thanked the priest and kissed his hand.  For the first
time in his life he felt at home in his own land.  The whole of the
Orthodox community were henceforth his brethren.

On the next day Elias came to visit him, without malice for the past or
the slightest recollection of ever in his life having slandered his
good friend, now his brother in the faith.  All his thoughts were of
Wady 'l Mulûk.  Had Iskender been there?  No?  Well, how was that?
Iskender confessed that he had lost the description of its whereabouts,
and his memory had played him false.  They had been very near to the
place, of that he felt sure; but the Emîr lost patience and refused to
search any further.  So, for lack of a little perseverance, all was
lost, and the whole expensive journey made for nothing.

Elias listened with devout belief.

"A pity!" he explained.  "But take heart, O my soul; thou and I will go
together one of these days and examine that whole region.  We shall
find it yet, in sh' Allah!"

So obliging was his friendliness that he insisted on being a witness of
Iskender's baptism upon the morrow.  His presence, with the scarlet
dust-cloak and the silver-mounted whip, astride of a prancing charger,
reflected glory on the little group of peasants who trudged out to the
nearest river, the priest with them.  On the return there was a feast
set forth in the house of Mîtri, and great rejoicing of the whole
community.  Elias was in boisterous spirits, boasting and telling
strange stories; the sons of Mûsa discussed politics and the price of
money with the rich Azîz; the priest made childish jokes and laughed at
them; while the remainder of the party, mere turbaned fellâhîn,
swarthy-faced and rough-handed, ate heartily and applauded all that was
said.  The only death's-head present was Abdullah.  Dismissed by Cook
as a result of the aspersions of the missionary, he now proclaimed his
intention to start business on his own account.  But men shook their
heads and winked aside when he talked of it.  The testimonials which he
vaunted as his stock-in-trade had been given to an elderly man of
dignity and pronounced decorum, not to this mouthing sheykh of the
dirty raiment and the visage ploughed by dissipation.  On the present
occasion he had no appetite for solid food, but sat apart morosely,
tasting from time to time with manifest disrelish the light drinks
provided.  It seemed he wished to go, but lacked the strength of mind
required to detach his person from so large a company.  His head and
hands kept trembling, and he muttered to himself.

Merriment was at its height when there came a knock at the door.  The
priest Mîtri opened, and exclaimed in glad surprise:

"Honour us, O khawâjah!  Come in!  Fear not!  All my guests are honest
people, and the occasion of our feast concerns thee nearly.  We have
this day reclaimed a Brûtestânt from the way of perdition.  Would to
Allah I might baptize thee also, O light of my eyes!"

The belated visitor would have drawn back at glimpse of so large a
gathering, but Mîtri took him by the arm and brought him in.  It was
the preacher Ward, the humblest of all missionaries, who was sent about
the country on the errands of the proud ones; a modest, pious man, who
spoke good Arabic and scorned not to converse upon a footing with the
natives of the land.

All rose upon his entrance.  Old Abdullah straightened his frame to
something of its former majesty, and said:

"Good efenin', sir!"

"I have come too late, I find," the small white-bearded clergyman
remarked to Mîtri, who had forced him to be seated and set food before
him.  "I knew not that the baptism had taken place.  My desire was only
to ascertain that Iskender was earnest in this change of faith, and not
impelled by anger at a treatment he conceived to be unjust."

"By Allah, no, he is the most sincere of converts!" responded Mîtri
with his jolly laugh.  "Have I anything to tempt a proselyte?  Look
round this room--with one beyond it, it is all my house--and compare it
with the dwelling of the Father of Ice.  Ah, no, my friend: this is a
true conversion!"

"I ask you to belief, sir, that I haf nothin' to do with it," said old
Abdullah angrily in English.  "I suffer much from unkind thin's beeble
say about me.  They haf ruined me in my brofession."

Mîtri silenced the old man.  With a Protestant missionary for his
guest, the priest thought all words wasted that were not employed on
controversial subjects.

"Thou art a good man, O khawâjah," he observed politely but with a
certain malice.  "Thou alone of all thy tribe wouldst deign to enter my
poor house without arrogance, and sit down with my friends and
neighbours in this kindly way; more especially this evening, when our
gladness is at your expense.  Tell me, I beseech thee, in what sense
the others of your kind serve Allah by building palaces in the land,
displaying a luxury unknown among us, and so tempting the weak and
worthless of the Church to gather round them in the hope of gain.  The
Muslimin are unassailable, being the rulers; and the Latins are too
strong and clever for them; so because their Honours must convert some
one, being paid and sent here for the purpose, they take example from
the Latins and turn on us, who are weak and not well educated.  But how
do they serve Allah in all this?  Explain to me, O my soul!"

The visitor stroked his thin white beard.

"Are the schools nothing?  Are the hospitals nothing?" he inquired.

"By Allah, it is true, they are much!" came in chorus from the company.

"But the charity might be greater if it were dissociated from attempts
at perversion," submitted Mîtri with a show of deep humility.

The missionary reflected for a moment before he said gently:

"Your ideas and ours are widely different.  When I was young I thought
with others of my kind, and preached conversion zealously and from the
heart.  But now that I am old I sometimes think as you do, and ask
myself what good there is in making proselytes.  But Allah is above all
of us; He alone sees the end.  We strive, and others strive, for
special objects, an all fail, or else find disappointment in success;
but Allah uses our success and failure, and with them gains an object
which we never saw.  Look back, O my friend, a score of years, and tell
me: Is not the intercourse between the divers sects and religions in
this country more friendly than it used to be; has not each more regard
for the other, while adhering more strongly than ever to its own creed?
Is not this to be ascribed to the missionaries, who pass from one to
the other, and cause them to compare their views, or at least
investigate them; who, by their very attacks, as you call them, have
done good, by forcing the attacked to look to their position and
resources?  The Muslimin, the very Jews, have grown more tolerant; they
never stone me now as heretofore.  Strange indeed if, where faith
assails faith in the name of Allah, Allah Himself should by that means
produce general toleration, and an end to proselytising!  Yet that is
what is happening, it seems to me.  The assaults of the Catholics and
the Protestants upon your Church have revived her.  Her priests are
better in their lives; they begin to be educated; and, as a
consequence, she holds her ground.  I submit to thee that we have made
few, if any, converts from you in the last ten years."

"That is true," said Mîtri, greatly interested; "and by my life thou
speakest like an angel.  Nevertheless, there is but one true Church on
earth; would that I might convince thee of her authority! . . .  But
thou eatest nothing!  Taste this sweetstuff, I entreat thee; it is
quite a delicacy!"

The rest of the company, finding the argument beyond them, were talking
among themselves in lower tones.  Only Abdullah, as a sometime
dragoman, kept near the missionary, interrupting his speech with
senseless scraps of English, all eagerness to translate for him the
words of Mîtri, till the latter stopped him with a curt "Be silent,
fool!"  And Iskender also hung upon the missionary, waiting an
opportunity to inquire for the young Emîr.  On a pause he thrust in his
question; when the missionary, who had been smiling at a joke of
Mîtri's, became of a sudden very grave.

"He lies at the gate of death," was his answer.  "The doctor doubts if
he will pass this night; but if he sees to-morrow's light, it means
that he will live, in sh' Allah!"

"May Allah preserve the poor young man!" said Mîtri, and resumed the
controversy.

But Iskender heard no more.  He slipped out, unobserved, into the
night, and stole down the sandy road through cloud-like orange-groves
to where the sandhills rolled beneath the stars.




CHAPTER XXV

Iskender walked all round the low garden-wall of the Mission, staring
through the feathery cloud of the tamarisks at the upper windows of the
house, till he saw a light in one of them, when he sat down on his
heels and watched it doggedly.  He feared the blame which would attach
to himself were the Emîr to die; still more the reproaches of his own
mind; but above all things he was conscious of a return of his old
devotion to the fair-haired stranger.  He recalled the Frank's many
kindnesses--in particular the splendid paint-box, which remained
Iskender's own--and, sobbing, prayed from the heart that he might live.
The hooting of an owl, or the bark of some dog in the distance, alone
broke the stillness, of which the rustle of the tamarisks seemed part,
so faint and vague it was.  At moments, looking up at the stars, he
could have deemed them living creatures, for they seemed to throb in
time with his own grief.

He knew not how long he had sat there in the darkness unafraid, when
the light in the room was moved.  A chill smote his heart.  He jumped
over the wall and drew nearer, in the hope to catch some word of what
was going on in there.  Inside the hedge of tamarisk the air was sweet
with flower scents, which floated thick and separate on the still air,
like oil on water.  He came beneath the window.  The light was once
more steadfast; so again he sat down on his heels and waited.
Presently the tamarisks were distributed by a cold breeze; they sighed
aloud; the stagnant perfumes of the garden were confused and scattered;
a whiteness came upon the wall before him, and the windows in it gave a
pallid gleam.  Having no desire to be caught lurking there by one of
the servants, he was on the point of departing, when the light in the
window was again moved, and while he stood in wonder what such
movements of the light portended, a door close by him opened, and the
Sitt Hilda came out into the garden.  She was weeping silently, with no
attempt to hide her tears.  Iskender sprang to her.

"He is dead?" he moaned in Arabic.  "May Allah have mercy on him!"

"He lives, the praise to Allah!" she replied, and with the words she
wept more copiously, and turned from him to smell the clustered flowers
of a certain creeping plant against the wall.

Echoing "Praise to Allah!" he withdrew.

She had not recognised him, had heard his question as the voice of
Nature.  It seemed to him that she had not answered it, but merely
sighed aloud her own thanksgiving.

"She loves him!" thought Iskender, with a flush of sympathy.

He found strange rapture in the knowledge of her passion for the fair
Emîr, in the prospect of a union of those two whom he had loved most of
all people in his former life.  They seemed in a sense his creatures,
and their love his handiwork.  If only he could help them to obtain
their heart's desire, could serve their happiness by any means, and get
forgiveness, he felt that he could enter on his new life without one
regret.




CHAPTER XXVI

Each morning and evening Iskender walked upon the sandhills until he
met with some one coming from the Mission who could give him the latest
tidings of the Emîr.  His mother spied him once from her house-door,
and indulged in furious gesticulations to the effect that he must fly
for his life.  When he gave no heed she shook her fist at him, and
opened her mouth wide to utter something, the sense of which was lost
in the distance.  She even came to his lodging, stealthily as of wont,
and implored him never to walk again so near the Mission.  It stopped
her breath, and caused her deathlike palpitations to behold him there.
The hatred of those children of abomination was so rank against him,
that they might hurt his body.  At the least they would wound his soul
with indignities which she could not bear to think of for her boy.

"Hilda is the only one of them with any kindness; and she, I know, is
always in the sickroom; she never now goes out beyond the garden.  The
mother of George is absent; the preacher Ward has gone again.  The
others!  They are known for devils, and they hate thee!  What madness
in thee to approach their house!"

When Iskender only laughed, she wrung her hands despairingly, and asked
her Maker for deliverance from such a madman.  Her apprehensions
proved, however, quite unfounded.

The ladies Carûlîn and Jane were touched by Iskender's solicitude, and
noticed him when passing on the road.  Costantîn the gardener answered
his demands, though grudgingly; and Asad told him all he wished to
know.  The last named even condescended to remonstrate with Iskender on
his change of faith, displaying the interest of a cultivated observer
in the motions of some curious wild creature.

"I am a son of the Arabs," was Iskender's invariable answer, "and have
no wish to seem to be a Frank.  My religion teaches me to remove my
hopes and ambitions from this world; and Allah knows I have experienced
enough of its vicissitudes.  All I ask now is leave to live and die in
peace."

"That is beautiful, what thou sayest!" Asad would rejoin with his
superior smile.  "But wait a month or so till thou hast survived thy
present grievance; then wilt thou wish that thou hadst done as I have.
For, only think!  I am to be sent to the land of the English to perfect
my studies.  There I shall take care to ingratiate myself with the
great ones of their Church, and to wed some noble lady of their race;
that, when I return hither, these people may be forced to treat me with
respect, and no longer as their servant and inferior.  I shall be a
great khawâjah, receiving perhaps two hundred English pounds every
year, whereas thou canst hope to be no more than a humble toiler at
some trade or other.  With the exercise of but a little self-control,
thou mightst have been all this instead of me.  Hadst thou but heard
the voice of my good counsel, much might have been preserved to thee.
Even now I would have helped thee for old friendship's sake.  In the
day of my power which is to come, in sh' Allah, it would have been easy
to procure for thee the post of a teacher in some school or of
lay-reader in some lesser mission.  But thy espousal of a barbarous
superstition, which no civilised and cultured person can so much as
tolerate, has put it quite beyond my power to serve thee."

Iskender hardly listened to such talk.  His mind found business in its
own devices.  He would have chosen to avoid the speaker altogether; but
even Asad's unconcerned announcements, sandwiched in between gibes at
the Orthodox faith were better than no tidings of his former patron.
And Asad always lay in wait for him, delighting to dazzle one so
downcast with the vision of his own high future.  One morning he said:

"The uncle of the convalescent is expected to arrive to-day.  He has
come all the way from Lûndra on hearing of his dear one's illness.  It
seems that thy sometime patron was ordered by the physicians to visit
Masr, his health being weak.  Growing weary of that land, where he knew
no one, and wishing to extend his travels, he came on here and made the
friends we know.  This uncle, who is his nearest relative, cared not
whither he went, so only that he was gaining health and strength; but
hearing that his beloved lay at death's door, he hastened hither, mad
with grief and rage.  The Father of Ice has received from him a
thousand costly telegrams, which demonstrate sufficiently his mind's
disorder.  It were well for thee to keep out of his way, for he will
certainly vow thy destruction when he has heard the story."

After this warning Iskender saw no more of Asad for three days, the
clergyman-designate being called upon to help in the housework.  But he
continued to walk near the Mission at sunrise and sunset; and at last,
one evening, going there as usual, he found Asad sitting, Frank-wise,
on a chair before the gate, devouring chunks of the sweetment called
baclâweh, which the cook had given him.  Espying the son of Yâcûb from
afar, the friendly youth sprang up in great alarm and waved him off
with frantic gestures, sweets in hand.

"Allah preserve thee, O Iskender; go back, O rash one!  Did not I tell
thee not to come again?  Only to approach the house is certain death.
The uncle of the poor sick man has sworn to drink thy blood, or at all
events to beat thee senseless, in payment for the way thou didst
beguile his nephew."  Asad sat down again upon the chair, and ate
another mouthful, then pursued: "The young man now is so much better
that he is able, with assistance, to pace the garden.  Yesterday it was
the Sitt Hilda who supported him; but to-day it is the furious uncle,
and the Sitt Hilda has red eyes.  The uncle thinks her not well-born
enough, or else too poor, to mate with his dear nephew.  The young man
has tired himself with pleading; but the old man locks his heart.  And
I am glad, for I myself would not object to marry Hilda when I am in
holy orders.  She is plump and shy and has fresh ripe-fruit cheeks that
I should like to bite.  Thou thyself didst love her once, I am aware;
and Allah knows thou mightst in the end have enjoyed her by the
exercise of a little self-control, by waiting humbly, as I do, till
they made a priest of thee.  At least, if I succeed in getting her, the
Father of Ice, to whom she is like a daughter, will no longer be able
to despise me, and keep me in dependence."

In spite of his first announcement of tremendous danger, Asad detained
Iskender by the gate for nearly an hour, talking with him openly in
full sight of the house.  His discourse was chiefly of women,
concerning whom he developed ideas purely cynical.  He said that the
daughters of the country were the more appetising, but that he himself
would choose a daughter of the English to increase his consequence.  If
she possessed wealth or good looks, so much the better; but she must be
English, and of an honourable house.  As an English missionary, with an
English wife of good family, how he would lord it here on a stipend of
two hundred pounds a year!  Iskender, being deep in thought of
something else, made an excellent listener.  Asad presented him with a
small piece of baclâweh.

"At what hour does the Emîr take his pleasure in the garden?" Iskender
asked at parting from that child of promise; leaving Asad to suppose he
put the question out of caution, to the end that he himself might shun
the Mission at that hour.

"Between the fourth and fifth after noon," was the reply.  "But avoid
the house altogether, if thy life is precious to thee!  The foe, I tell
thee, is a seasoned warrior, a drinker of blood from his birth."

From all that Asad had let fall, two facts shone forth: that the Emîr
was mad in love with the Sitt Hilda, and that he was oppressed by his
cruel uncle.  Iskender mused on these, seeing a chance to help him and
obtain forgiveness.




CHAPTER XXVII

Between the fourth and fifth hour after noon of that same day Iskender
once more approached the house of the missionaries, this time with
extreme precaution, keeping as far as might be hidden in the folds of
the land, and, when obliged of necessity to cross a space of ground
exposed to view, crawling on his belly, with his tarbûsh, which, being
scarlet, was conspicuous, doffed and rolled up tightly in one hand.  It
was important for the enterprise he had in view that no one of the
house should see him coming.

Having reached the garden boundary undiscovered, he stole round it,
crouching, with his ear to the wall.  Soon he caught the sound of
voices, and, guided by them, reached a point quite near the speakers
whence he could hear every word they were saying.  The Emîr had just
concluded what must have been a long petition, and now the uncle spoke:

"Need we have it all over again?" he inquired irritably.  "You know I
would not cross you in your present state, unless I were convinced it
is for your own good.  As I have before observed, she is a good many
years your senior; she has neither birth nor money, nor anything
uncommon in good looks.  If, in eight months' time, you still desire
it, I shall have no longer any right to forbid your marrying.  But it
shall not be now."

The tamarisks just there were a sufficient screen.  Noiselessly
Iskender surmounted the low wall and parted with his hands their
feathery boughs till he could see the disputants.  The uncle's face was
richly bronzed, in striking contrast with his light blue eyes and heavy
white moustache.  Clad in a white suit, with a white pith helmet on his
head, he appeared to Iskender like a portrait just begun, of which only
the hands and the flesh of the face had yet been coloured by the
artist.  Of figure he was broad and upright, without a symptom of
decrepitude unless it might be the stout cane he used in walking.  The
Emîr looked fragile and infirm beside him, pale with the trace of
illness, and bowed by his present dejection.

"Pshaw!  Bless my soul!" pursued the uncle, with a lively flourish of
his cane.  "Why, every man falls in love with his nurse if she's at all
personable; it is a phase of convalescence.  I could tell you of a
dozen cases, within my own personal knowledge, out in India; but I
never saw a happy marriage come of it.  Now come, I only ask you to
wait eight months until you are of age--you can't call that request
unreasonable--and to stop all communications for the same period.  It
will give both you and the lady time to think about it, and save you
both from rash and ill-considered action.  Our good host here and the
elder ladies quite agree with me.  Now sit down on this bench and rest,
while I go and get my notebook with the dates of sailing."

With that the old man went into the house, leaving the Emîr alone,
resting forlornly on the garden-seat beneath a flowering tree and
staring at the ground.  Iskender parted the growth of tamarisks and
stood out before him.

The Emîr gave a start and a faint cry, with eyes dilated.  Iskender
pounced on his hand and, murmuring words of love, essayed to kiss it.
It was snatched from him.

"What the devil are you doing here?  Get out, I say!"  The Frank spoke
low and angrily, with a glance at his hands which cursed their present
helplessness.  "If I were not so confoundedly weak, I would send you
flying over that wall! . . .  Oh, yes, I suppose I forgive you, and all
that.  Only I don't want to speak to you, or see your face.  You've got
to be a kind of nightmare to me.  I daresay I misjudged you; I don't
pretend to understand you; in some ways you behaved quite well and
honestly.  Only I can't endure the sight of your face, the sound of
your confounded voice.  Get out, I tell you."

But Iskender came close, and, despite his efforts to repel, leaned over
him and whispered in his ear:

"Just listen, sir!  I bring her to you where you like--to England?--to
America?--anywhere you tell me.  Gif to me a bit of writing, for me to
show to her--you know!--to Miss Hilda, her you luf!  The old man is a
fery wicked deffil to wish to sebarate you."

"So you have been listening, have you?" said the Frank, with a
mirthless laugh.  "Just as if you hadn't done enough already in the way
of meddling with my affairs.  Go! and may I never see your face again.
You will make haste and begone if you're wise.  My uncle will be back
in half a jiffy."

But Iskender was too astonished by these words, and the listless manner
of their utterance, to trust his understanding.  He went on entreating:

"Just a word in your handwriting, sir, so she can know it's all right.
I bring her to you anywhere at my exbense.  God knows I do anything to
blease you!  I treat her honourably, sir; I be her servant like as I'f
been yours.  All that I told you about me and her was nothin'; I was
just a silly boy.  I resbect her, sir; I be her slave; you trust me.
By God, I treat her like as if she was the Blessed Firgin!  It will
cost you nothin', sir; I bray you do not doubt----"

But he got no further, being suddenly collared from behind, and beaten
with a cane which stung like hornets.  Screaming under the punishment,
and struggling hard, he at last succeeded in breaking away just as
Costantîn came running round a corner of the house and terrified faces
appeared at its lower windows.  He heard his assailant, panting,
exclaim, "That's the only argument the beggars understand.  We learnt
that in India," as he (Iskender) dashed through the hedge of tamarisks
and cleared the low wall at a bound.

With mouth full of sobs, he ran across the sandhills, every salient
object, every shadow, swelling and sinking with the horror of each
breath he drew.  It was not that the old afrit, the uncle of the Emîr,
had beaten him, nor that his back was sore, but that the Emîr himself
had refused his services, which so appalled him.  He felt like the
spectator of some ghastly crime.  Surely no man really in love would
question by what means he got his dear, so only that she was brought to
him with despatch and decency.  It was a catastrophe hardly less than
that of the gold.  Even in love--the fierce, unreasoning passion of a
youth for a maid--it seemed a Frank must differ from a son of the
Arabs.  Once more Iskender had erred in attributing to the Emîr his own
sensations, and been punished for it as for an offence unthinkable.
Once more he gazed into a soundless gulf, impossible to bridge; and was
appalled.

Seeing a convenient hollow close before him, he plunged into it, and
had flung himself down to think and fetch his breath, before he knew
that it was already occupied.  A sudden burst of music with the strains
of the English National Hymn was the first announcement he received of
the proximity of Khalîl, the concertina-player, and of his own uncle
Abdullah.

"Welcome, O Iskender," said Khalîl, when the tune had finished with
becoming gravity.  "I come out here to play my music undisturbed.  And
Abdullah follows me through love of the strange sounds, which soothe
his mind's disease."

"May Allah preserve thee in happiness, O son of my brother!" said
Abdullah gloomily.  "But thy folly has brought ruin to my house.  Our
Lord destroy those children of iniquity who slandered me in the ears of
Kûk."

"Take heart, O my soul!  Be not so downcast!" pleaded the musician, who
was all urbanity, doing the honours of his one accomplishment there in
that lonely hollow of the sands for all the world as though it had been
a fine reception-room, and they his guests.  "Stay, and I will play to
you both the air of 'Yenki-dûdal'--a noble air, none like it, and of
wide renown.  So shall Abdullah cease from brooding on misfortune."

This Frankish music hurrying to an end, of a rhythm monotonous as the
hoof-beats of a galloping horse, seemed very ugly to Iskender.  How
different from the delicious waywardness of Eastern airs, whose charm
is all by the bye, in precious dawdlings and digressions!  It revealed
to him the mind of his Emîr.  Gradually, as he listened to it, grief
fell from him; and in its stead rose hatred for a race that measured
all things, even the sweet sounds of music, even love.  He remembered
only that his back was sore.




CHAPTER XXVIII

That night Iskender still endured distress of mind.  Anger and fierce
hatred of the Franks overcame him whenever he recalled what had
happened in the Mission garden, and the recurring smart of his wounds
prevented his forgetting it for more than a minute at a time.  But in
the morning, when pain had given place to a bruised stiffness, he
recovered the resignation which had been his before the preacher Ward
came with the tidings of his Emîr's great danger.  For the first time
since his return from the search for Wady 'l Mulûk he took out his
paints and sketch-book, and went and sat beneath the ilex-tree,
awaiting inspiration.  But the buzz of flies, of bees, and other
insects inseparable from the creamy morning sunlight set his mind
afloat, and prevented its settling on any one object.

In this happy state of indecision he was found by Asad son of
Costantîn.  That high-minded youth had come, as he explained, at no
small peril to himself, solely to warn his dear one to beware of ever
coming near the Mission.  The indignation of the missionary and the
ladies with his conduct of the day before was intense; and no wonder,
for from the excitement consequent upon that scene in the garden the
Frank was back in bed again as ill as ever.  All, to the very servants,
blamed Iskender; while as for the uncle of the sufferer, that ancient
blood-drinker had sworn to cut the son of Yâcûb into little pieces, and
give his meat to dogs--a form of punishment, Asad explained, which the
terrible old man had practised daily while in India at the expense of
the native inhabitants of that unhappy country.

"Wallah, he is a veritable ghoul; he is more blood-thirsty than the
worst among the Turks.  Did I not warn thee of his state of feeling?
What ailed thee thus to rush into his arms?"

To all this Iskender's sole reply was:

"Allah is bountiful!"

"But wherefore risk thy body in his presence?  Tell me, O my soul, what
imp possessed thee?" pleaded Asad in his most seductive tone.  His
curiosity was real, and very great.  "All demand to know.  That old
ghoul vows he caught thee begging money of thy former patron--the Emîr,
we used to call him, who is no more an Emîr than I am, it turns out,
but only the son of a merchant in the city of Lûndra--but I cannot
believe that he speaks truth in this.  Inform me of thy motives, tell
what really happened; then I can defend thee.  Is not my discretion
known?  Have I not always stood thy friend?  By Allah, I will keep the
matter secret, if that is thy desire.  Tell me, me only, O my soul--thy
brother Asad!"

Still Iskender only answered: "Allah is bountiful!"  In truth the
tidings of the Emîr's relapse concerned him not at all.  He murmured in
his soul, "May Allah heal him!" as he would have prayed on hearing of a
stranger's illness, but with no sense of guilt or responsibility.  To
have opened his heart to Asad would have been to risk destroying this
blissful state of indifference.  He feared to revive his emotions of
the day before; so confined himself to pious exclamations.

Asad's inquisitiveness, however, was of a hardy kind.  Again and yet
again did he return to the charge, pleading, remonstrating, even
threatening; holding out every inducement he could think of; even
offering the fine penknife with three blades and an ivory handle, which
had been given to him only yesterday by the Sitt Jane.  He held this
treasure up before his patient's eyes, opening the blades one by one to
display the glory of it.  But Iskender still sat on composedly, smiling
into distance, like a graven image.  Finding he could elicit nothing,
Asad grew angry.

"Thou art still at thy childish toys, I see," he sneered as he at last
withdrew.  "Much they will profit thee!  Ma sh' Allah!  I can see how
thou wilt envy me hereafter when I am a grand khawâjah, and thou art
dirt in the road!"  Having attained a safe distance, he let fly his
farewell shaft: "Cursed be thy religion, O dog son of a dog!"

Iskender then glanced round in the hope that some others of the
Orthodox communion might have heard the insult, in which case it would
have fared extremely ill with the son of Costantîn.  His heart leapt
with joy at the sight of Elias close at hand armed with his fine
silver-mounted riding-whip.  But instead of pursuing Asad, who had
taken to his heels, and of whipping the life out of him, Elias
contented himself with throwing a stone and celebrating in a loud voice
the immodesty of Asad's mother and the revolting manner of his
conception and birth.  That done, he came and sat beside Iskender.

"I have killed a man for cursing our holy religion before now," he
remarked, smiling; and proceeded to give an outline of the murder.  But
this was not the object of his coming.  He had obtained command of a
party of American travellers, men bound for Wady Mûsa, and, remembering
that the valley of the gold lay somewhere in the same direction, had
come to ask Iskender to join the expedition in the quality of cook.
These khawâjât knew nothing of the country, Elias could conduct them by
what road he chose; might even keep them encamped in one spot for days,
if necessary, while he and his dearest friend explored the
neighbourhood.

"Say yes, O my soul!" he entreated.  "It is an opportunity that may not
occur again.  In sh' Allah, we shall come back each as rich as the
Sultan's Majesty.  Without thee, I am nothing; for thou alone art in
possession of the knowledge to ensure success.  We set forth to-morrow.
Make all thy preparations now directly, and come with us!"

Iskender refused, vowing by Allah Most High that he had had enough of
desert travelling to last a lifetime.  At that the chagrin of Elias was
pitiful to witness.  He saw the valley full of gold, which the second
before had seemed quite close to him, removed by this reply a great way
off.  But when Iskender offered to describe its whereabouts to the best
of his remembrance, and to make over all his rights in it to him
(Elias), confiding in his far-famed generosity, the seer's lips parted
and his eyes started out from his head with astonishment and delight.
Whipping out his grand pocket-book, he took down hurried notes while
Iskender thoughtfully reviewed his route with the Emîr, naming every
village and outstanding mark upon the road, as also the precise point
at which he believed that he had gone astray.

"It was there that my memory failed me.  I should have borne more to
the southward.  But even as it was, we must have been within an hour of
the place, when the Emîr--curse his father!--gave the fatal order to
turn back.  Forget not, O my soul, to bribe the chief of the Arabs in
that district, who is surnamed Son of the Lion; or he will certainly
oppress thy party as he did mine."

Elias, having replaced his note-book, flung both arms around Iskender's
neck and kissed him on the mouth repeatedly.  Tears rolled from his
eyes.  He whispered fiercely:

"Never will I forget this deed of kindness; I will pay thee half the
treasure--by my head I swear it, by my honourable reputation, by my
hope of life hereafter!  Allah knows I always loved thee!  May Allah
destroy those wicked people who spread abroad foul lies concerning
thee.  Only let them dare to come within reach of my two hands!"

The transport past, he sat beside Iskender, with arm about his neck.
Some girls at a round game in the shadow of the church caught his
wandering eye.  He called his friend's attention to the good looks of
Nesîbeh, who was one of them.  Iskender turned his head and threw a
careless glance in the direction indicated.

"Thou hast not seen her properly.  Wait a minute! . . .  O Nesîbeh!  O
my pearl!  Come hither! . . .  Ah, the rogue has fled to hiding; she
has slipped inside the church; and the rest, her playmates, are flying,
each to her mother's side, as if my sweet-toned voice had been a lion's
roar!  A year ago she would have flung herself into my arms, and sat
upon my knee and begged for stories.  But now she wears the veil, she
is a woman, and therefore must be captious like the rest of them.  In
thy grace I depart, having much to put in order for to-morrow's
journey."

Once more he flung both arms around Iskender's neck, kissing him on
both cheeks and on the mouth, and vowing by Our Lady, and by the three
Archangels, Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael, to repay him half the
treasure of the Valley of the Kings.




CHAPTER XXIX

Left alone, Iskender took up a position in which he could watch the
open door of the church without seeming to do so.  Then, as soon as he
beheld Nesîbeh peeping out, he opened his paint-box, laid his
sketch-book on his knee, and made believe to set to work in earnest,
crooning a facetious song the while, to complete the deception.  His
object was to tempt or provoke the girl to come to him.  For days past
she had withstood all his allurements, taking to her heels at his
approach.  He desired an explanation of such queer behaviour, and,
having learnt that frankness was of no avail, resorted now to subtlety.

After a space of apparent absorption in his work, he hazarded a glance
out of the corners of his eyes, and was glad to see that she was
drawing nearer.  From the glimpse thus obtained he judged her
discontented, sullen, even angry, and suspected some hostility to be
the object of her stealing up behind him.  But he was quite unprepared
for what actually happened.  A large stone, flung at close quarters
with all the strength of her young arms, struck him fairly between the
shoulders, just where the bruises resultant from yesterday's beating
most thickly congregated.  It knocked all the breath out of his body.
The shock, however, stood him in good stead; since it prevented his
acting on the first angry impulse of retaliation, and at the same time
gave him a look of genuine anguish.  In a trice she was at his side,
weeping and imploring his forgiveness.

"Say thou art not badly hurt--say it, I implore thee.  By my life, I
should die if I had injured thee."

Iskender did his best to personate the last agony, writhing and rolling
his eyes, and clutching at the air with palsied hands.  In despair of
soothing one in that condition, she changed mood swiftly and became
defiant.

"No matter," she sneered.  "Thou art not hurt to death; and by Allah
thou deservest any suffering in return for the shame and humiliation
thou hast put upon me.  What was that Frank--curse his religion!--to
thee, that thou must go every hour only to watch the house where he lay
ill?  He had cast thee off, when I came and comforted thee.  Yet is he
dearer!  O the disgrace to me to have offered my love and to be thus
rejected!  Would to Allah I had never seen thy dirty, ugly, wicked--thy
accursed face!  It is the face of a pig, of an afrît; so now thou
knowest!  What had I ever done to harm thee that, after speaking to me
of love and asking for me, thou didst turn thy back and spurn me for
the sake of a vile foreigner who has blackened thy face and made of
thee a byword for infamy?  I heard thee ask my father; and I heard his
answer.  There was hope for thee.  Why has thy mother never come to
talk with mine?  By Allah, I will take that stone again and kill thee
with it; for it seems that I am nothing in thy eyes, O misbegotten!"

Iskender knew not how to answer, for her reproach was righteous; yet he
loved her dearly.  He was released from this embarrassment by the
return of Mîtri, who had been into the town to visit a sick man.  He
had drawn quite near before the bickering pair perceived him.  Nesîbeh
made as if to fly indoors; but the priest called her back rather
sternly.

"Art afraid of me, thy father, child of mischief?  By the Gospel thou
hast cause to fear, O shameless, O deceitful.  But wait a minute, I
command thee, and hear what I have to say to this young man."

The girl obeyed demurely, standing by, with hands folded in the fall of
her white headveil while her father addressed Iskender.

"It is known, O my son, that I have conceived a fondness for thee; and
so it seems has this wild girl of mine.  The mother of Nesîbeh, too,
speaks well of thee, because thou dost run her errands, and art fond of
playing with the younger children--things which seem naught to me, but
please her greatly.  I say not that I will not give Nesîbeh to thee,
some day in the future, if thou walkest straight.  At present she is
very young; and thou hast yet no trade by which to gain a livelihood.
Now I have been thinking; Allah has bestowed on thee a rare and
wondrous gift, which is, to make flat likenesses of all things that
thine eyes behold.  There lives in El Cuds a sheykh of my
acquaintance--a righteous man, and steadfast in the faith--who earns
his living, and a fat one, by no other means.  He makes the icons and
religious pictures for many of our monasteries and great churches.
Often, in old days, when I was at the seminary, have I watched him
shape the blue and crimson robes and spread the gold like butter.  I
will write a word to him and, maybe, pay a trifle, that he may receive
thee as his disciple.  Devote thyself to his instruction and soon, with
the grace of Allah, thou wilt far surpass him in accomplishment.  Then,
after a year or two, return and speak to us of marriage.  We shall hear
thee favourably.  Have I said well, O my daughter?"

The child was silent.  The weight of her father's words had stilled and
solemnised her, removing every trace of coquetry.  Her head was bowed
as at the benediction; she was sobbing.  Mîtri patted her head and bade
her run indoors.

"There is yet another reason," he told Iskender privately, "why I would
defer the nuptials for a year or two.  Did thy wedding with my daughter
follow close on thy conversion, scoffers would see in it a clear
inducement, would say that I bribed thee with my flesh and blood; and
that would grieve me.  Go away, therefore, for a reasonable time; let
the noise of thy conversion die away; and all is said."

So it was arranged.




CHAPTER XXX

On the day when the Emîr set sail for England in the custody of his
forbidding uncle, Iskender, with the sum of two mejîdis in his pouch,
set out on foot for the Holy City.  On his way to join a horde of
Russian pilgrims with whom, by Mîtri's advice, he was to walk for
safety, he saw the carriage belonging to the Hotel Barûdi, conveying
the two Englishmen to the gate of the town.  The carriage passed him
from behind; its inmates must have had him long in view, the road being
empty; yet the Emîr deigned never a glance at him, but laughed and
talked, as if enchanted, with the horrible old ghoul who sat beside
him.  Iskender called down curses on their race, and hastened on to
find his Russian pilgrims.

These were peasants, men and women, for the most part old, with faces
gnarled and knotted like the trunks of ancient olives, and pale eyes
which had a patient, rapt expression as if they saw Heaven opened, but
a long way off.  They took no notice of Iskender there beside them,
though his adherence was conspicuous as a flower among grey rocks, but
trudged onward, singing hymns in a strange tongue.

The general rate of advance was very slow, so many aged, feeble folk
were of the company; but some three hours after noon of the third day,
having toiled long through a wilderness of stony hills, they saw the
city.  Men and women kissed the ground, weeping and crying aloud.  The
priests in charge of the pilgrims struck up a psalm of thanksgiving.

Iskender left them at these devotions, passing on into the city.  There
he lost all purpose and the count of time in rapture with the colours
of the motley throng, which budded in the night of long, dark tunnels
and blossomed in the open alleys, full of shade.  The sense of an
infinitude of burning light, resting above, gave to the shadow and its
bedded splendours something magical, reminding Iskender of his childish
fancies of what it must be like to live at the bottom of the sea.  He
had stood for a long while glued to the pavement of a certain entry,
outside the jostling crowd, gazing entranced at the shop of a
coppersmith across the way--where, in the darkness of a kind of cave,
the burnished wares gave forth a bluish gleam like negro faces--when
some one smote his chest.

There was Yuhanna the dragoman, his old enemy, grinning down at him,
for once quite friendly.

"Shrink not, O my son, fear nothing," he said, laughing, when Iskender
half retreated.  "Thou didst not perjure thyself, it seems, that time
thou knowest, so I have no grudge against thee.  And now thou hast
joined the Church, thou art my brother.  I heard the blessed news from
one I met upon the road.  Art thou not happy to be now a child of
light, delivered from the prospect of everlasting damnation?  Wallah,
it is bad to be Brûtestânt."

He gave Iskender's arm a cunning twist, just enough to suggest the
torture in reserve for heretics; and then, detaining his hand inquired
the nature of his business in the city.  Thus reminded of his errand
which had quite escaped him, Iskender confessed that he was in search
of the shop of one Ibrahîm abu Yûsuf, a painter of religious pictures.
Yuhanna told him it was close at hand, and, having treated him to a cup
of coffee and some sticky sweet-stuff, showed him the way, which could
hardly have been found without direction.  Through a deserted alley,
down first one dark, stinking passage, then another, Iskender reached a
crazy door and, knocking on it twice, was told to enter.

The room within was small and very dark.  It had only one window, high
up in the wall, and even that looked out upon a covered way.  When
Iskender entered, the artist was in the act of rising from his knees,
having been on the floor at work upon a picture.  He was a wizened
elder with a fine white beard, clad in a soiled kaftan, black turban
and big black-rimmed spectacles.  Lighting a candle-end he read the
letter of the priest Mîtri, and, having read, embraced his new
disciple.  He took off his spectacles, brushed them, wiped his eyes
repeatedly, and then knelt again to his painting, bidding Iskender
watch the way of it.  When the youth suggested that more light was
needed, Ibrahîm abu Yûsuf shook his head decidedly.  This room, he
explained, had been chosen precisely on account of its obscurity, which
meant seclusion.  Were he to ply his trade in the light of day, the
Muslim zealots of the city would speedily tear him in pieces as an
idol-maker.  "Though some of them make pictures also," he explained,
"not here but in Esh-Shâm and other places.  They quote in excuse some
fetwah of the learned.  I have no appeal; for did I quote their fetwah
they would call it blasphemy."  The room, he said, possessed advantages
for health as well as privacy.  Its window gave upon the market of the
shoemakers, and, when it stood open, admitted the smell of leather,
than which nothing in the world is more wholesome and invigorating.
Iskender was glad to learn that he was not required to sleep there, but
in the private house of his master, whither he was conducted at the end
of the day's work.  The old man and his wife seemed pleased to have him
in the room of their only son, an adventurous youth who had gone with
merchandise to America to seek his fortune.

The Sheykh Ibrahîm took great pains with his pupil's instruction, and
taught him divers little tricks which saved much trouble.

"But times are bad!" he would suspire in moments of depression.  "Once
it was a profitable trade; all the pictures required used to be wrought
and purchased in the land.  But now the majority of the clergy buy them
ready-made from Europe.  That the Franks have a pretty, life-like trick
is undeniable; yet I think our ancient style, stiff and conventional as
they call it, is far more reverent.  There is no one left to practise
it, nowadays, except myself, and here and there a religious in the
monasteries."

Yet, for all the old man's moan, there seemed no lack of business; and
Iskender wished that he had half the money which he saw paid into his
master's hand.  Monks and nuns and priests, and even prelates, found
their way to the cell of the painter; and Iskender's work was highly
thought of by such visitors.  The old man was laughingly told to look
to his laurels, for the young one at his side had almost Frankish
talent.

"Heed them not, O my soul!" said Abu Yûsuf.  "They speak as fools who
know not.  That the Frankish way has merits, all must allow; but ours,
I do maintain, is more devotional.  Let it be one thing or the other;
that is all I ask.  And I would have thee purge thy style, once and for
all, of just those lifelike touches which these fools admire."

Iskender, of sheer laziness, was content to humour the old man; and
soon acquired such skill in practice that he could have wrought with
his eyes shut, as the Sheykh Abu Yûsuf virtually did, for he was almost
blind.  Every morning, before setting to work, he hastened to the
Church of the Resurrection and said a prayer there, kneeling at the
tomb of Christ, ere studying the paintings which adorn its dim old
walls.  At the end of a year and a half his work was in greater demand
than that of his master.  The latter, recognising that his hand was
failing and his sight would soon be gone, offered to sell him the
business.  But Iskender had no money for the purchase.  He consented,
however, to a scheme of partnership; and, proud of his achievements,
sent a letter to the priest Mîtri, announcing his return to claim his
bride.  After four days came the priest's reply, to the effect that
preparations were being made for the wedding; upon receipt of which
Iskender set forth on his journey, mounted upon an ass, and accompanied
by two wealthy Christian merchants of El Cuds, new friends of his, who
valued his acquaintance.  Their escort won him standing in his native
town.




CHAPTER XXXI

The bridal was attended with festivities.  The little Christian village
re-echoed with the ululation of the crowd of women forming the bride's
procession, as they paraded their joy among the hovels before going to
the church.  And when, after the ceremony, the train came forth, carrying
Nesîbeh to a house not her father's, the zaghârît broke out afresh, and
guns and pistols were discharged.  Much feasting of a solid kind ensued
at the bridegroom's expense, in a house which had been ceded to him for
the purpose.  Elias was there in gorgeous raiment, telling all who would
give ear a strange romance of how he had once been all but married to a
royal princess.  Khalîl, the concertina-player, was a thought aggrieved
that Mîtri forbade him to make music in the church itself, but forgot his
dudgeon when the crowd trooped out again.  For hours he played on
indefatigably, repeating his whole repertory of Frankish discords at
least a score of times, and telling all who asked that he had acquired
his skill in foreign music by instruction from the greatest living master
of the art--a certain English mariner named William.

Of Iskender's family not one was present.  His mother dared not
adventure, for fear of the missionaries; and his uncle Abdullah lay at
that time ill in his house as the result of a wound received in a drunken
brawl.

It was not until two days later, when Iskender was beginning to overcome
the shyness of his young bride, that his mother came to bless him.

"Ah, thou hast won for thyself a pearl of price, my son, a gem desired of
many!" she whispered in his ear, when she had embraced Nesîbeh.  "Be
careful of her goings, guard her closely; for it has reached my ears that
she is ripe for naughtiness.  May Allah, of his mercy, bless the pair of
you, and grant you honoured increase."

Congratulation, however, was only part of her purpose in the visit, as
soon appeared.

"My son," she cried excitedly, "the great lady, the mother of George, has
come hither from the land of the English, for a few weeks only, having
left the children.  She had ever a fondness for thee, and has asked to
see thee, as I hear from the servants at the Mission.  Even when informed
of all thy misdoings by the Father of Ice, her husband, she smiled in his
face, they tell me, and still protested she would like to see thee.  So I
threw this shawl over my head, and came to fetch thee to the house.  The
mother of George loves thee, as I said before; and her husband denies her
nothing, both because she comes of a good house, while he is the son of
low people, and for the sake of the many children she has borne him.  By
the Gospel, I perceive a chance for thee to retrieve the past, if only
thou wilt deign to be a little politic and respect their foibles.  For
Asad son of Costantîn is in the land of the English, and the report of
his doings displeases the Father of Ice.  It is said that he shows a
tendency towards the High Church in that country, which for the time is
uppermost, and has found some favour with its dignitaries; which means he
is accursed in the eyes of our friends here. . . .  What art thou doing?
Come, make haste, I say!"

Iskender, on his knees upon the floor, was looking through a little pile
of paintings, his own work.

"I would take in my hand a gift for the mother of George," he explained;
"a specimen of my art, that she may see what proficiency I have attained
in it.  It was she who first encouraged me to draw and paint--she and,
after her, the Sitt Hilda.  I should like them both to see the beauty of
my present paintings."

"Now Allah forbid!" exclaimed his mother in alarm.  "Verily thou art mad
to think of it.  They view with horror all religious pictures, regarding
them as idols, in their ignorance, like the Muslimin!  Here is a chance
to recover all their favour, to supplant Asad, to become a priest of
their religion, a rich khawâjah; and lo! thou wouldst spoil it all by
showing them a holy image!  When thou askest aught of the Devil, make not
the sign of the Cross.  Be wise, my son; and come at once!"

But Nesîbeh, who had till now stood speechless by, here flung herself
between them, threatening to tear the eyes out of the mother of Iskender.
She swore that she would never let her husband visit the home of unbelief
in the company of one so wicked.  If he went at all, let him take the
holy picture to protect his spirit from pernicious influence.

"Tush! tush! thou silly babe," the elder woman chid her, "were it not
better for thee to have for husband a rich khawâjah than a wretched
painter of religious pictures?  Thou wouldst wear fine Frankish clothes
of wondrous texture and hats, I tell thee, hats with waving feathers.
Thou wouldst sit at ease all day, with maids to wait on thee."

"I want none of it," screamed Nesîbeh.  "These are devil's wiles.  May
Allah blast thy life, unnatural woman, thus to tempt thy son to sell his
soul, his part in everlasting life, for earthly gain."

Iskender took her in his arms and silenced her; then turned to pacify his
mother, who was much incensed.  Had she thought for herself at all?  Was
not all her endeavour to secure prosperity and a high position for
Iskender, and, of course, his bride?  What right had this chit of a girl,
who knew nothing of the world, nor the shifts that folks are forced to
who would live in it comfortably, to call her husband's mother an
unnatural woman for displaying a little forethought?  And Allah knew it
was a grievous pity, for her adherence would have clinched the matter.
They would have given Iskender anything on earth to secure the conversion
of the daughter of the Orthodox priest.  Appeased at length, she asked to
see the picture.  It was a simple fancy of Iskender's, done in leisure
moments, of angels fighting devils in mid-air, with clouds like solid
cushions spread to fall on.

"Aye, that may pass," she admitted grudgingly, "the fiends at all events,
for they believe in them."

In a dream, Iskender, at his mother's side, approached once more the
Mission on the sandhills, traversed the garden and the clean cool hall,
and entered the reception-room with its soft carpets, polished chairs and
tables, which had presented to his childish mind the life of palaces.
There sat the ladies with their work-baskets, each in her special chair,
exactly as of yore.  There was the canary in its cage, and there was the
dog in Hilda's lap as usual.  The mother of George came forward and shook
hands with him, then made him sit beside her and recount his doings.
Conscious of independent standing, he was fearless and behaved with
dignity; he even asked for news of the Emîr without confusion.  The other
ladies chatted kindly of his marriage, praising the beauty of the bride,
whom they knew only by sight; even the Father of Ice shook hands with
him, and hoped with a smile that he was well and thriving.  It surprised
him much to see his mother making frequent reverence, to hear her asking
pardon in his name.

Having inquired for George and the rest of the children, each by name,
and assured himself of their welfare, he conceived that he had said
enough, and wished to go.  It was then that he made his offering,
producing the little picture and placing it in the lady's hand with
conscious pride.  The effect was quite other than he had expected.  The
ladies Carûlîn and Jane turned from it with a pitying smile; Hilda
remarked, "I prefer your earlier work;" the missionary indulged in a curt
laugh; while the mother of George herself, the blest recipient, was dumb,
till, seeing trouble in Iskender's eyes, she forced a smile and exclaimed:

"A curious picture!  I shall certainly preserve it among my treasures."

Outside the house again, his mother punched Iskender in the back and spat
at him, calling him fool and marplot, cursing all his ancestry.

"Hast thou no sense, no perspicacity?  When all went well, what need to
show thy picture?  Why bring a picture that had angels in it?  I saw them
shudder and go yellow at the sight of those white, holy ones.  Couldst
thou not paint a picture all of devils, or else of things without
religious meaning?  And what possessed thee to inquire concerning the
health of that bad Emîr, who spurned the love of the Sitt Hilda?  Thou
knewest nothing of the story?  Say that again, unblushing liar!--when I
myself informed thee on our way up thither.  Merciful Allah!  So thou
heardest nothing; thy wits went wandering off, as always, to thy
painting, or the pleasures of thy bride; and, for the lack of a little
attention, mere politeness, the hopes of our house lie ruined.  Naturally
poor Hilda thought thy question was designed to taunt her.  I saw how red
she went, though thou didst not.  But for that she would certainly have
praised thy picture.  Now she hates thee.  Well, no doubt it is from
Allah!  But none the less it is hard for me to bear, with the wife of
Costantîn for ever dinning in my ear her son's achievements.  And why, if
thou must be a painter, dost thou not go to Beyrût, that great
fashionable city, superior to any in Europe, where folks have taste, and
thou couldst make a fortune by thy art?  Thy bride could help thee in the
world of fashion, for her father is well known and has rich friends among
the Orthodox.  But where is the use in talking to a man like thee?  Thou
hast no spirit, no ambition."

Iskender did not argue.  His mother's note of angry lamentation, in
strange accordance with his feelings at that moment, condoned the
sharpness of her words, which hardly reached him.  The failure of the
missionaries to see the merit in his work showed ignorance, but was their
own affair; the omission to say "thank you" for his gift was downright
rudeness.  Their open contempt of his little masterpiece rankled hot in
his mind.  He vowed before Allah never again to seek to please a Frank
and risk such insult.  Henceforth he would cleanse his mouth whenever he
so much as passed in the street near one of that accursed race.

With pride he called himself a Nazarene, a native Christian of the land,
preferring the insolent domination of the Muslim, his blood-relative, to
the arrogance of so-called Christian strangers.

Returning home, he told Nesîbeh of his determination to start next
morning early for the Holy City.  His bride was glad, for she had feared
much from his visit to the missionaries, and longed to remove him far
from their hellish wiles.




CHAPTER XXXII

Two years later, when Allah had given him a male child by Nesîbeh,
Iskender visited his wife's father in the spring-time.  He arrived on
foot leading the donkey, on which his wife sat with the baby in her
arms.  An excited group stood out beneath the ilex-tree.  They shouted
"Praise to Allah!"  The mother of Iskender ran and seized the baby, and
rocking it in her arms, poured forth her hoard of tidings.  Asad ebn
Costantîn was married--had Iskender heard?--to a great lady of the
English, a virgin strictly guarded, the only child of rich and honoured
parents.  Ah, the cunning devil!  The people there at the Mission were
furious, he might believe; the more so that Asad was bringing his bride
to visit them as an equal--he, the son of Costantîn, who fetched the
water!  Ah, they were well repaid for their treatment of Iskender; and
they knew it!

But Mîtri broke in, crying:

"Hast thou brought the picture?"

"Be sure I have!" replied Iskender cheerfully.  Opening one of the
saddlebags he produced it, wrapped in a linen cloth, which he removed.
A howl of delight went up from all the company.

"Ma sh' Allah!  It is Mar Jiryis himself!"  "May we be helped through
him!"  "Now our church will wear a richer and more modish look!"
exclaimed one and another.

It was indeed the crowning triumph of his art, which Iskender brought
as an offering to the little church of St. George beneath the oak-tree,
which he regarded as the fountain of Heaven's favours towards him.  For
the form and posture of the saint he had gone to one of those grand
English newspapers which the Emîr had given to him years ago.  He had
taken thence the likeness of a mounted officer slashing downward with
his sabre, while his charger, dragged back on its haunches, pawed the
air convulsively.  A uniform of gold embellished this equestrian
figure, which was framed in coils of Dragon, green and black; while the
Dragon, in its turn, was framed in a fine decorative gush of blood,
pure scarlet, which swirled and eddied round the combatants, springing
visibly from the monster's many wounds.

"It is a feast for the eyes!" cried Mîtri, when he had gazed his fill.
There were tears on his cheeks as he turned and kissed Iskender.  "The
saint will be pleased, in sh' Allah!  To-night it shall honour my
house.  To-morrow we will carry it in procession seven times round the
church before we enter.  It is all arranged.  Khalîl will be there with
his music, which is lawful anywhere except in church.  In sh' Allah, we
will have a ceremony such as has not been seen in this place for many a
year.  I have spoken to the caimmacâm and to the learned at the Mosque
about it; and they say we may do what we like among ourselves, but must
desist if any Muslim passing by should make objection.  To-morrow is
high festival with us!"

Accordingly, next morning, there was concourse at the house of the
Orthodox priest.  Within, upon a kind of altar, the picture was
displayed with tapers burning.  Each new arrival paid respect to it.
Abdullah, who had strayed in aimless with the crowd, stood fixed before
it as if petrified, in horror of the dragon's hideous face.  Then, with
a fervent "God protect us all!" the spell was broken and he hurried out.

"A miracle!" cried Mîtri joyously.  "Our picture has already scared a
sinner."

Some one in the room inquired tremulously whether dragons such as that
portrayed were still to be found in the world?

"No, praise be to Allah!" replied Mîtri.  All laughed at the simplicity
of the questioner, except Elias, who solemnly averred that such
existed, that he himself had seen one crunching a poor one-eyed black
man in its cruel jaws.

"He has seen a crocodile, perhaps, in Masr," Yuhanna laughingly
suggested, with a hand on the shoulder of the visionary.  But Elias
protested vehemently, swearing by Allah that he knew a crocodile when
he saw one.  The monster in dispute had been no crocodile, as witness
its possession of two wings, like the wings of a bat, only fifty times
larger, and a voice which could be heard for many miles.  There was one
blessing, however, about all such creatures; that they had power only
over unbaptized people.  This last touch pleased the majority of his
audience, causing them to praise Allah, and inclining them to accept
the truth of the whole story on religious grounds.  Elias was preparing
to support it with some cognate marvel, when Mîtri announced that the
procession was being formed.  At the same moment, a few prelusory notes
of the concertina were heard without.  The house soon emptied.

Out in the heavy sunlight, hens fled clucking from the sudden tumult,
pigeons circled overhead and cooed distractedly, children were driving
dogs away with stones and curses.  Khalîl, the musician, stood to lead
the way, making his concertina speak occasionally as a protest against
further waiting.  Iskender was to follow next to him as donor of the
honoured picture; then the males of the congregation by twos and
threes, many of them carrying lighted tapers; and, last of all, the
priest fully robed, bearing the sacred picture at his breast.  Groups
of white-veiled women, mere spectators, waited in the shadow of the
hovels, or beneath the oak-tree.

"Play that tune that thou didst play at our wedding, O Khalîl," cried
Nesîbeh to the musician, who was chafing for the start.

"Which tune may that be of all tunes, O lady?  I played you all I knew
on that most blessed day!"  Khalîl was very grave and ceremonious, this
being the greatest hour of all his life.  "Is it this?"  He broke into
"God save the Queen."

"No, no; it goes like this!"  Nesîbeh strove to shadow forth the
Frankish air.  Do what she would, she could not keep from smiling, for
pleasure in her husband's great success.

"Ah, yes, I know thy meaning now.  That is a tune indeed--a tune of
playful triumph without arrogance, well suited to the occasion.  It was
taught to me by an English mariner in Bûr' Saïd, and is entitled 'Bob
gûs the wîssal.'"

"Play it, O Khalîl!  Play it all the time; for it is merry and it makes
us laugh!" cried Nesîbeh, clapping her hands.

"Ready!" cried Mîtri from the house; and Khalîl stepped out with
triumph, flourishing his concertina, flinging its strains out far and
wide; his head, his whole body carried this way and that with the
violence of his exertions.  Elias and other excitables cut strange
capers or embraced each other.  The more serious rendered praise to
Allah; the women looking on gave forth their joy-cries; and Mîtri,
bringing up the rear of the procession, smiled a blessing on their
enthusiasm over the picture held against his breast.  They had
compassed the church five times to the tune of "Pop goes the Weasel,"
and were coming round again when a carriage which they had not heard
approaching drew up beneath the ilex-tree.  Its occupants were a
Frankish clergyman dressed in black, and a lady dressed in white with a
white sunshade.  They watched the procession curiously with pitying
smiles.  Iskender from a distance was struck by the clergyman's
complexion, which seemed darker than is usual among Europeans; then
when he passed the front of the church and got close view of him, he
saw that it was Asad son of Costantîn.  In a flash he remembered things
he had forgotten, recalled a standpoint that had once seemed all
desirable.  He perceived how ludicrous this joyful marching round must
seem to English eyes; and for a moment felt ashamed for himself and his
friends.  But the next minute, having turned the corner of the church,
he met his young wife's smile, and grew once more exultant.  The lady
in the carriage beside Asad was very ugly, and no longer young.
Proudly he followed the musician round again, and, once more abreast of
the carriage, returned the contemptuous smile of the son of Costantîn.
And then the music ceased, as the procession passed into the darkness
of the little church.