Strangers frequently have acquaintances among the under-chiefs, to whose
establishments they turn aside, and are treated on the same principle
that others are when they are the guests of the chief. So generally is
the duty admitted, that one of the most cogent arguments for polygamy is
that a respectable man with only one wife could not entertain strangers
as he ought. This reason has especial weight where the women are the
chief cultivators of the soil, and have the control over the corn, as
at Kolobeng. The poor, however, who have no friends, often suffer much
hunger, and the very kind attention Sebituane lavished on all such was
one of the reasons of his great popularity in the country.

The Makololo cultivate a large extent of land around their villages.
Those of them who are real Basutos still retain the habits of that
tribe, and may be seen going out with their wives with their hoes in
hand--a state of things never witnessed at Kolobeng, or among any other
Bechuana or Caffre tribe. The great chief Moshesh affords an example to
his people annually by not only taking the hoe in hand, but working hard
with it on certain public occasions. His Basutos are of the same family
with the Makololo to whom I refer. The younger Makololo, who have been
accustomed from their infancy to lord it over the conquered Makalaka,
have unfortunately no desire to imitate the agricultural tastes of their
fathers, and expect their subjects to perform all the manual labor. They
are the aristocracy of the country, and once possessed almost unlimited
power over their vassals. Their privileges were, however, much abridged
by Sebituane himself.

I have already mentioned that the tribes which Sebituane subjected in
this great country pass by the general name of Makalaka. The Makololo
were composed of a great number of other tribes, as well as of these
central negroes. The nucleus of the whole were Basuto, who came with
Sebituane from a comparatively cold and hilly region in the south. When
he conquered various tribes of the Bechuanas, as Bakwains, Bangwaketze,
Bamangwato, Batauana, etc., he incorporated the young of these tribes
into his own. Great mortality by fever having taken place in the
original stock, he wisely adopted the same plan of absorption on a
large scale with the Makalaka. So we found him with even the sons of the
chiefs of the Barotse closely attached to his person; and they say to
this day, if any thing else but natural death had assailed their father,
every one of them would have laid down his life in his defense. One
reason for their strong affection was their emancipation by the decree
of Sebituane, "all are children of the chief."

The Makalaka cultivate the 'Holcus sorghum', or dura, as the principal
grain, with maize, two kinds of beans, ground-nuts ('Arachis hypogoea'),
pumpkins, watermelons, and cucumbers. They depend for success entirely
upon rain. Those who live in the Barotse valley cultivate in addition
the sugar-cane, sweet potato, and manioc ('Jatropha manihot'). The
climate there, however, is warmer than at Linyanti, and the Makalaka
increase the fertility of their gardens by rude attempts at artificial
irrigation.

The instrument of culture over all this region is a hoe, the iron of
which the Batoka and Banyeti obtain from the ore by smelting. The amount
of iron which they produce annually may be understood when it is known
that most of the hoes in use at Linyanti are the tribute imposed on the
smiths of those subject tribes.

Sekeletu receives tribute from a great number of tribes in corn or
dura, ground-nuts, hoes, spears, honey, canoes, paddles, wooden vessels,
tobacco, mutokuane ('Cannabis sativa'), various wild fruits (dried),
prepared skins, and ivory. When these articles are brought into the
kotla, Sekeletu has the honor of dividing them among the loungers who
usually congregate there. A small portion only is reserved for himself.
The ivory belongs nominally to him too, but this is simply a way of
making a fair distribution of the profits. The chief sells it only with
the approbation of his counselors, and the proceeds are distributed in
open day among the people as before. He has the choice of every thing;
but if he is not more liberal to others than to himself, he loses in
popularity. I have known instances in this and other tribes in which
individuals aggrieved, because they had been overlooked, fled to
other chiefs. One discontented person, having fled to Lechulatebe, was
encouraged to go to a village of the Bapalleng, on the River Cho or Tso,
and abstracted the tribute of ivory thence which ought to have come to
Sekeletu. This theft enraged the whole of the Makololo, because they all
felt it to be a personal loss. Some of Lechulatebe's people having come
on a visit to Linyanti, a demonstration was made, in which about five
hundred Makololo, armed, went through a mimic fight; the principal
warriors pointed their spears toward the lake where Lechulatebe lives,
and every thrust in that direction was answered by all with the shout,
"Ho-o!" while every stab on the ground drew out a simultaneous "Huzz!"
On these occasions all capable of bearing arms, even the old, must turn
out at the call. In the time of Sebituane, any one remaining in his
house was searched for and killed without mercy.

This offense of Lechulatebe was aggravated by repetition, and by a song
sung in his town accompanying the dances, which manifested joy at the
death of Sebituane. He had enjoined his people to live in peace with
those at the lake, and Sekeletu felt disposed to follow his advice; but
Lechulatebe had now got possession of fire-arms, and considered himself
more than a match for the Makololo. His father had been dispossessed of
many cattle by Sebituane, and, as forgiveness is not considered among
the virtues by the heathen, Lechulatebe thought he had a right to
recover what he could. As I had a good deal of influence with the
Makololo, I persuaded them that, before they could have peace, they must
resolve to give the same blessing to others, and they never could do
that without forgiving and forgetting ancient feuds. It is hard to make
them feel that shedding of human blood is a great crime; they must be
conscious that it is wrong, but, having been accustomed to bloodshed
from infancy, they are remarkably callous to the enormity of the crime
of destroying human life.

I sent a message at the same time to Lechulatebe advising him to give
up the course he had adopted, and especially the song; because, though
Sebituane was dead, the arms with which he had fought were still alive
and strong.

Sekeletu, in order to follow up his father's instructions and promote
peace, sent ten cows to Lechulatebe to be exchanged for sheep; these
animals thrive well in a bushy country like that around the lake, but
will scarcely live in the flat prairies between the net-work of waters
north of the Chobe. The men who took the cows carried a number of hoes
to purchase goats besides. Lechulatebe took the cows and sent back an
equal number of sheep. Now, according to the relative value of sheep and
cows in these parts, he ought to have sent sixty or seventy.

One of the men who had hoes was trying to purchase in a village without
formal leave from Lechulatebe; this chief punished him by making him sit
some hours on the broiling hot sand (at least 130 Deg.). This farther
offense put a stop to amicable relations between the two tribes
altogether. It was a case in which a very small tribe, commanded by
a weak and foolish chief, had got possession of fire-arms, and felt
conscious of ability to cope with a numerous and warlike race. Such
cases are the only ones in which the possession of fire-arms does evil.
The universal effect of the diffusion of the more potent instruments of
warfare in Africa is the same as among ourselves. Fire-arms render wars
less frequent and less bloody. It is indeed exceedingly rare to hear of
two tribes having guns going to war with each other; and, as nearly all
the feuds, in the south at least, have been about cattle, the risk which
must be incurred from long shots generally proves a preventive to the
foray.

The Makololo were prevailed upon to keep the peace during my residence
with them, but it was easy to perceive that public opinion was against
sparing a tribe of Bechuanas for whom the Makololo entertained the most
sovereign contempt. The young men would remark, "Lechulatebe is herding
our cows for us; let us only go, we shall 'lift' the price of them in
sheep," etc.

As the Makololo are the most northerly of the Bechuanas, we may glance
back at this family of Africans before entering on the branch of the
negro family which the Makololo distinguish by the term Makalaka. The
name Bechuana seems derived from the word Chuana--alike, or equal--with
the personal pronoun Ba (they) prefixed, and therefore means fellows
or equals. Some have supposed the name to have arisen from a mistake of
some traveler, who, on asking individuals of this nation concerning the
tribes living beyond them, received the answer, Bachuana, "they (are)
alike"; meaning, "They are the same as we are"; and that this nameless
traveler, who never wrote a word about them, managed to ingraft his
mistake as a generic term on a nation extending from the Orange River to
18 Deg. south latitude.*

   * The Makololo have conquered the country as far as 14 Deg.
   south, but it is still peopled chiefly by the black tribes
   named Makalaka.

As the name was found in use among those who had no intercourse with
Europeans, before we can receive the above explanation we must believe
that the unknown traveler knew the language sufficiently well to ask a
question, but not to understand the answer. We may add, that the way in
which they still continue to use the word seems to require no fanciful
interpretation. When addressed with any degree of scorn, they reply, "We
are Bachuana, or equals--we are not inferior to any of our nation,"
in exactly the same sense as Irishmen or Scotchmen, in the same
circumstances, would reply, "We are Britons," or "We are Englishmen."
Most other tribes are known by the terms applied to them by strangers
only, as the Caffres, Hottentots, and Bushmen. The Bechuanas alone use
the term to themselves as a generic one for the whole nation. They have
managed, also, to give a comprehensive name to the whites, viz., Makoa,
though they can not explain the derivation of it any more than of their
own. It seems to mean "handsome", from the manner in which they use
it to indicate beauty; but there is a word so very like it meaning
"infirm", or "weak", that Burchell's conjecture is probably the right
one. "The different Hottentot tribes were known by names terminating in
'kua', which means 'man', and the Bechuanas simply added the prefix
Ma, denoting a nation." They themselves were first known as Briquas, or
"goat-men". The language of the Bechuanas is termed Sichuana; that of
the whites (or Makoa) is called Sekoa.

The Makololo, or Basuto, have carried their powers of generalization
still farther, and arranged the other parts of the same great family
of South Africans into three divisions: 1st. The Matebele, or
Makonkobi--the Caffre family living on the eastern side of the country;
2d. The Bakoni, or Basuto; and, 3d. The Bakalahari, or Bechuanas, living
in the central parts, which includes all those tribes living in or
adjacent to the great Kalahari Desert.

1st. The Caffres are divided by themselves into various subdivisions, as
Amakosa, Amapanda, and other well-known titles. They consider the name
Caffre as an insulting epithet.

The Zulus of Natal belong to the same family, and they are as famed
for their honesty as their brethren who live adjacent to our colonial
frontier are renowned for cattle-lifting. The Recorder of Natal declared
of them that history does not present another instance in which so
much security for life and property has been enjoyed, as has been
experienced, during the whole period of English occupation, by ten
thousand colonists, in the midst of one hundred thousand Zulus.

The Matebele of Mosilikatse, living a short distance south of the
Zambesi, and other tribes living a little south of Tete and Senna,
are members of this same family. They are not known beyond the Zambesi
River. This was the limit of the Bechuana progress north too, until
Sebituane pushed his conquests farther.

2d. The Bakoni and Basuto division contains, in the south, all those
tribes which acknowledge Moshesh as their paramount chief. Among them
we find the Batau, the Baputi, Makolokue, etc., and some mountaineers on
the range Maluti, who are believed, by those who have carefully sifted
the evidence, to have been at one time guilty of cannibalism. This
has been doubted, but their songs admit the fact to this day, and they
ascribe their having left off the odious practice of entrapping human
prey to Moshesh having given them cattle. They are called Marimo and
Mayabathu, men-eaters, by the rest of the Basuto, who have various
subdivisions, as Makatla, Bamakakana, Matlapatlapa, etc.

The Bakoni farther north than the Basuto are the Batlou, Baperi, Bapo,
and another tribe of Bakuena, Bamosetla, Bamapela or Balaka, Babiriri,
Bapiri, Bahukeng, Batlokua, Baakhahela, etc., etc.; the whole of which
tribes are favored with abundance of rain, and, being much attached
to agriculture, raise very large quantities of grain. It is on their
industry that the more distant Boers revel in slothful abundance, and
follow their slave-hunting and cattle-stealing propensities quite beyond
the range of English influence and law. The Basuto under Moshesh are
equally fond of cultivating the soil. The chief labor of hoeing, driving
away birds, reaping, and winnowing, falls to the willing arms of the
hard-working women; but as the men, as well as their wives, as already
stated, always work, many have followed the advice of the missionaries,
and now use plows and oxen instead of the hoe.

3d. The Bakalahari, or western branch of the Bechuana family, consists
of Barolong, Bahurutse, Bakuena, Bangwaketse, Bakaa, Bamangwato,
Bakurutse, Batauana, Bamatlaro, and Batlapi. Among the last the success
of missionaries has been greatest. They were an insignificant and filthy
people when first discovered; but, being nearest to the colony, they
have had opportunities of trading; and the long-continued peace they
have enjoyed, through the influence of religious teaching, has enabled
them to amass great numbers of cattle. The young, however, who do
not realize their former degradation, often consider their present
superiority over the less-favored tribes in the interior to be entirely
owing to their own greater wisdom and more intellectual development.




Chapter 11.

Departure from Linyanti for Sesheke--Level Country--Ant-hills--Wild
Date-trees--Appearance of our Attendants on the March--The Chief's
Guard--They attempt to ride on Ox-back--Vast Herds of the
new Antelopes, Leches, and Nakongs--The native way of hunting
them--Reception at the Villages--Presents of Beer and Milk--Eating with
the Hand--The Chief provides the Oxen for Slaughter--Social Mode
of Eating--The Sugar-cane--Sekeletu's novel Test of Character--
Cleanliness of Makololo Huts--Their Construction and Appearance--The
Beds--Cross the Leeambye--Aspect of this part of the Country--The small
Antelope Tianyane unknown in the South--Hunting on foot--An Eland.



Having waited a month at Linyanti (lat. 18d 17' 20" S., long. 23d 50'
9" E.), we again departed, for the purpose of ascending the river from
Sesheke (lat. 17d 31' 38" S., long. 25d 13' E.). To the Barotse country,
the capital of which is Nariele or Naliele (lat. 15d 24' 17" S., long.
23d 5' 54" E.), I went in company with Sekeletu and about one hundred
and sixty attendants. We had most of the young men with us, and many of
the under-chiefs besides. The country between Linyanti and Sesheke
is perfectly flat, except patches elevated only a few feet above
the surrounding level. There are also many mounds where the gigantic
ant-hills of the country have been situated or still appear: these
mounds are evidently the work of the termites. No one who has not
seen their gigantic structures can fancy the industry of these little
laborers; they seem to impart fertility to the soil which has once
passed through their mouths, for the Makololo find the sides of
ant-hills the choice spots for rearing early maize, tobacco, or any
thing on which they wish to bestow especial care. In the parts through
which we passed the mounds are generally covered with masses of wild
date-trees; the fruit is small, and no tree is allowed to stand long,
for, having abundance of food, the Makololo have no inclination to
preserve wild fruit-trees; accordingly, when a date shoots up to seed,
as soon as the fruit is ripe they cut down the tree rather than be at
the trouble of climbing it. The other parts of the more elevated land
have the camel-thorn ('Acacia giraffae'), white-thorned mimosa ('Acacia
horrida'), and baobabs. In sandy spots there are palmyras somewhat
similar to the Indian, but with a smaller seed. The soil on all the flat
parts is a rich, dark, tenacious loam, known as the "cotton-ground" in
India; it is covered with a dense matting of coarse grass, common on
all damp spots in this country. We had the Chobe on our right, with its
scores of miles of reed occupying the horizon there. It was pleasant to
look back on the long-extended line of our attendants, as it twisted and
bent according to the curves of the footpath, or in and out behind the
mounds, the ostrich feathers of the men waving in the wind. Some had the
white ends of ox-tails on their heads, Hussar fashion, and others great
bunches of black ostrich feathers, or caps made of lions' manes. Some
wore red tunics, or various-colored prints which the chief had bought
from Fleming; the common men carried burdens; the gentlemen walked with
a small club of rhinoceros-horn in their hands, and had servants to
carry their shields; while the "Machaka", battle-axe men, carried their
own, and were liable at any time to be sent off a hundred miles on an
errand, and expected to run all the way.

Sekeletu is always accompanied by his own Mopato, a number of young men
of his own age. When he sits down they crowd around him; those who
are nearest eat out of the same dish, for the Makololo chiefs pride
themselves on eating with their people. He eats a little, then beckons
his neighbors to partake. When they have done so, he perhaps beckons
to some one at a distance to take a share; that person starts forward,
seizes the pot, and removes it to his own companions. The comrades of
Sekeletu, wishing to imitate him in riding on my old horse, leaped
on the backs of a number of half-broken Batoka oxen as they ran, but,
having neither saddle nor bridle, the number of tumbles they met with
was a source of much amusement to the rest. Troops of leches, or, as
they are here called, "lechwes", appeared feeding quite heedlessly
all over the flats; they exist here in prodigious herds, although the
numbers of them and of the "nakong" that are killed annually must be
enormous. Both are water antelopes, and, when the lands we now tread
upon are flooded, they betake themselves to the mounds I have alluded
to. The Makalaka, who are most expert in the management of their small,
thin, light canoes, come gently toward them; the men stand upright in
the canoe, though it is not more than fifteen or eighteen inches wide
and about fifteen feet long; their paddles, ten feet in height, are of
a kind of wood called molompi, very light, yet as elastic as ash. With
these they either punt or paddle, according to the shallowness or depth
of the water. When they perceive the antelopes beginning to move they
increase their speed, and pursue them with great velocity. They make the
water dash away from the gunwale, and, though the leche goes off by a
succession of prodigious bounds, its feet appearing to touch the bottom
at each spring, they manage to spear great numbers of them.

The nakong often shares a similar fate. This is a new species, rather
smaller than the leche, and in shape has more of paunchiness than any
antelope I ever saw. Its gait closely resembles the gallop of a dog
when tired. The hair is long and rather sparse, so that it is never
sleek-looking. It is of a grayish-brown color, and has horns twisted
in the manner of a koodoo, but much smaller, and with a double ridge
winding round each of them.

Its habitat is the marsh and the muddy bogs; the great length of its
foot between the point of the toe and supplemental hoofs enables it to
make a print about a foot in length; it feeds by night, and lies hid
among the reeds and rushes by day; when pursued, it dashes into sedgy
places containing water, and immerses the whole body, leaving only the
point of the nose and ends of the horns exposed. The hunters burn
large patches of reed in order to drive the nakong out of his lair;
occasionally the ends of the horns project above the water; but when it
sees itself surrounded by enemies in canoes, it will rather allow
its horns to be scorched in the burning reed than come forth from its
hiding-place.

When we arrived at any village the women all turned out to lulliloo
their chief. Their shrill voices, to which they give a tremulous sound
by a quick motion of the tongue, peal forth, "Great lion!" "Great
chief!" "Sleep, my lord!" etc. The men utter similar salutations; and
Sekeletu receives all with becoming indifference. After a few minutes'
conversation and telling the news, the head man of the village, who is
almost always a Makololo, rises, and brings forth a number of large pots
of beer. Calabashes, being used as drinking-cups, are handed round, and
as many as can partake of the beverage do so, grasping the vessels so
eagerly that they are in danger of being broken.

They bring forth also large pots and bowls of thick milk; some contain
six or eight gallons; and each of these, as well as of the beer, is
given to a particular person, who has the power to divide it with
whom he pleases. The head man of any section of the tribe is generally
selected for this office. Spoons not being generally in fashion, the
milk is conveyed to the mouth with the hand. I often presented my
friends with iron spoons, and it was curious to observe how their habit
of hand-eating prevailed, though they were delighted with the spoons.
They lifted out a little with the utensil, then put it on the left hand,
and ate it out of that.

As the Makololo have great abundance of cattle, and the chief is
expected to feed all who accompany him, he either selects an ox or
two of his own from the numerous cattle stations that he possesses at
different spots all over the country, or is presented by the head men of
the villages he visits with as many as he needs by way of tribute. The
animals are killed by a thrust from a small javelin in the region of
the heart, the wound being purposely small in order to avoid any loss
of blood, which, with the internal parts, are the perquisites of the
men who perform the work of the butcher; hence all are eager to render
service in that line. Each tribe has its own way of cutting up and
distributing an animal. Among the Makololo the hump and ribs belong to
the chief; among the Bakwains the breast is his perquisite. After the
oxen are cut up, the different joints are placed before Sekeletu, and he
apportions them among the gentlemen of the party. The whole is rapidly
divided by their attendants, cut into long strips, and so many of these
are thrown into the fires at once that they are nearly put out. Half
broiled and burning hot, the meat is quickly handed round; every one
gets a mouthful, but no one except the chief has time to masticate. It
is not the enjoyment of eating they aim at, but to get as much of the
food into the stomach as possible during the short time the others are
cramming as well as themselves, for no one can eat more than a mouthful
after the others have finished. They are eminently gregarious in their
eating; and, as they despise any one who eats alone, I always poured out
two cups of coffee at my own meals, so that the chief, or some one of
the principal men, might partake along with me. They all soon become
very fond of coffee; and, indeed, some of the tribes attribute greater
fecundity to the daily use of this beverage. They were all well
acquainted with the sugar-cane, as they cultivate it in the Barotse
country, but knew nothing of the method of extracting the sugar from it.
They use the cane only for chewing. Sekeletu, relishing the sweet coffee
and biscuits, of which I then had a store, said "he knew my heart loved
him by finding his own heart warming to my food." He had been visited
during my absence at the Cape by some traders and Griquas, and "their
coffee did not taste half so nice as mine, because they loved his ivory
and not himself." This was certainly an original mode of discerning
character.

Sekeletu and I had each a little gipsy-tent in which to sleep. The
Makololo huts are generally clean, while those of the Makalaka are
infested with vermin. The cleanliness of the former is owing to the
habit of frequently smearing the floors with a plaster composed of
cowdung and earth. If we slept in the tent in some villages, the mice
ran over our faces and disturbed our sleep, or hungry prowling dogs
would eat our shoes and leave only the soles. When they were guilty of
this and other misdemeanors, we got the loan of a hut. The best sort
of Makololo huts consist of three circular walls, with small holes as
doors, each similar to that in a dog-house; and it is necessary to bend
down the body to get in, even when on all-fours. The roof is formed of
reeds or straight sticks, in shape like a Chinaman's hat, bound firmly
together with circular bands, which are lashed with the strong inner
bark of the mimosa-tree. When all prepared except the thatch, it is
lifted on to the circular wall, the rim resting on a circle of poles,
between each of which the third wall is built. The roof is thatched with
fine grass, and sewed with the same material as the lashings; and, as
it projects far beyond the walls, and reaches within four feet of the
ground, the shade is the best to be found in the country. These huts are
very cool in the hottest day, but are close and deficient in ventilation
by night.

The bed is a mat made of rushes sewn together with twine; the hip-bone
soon becomes sore on the hard flat surface, as we are not allowed to
make a hole in the floor to receive the prominent part called trochanter
by anatomists, as we do when sleeping on grass or sand.

Our course at this time led us to a part above Sesheke, called
Katonga, where there is a village belonging to a Bashubia man named
Sekhosi--latitude 17d 29' 13", longitude 24d 33'. The river here is
somewhat broader than at Sesheke, and certainly not less than six
hundred yards. It flows somewhat slowly in the first part of its eastern
course. When the canoes came from Sekhosi to take us over, one of the
comrades of Sebituane rose, and, looking to Sekeletu, called out, "The
elders of a host always take the lead in an attack." This was understood
at once; and Sekeletu, with all the young men, were obliged to give the
elders the precedence, and remain on the southern bank and see that all
went orderly into the canoes. It took a considerable time to ferry over
the whole of our large party, as, even with quick paddling, from six to
eight minutes were spent in the mere passage from bank to bank.

Several days were spent in collecting canoes from different villages on
the river, which we now learned is called by the whole of the Barotse
the Liambai or Leeambye. This we could not ascertain on our first visit,
and, consequently, called the river after the town "Sesheke". This term
Sesheke means "white sand-banks", many of which exist at this part.
There is another village in the valley of the Barotse likewise called
Sesheke, and for the same reason; but the term Leeambye means "the
large river", or the river PAR EXCELLENCE. Luambeji, Luambesi, Ambezi,
Ojimbesi, and Zambesi, etc., are names applied to it at different
parts of its course, according to the dialect spoken, and all possess a
similar signification, and express the native idea of this magnificent
stream being the main drain of the country.

In order to assist in the support of our large party, and at the same
time to see the adjacent country, I went several times, during our stay,
to the north of the village for game. The country is covered with clumps
of beautiful trees, among which fine open glades stretch away in every
direction; when the river is in flood these are inundated, but the
tree-covered elevated spots are much more numerous here than in the
country between the Chobe and the Leeambye. The soil is dark loam, as it
is every where on spots reached by the inundation, while among the trees
it is sandy, and not covered so densely with grass as elsewhere. A sandy
ridge covered with trees, running parallel to, and about eight miles
from the river, is the limit of the inundation on the north; there are
large tracts of this sandy forest in that direction, till you come to
other districts of alluvial soil and fewer trees. The latter soil is
always found in the vicinity of rivers which either now overflow their
banks annually, or formerly did so. The people enjoy rain in sufficient
quantity to raise very large supplies of grain and ground-nuts.

This district contains great numbers of a small antelope named Tianyane,
unknown in the south. It stands about eighteen inches high, is very
graceful in its movements, and utters a cry of alarm not unlike that of
the domestic fowl; it is of a brownish-red color on the sides and back,
with the belly and lower part of the tail white; it is very timid, but
the maternal affection that the little thing bears to its young will
often induce it to offer battle even to a man approaching it. When the
young one is too tender to run about with the dam, she puts one foot
on the prominence about the seventh cervical vertebra, or withers; the
instinct of the young enables it to understand that it is now required
to kneel down, and to remain quite still till it hears the bleating of
its dam. If you see an otherwise gregarious she-antelope separated from
the herd, and going alone any where, you may be sure she has laid her
little one to sleep in some cozy spot. The color of the hair in the
young is better adapted for assimilating it with the ground than that of
the older animals, which do not need to be screened from the observation
of birds of prey. I observed the Arabs at Aden, when making their camels
kneel down, press the thumb on the withers in exactly the same way the
antelopes do with their young; probably they have been led to the custom
by seeing this plan adopted by the gazelle of the Desert.

Great numbers of buffaloes, zebras, tsessebes, tahaetsi, and eland, or
pohu, grazed undisturbed on these plains, so that very little exertion
was required to secure a fair supply of meat for the party during the
necessary delay. Hunting on foot, as all those who have engaged in it in
this country will at once admit, is very hard work indeed. The heat of
the sun by day is so great, even in winter, as it now was, that, had
there been any one on whom I could have thrown the task, he would have
been most welcome to all the sport the toil is supposed to impart. But
the Makololo shot so badly, that, in order to save my powder, I was
obliged to go myself.

We shot a beautiful cow-eland, standing in the shade of a fine tree. It
was evident that she had lately had her calf killed by a lion, for there
were five long deep scratches on both sides of her hind-quarters, as
if she had run to the rescue of her calf, and the lion, leaving it, had
attacked herself, but was unable to pull her down. When lying on the
ground, the milk flowing from the large udder showed that she must have
been seeking the shade, from the distress its non-removal in the natural
manner caused. She was a beautiful creature, and Lebeole, a Makololo
gentleman who accompanied me, speaking in reference to its size and
beauty, said, "Jesus ought to have given us these instead of cattle." It
was a new, undescribed variety of this splendid antelope. It was marked
with narrow white bands across the body, exactly like those of the
koodoo, and had a black patch of more than a handbreadth on the outer
side of the fore-arm.




Chapter 12.

Procure Canoes and ascend the Leeambye--Beautiful Islands--Winter
Landscape--Industry and Skill of the Banyeti--Rapids--Falls of
Gonye--Tradition--Annual Inundations--Fertility of the great
Barotse Valley--Execution of two Conspirators--The Slave-dealer's
Stockade--Naliele, the Capital, built on an artificial Mound--Santuru,
a great Hunter--The Barotse Method of commemorating any remarkable
Event--Better Treatment of Women--More religious Feeling--Belief in a
future State, and in the Existence of spiritual Beings--Gardens--Fish,
Fruit, and Game--Proceed to the Limits of the Barotse Country--
Sekeletu provides Rowers and a Herald--The River and Vicinity--
Hippopotamus-hunters--No healthy Location--Determine to go to Loanda--
Buffaloes, Elands, and Lions above Libonta--Interview with the Mambari--
Two Arabs from Zanzibar--Their Opinion of the Portuguese and the English
--Reach the Town of Ma-Sekeletu--Joy of the People at the first Visit of
their Chief--Return to Sesheke--Heathenism.



Having at last procured a sufficient number of canoes, we began to
ascend the river. I had the choice of the whole fleet, and selected the
best, though not the largest; it was thirty-four feet long by twenty
inches wide. I had six paddlers, and the larger canoe of Sekeletu had
ten. They stand upright, and keep the stroke with great precision,
though they change from side to side as the course demands. The men at
the head and stern are selected from the strongest and most expert of
the whole. The canoes, being flat bottomed, can go into very shallow
water; and whenever the men can feel the bottom they use the paddles,
which are about eight feet long, as poles to punt with. Our fleet
consisted of thirty-three canoes, and about one hundred and sixty men.
It was beautiful to see them skimming along so quickly, and keeping
the time so well. On land the Makalaka fear the Makololo; on water
the Makololo fear them, and can not prevent them from racing with
each other, dashing along at the top of their speed, and placing
their masters' lives in danger. In the event of a capsize, many of the
Makololo would sink like stones. A case of this kind happened on the
first day of our voyage up. The wind, blowing generally from the east,
raises very large waves on the Leeambye. An old doctor of the Makololo
had his canoe filled by one of these waves, and, being unable to swim,
was lost. The Barotse who were in the canoe with him saved themselves
by swimming, and were afraid of being punished with death in the evening
for not saving the doctor as well. Had he been a man of more influence,
they certainly would have suffered death.

We proceeded rapidly up the river, and I felt the pleasure of looking
on lands which had never been seen by a European before. The river is,
indeed, a magnificent one, often more than a mile broad, and adorned
with many islands of from three to five miles in length. Both islands
and banks are covered with forest, and most of the trees on the brink of
the water send down roots from their branches like the banian, or 'Ficus
Indica'. The islands at a little distance seem great rounded masses of
sylvan vegetation reclining on the bosom of the glorious stream. The
beauty of the scenery of some of the islands is greatly increased by the
date-palm, with its gracefully curved fronds and refreshing light green
color, near the bottom of the picture, and the lofty palmyra towering
far above, and casting its feathery foliage against a cloudless sky. It
being winter, we had the strange coloring on the banks which many parts
of African landscape assume. The country adjacent to the river is rocky
and undulating, abounding in elephants and all other large game, except
leches and nakongs, which seem generally to avoid stony ground. The soil
is of a reddish color, and very fertile, as is attested by the great
quantity of grain raised annually by the Banyeti. A great many villages
of this poor and very industrious people are situated on both banks of
the river: they are expert hunters of the hippopotami and other animals,
and very proficient in the manufacture of articles of wood and iron. The
whole of this part of the country being infested with the tsetse, they
are unable to rear domestic animals. This may have led to their skill
in handicraft works. Some make large wooden vessels with very neat lids,
and wooden bowls of all sizes; and since the idea of sitting on stools
has entered the Makololo mind, they have shown great taste in the
different forms given to the legs of these pieces of furniture.

Other Banyeti, or Manyeti, as they are called, make neat and strong
baskets of the split roots of a certain tree, while others excel in
pottery and iron. I can not find that they have ever been warlike.
Indeed, the wars in the centre of the country, where no slave-trade
existed, have seldom been about any thing else but cattle. So well known
is this, that several tribes refuse to keep cattle because they tempt
their enemies to come and steal. Nevertheless, they have no objection to
eat them when offered, and their country admits of being well stocked.
I have heard of but one war having occurred from another cause. Three
brothers, Barolongs, fought for the possession of a woman who was
considered worth a battle, and the tribe has remained permanently
divided ever since.

From the bend up to the north, called Katima-molelo (I quenched fire),
the bed of the river is rocky, and the stream runs fast, forming a
succession of rapids and cataracts, which prevent continuous navigation
when the water is low. The rapids are not visible when the river is
full, but the cataracts of Nambwe, Bombwe, and Kale must always be
dangerous. The fall at each of these is between four and six feet. But
the falls of Gonye present a much more serious obstacle. There we were
obliged to take the canoes out of the water, and carry them more than
a mile by land. The fall is about thirty feet. The main body of water,
which comes over the ledge of rock when the river is low, is collected
into a space seventy or eighty yards wide before it takes the leap, and,
a mass of rock being thrust forward against the roaring torrent, a loud
sound is produced. Tradition reports the destruction in this place of
two hippopotamus-hunters, who, over-eager in the pursuit of a wounded
animal, were, with their intended prey, drawn down into the frightful
gulf. There is also a tradition of a man, evidently of a superior mind,
who left his own countrymen, the Barotse, and came down the river, took
advantage of the falls, and led out a portion of the water there for
irrigation. Such minds must have arisen from time to time in these
regions, as well as in our own country, but, ignorant of the use of
letters, they have left no memorial behind them. We dug out some of an
inferior kind of potato ('Sisinyane') from his garden, for when once
planted it never dies out. This root is bitter and waxy, though it
is cultivated. It was not in flower, so I can not say whether it is a
solanaceous plant or not. One never expects to find a grave nor a stone
of remembrance set up in Africa; the very rocks are illiterate, they
contain so few fossils. Those here are of reddish variegated, hardened
sandstone, with madrepore holes in it. This, and broad horizontal strata
of trap, sometimes a hundred miles in extent, and each layer having an
inch or so of black silicious matter on it, as if it had floated there
while in a state of fusion, form a great part of the bottom of the
central valley. These rocks, in the southern part of the country
especially, are often covered with twelve or fifteen feet of soft
calcareous tufa. At Bombwe we have the same trap, with radiated zeolite,
probably mesotype, and it again appears at the confluence of the Chobe,
farther down.

As we passed up the river, the different villages of Banyeti turned out
to present Sekeletu with food and skins, as their tribute. One large
village is placed at Gonye, the inhabitants of which are required to
assist the Makololo to carry their canoes past the falls. The tsetse
here lighted on us even in the middle of the stream. This we crossed
repeatedly, in order to make short cuts at bends of the river. The
course is, however, remarkably straight among the rocks; and here the
river is shallow, on account of the great breadth of surface which it
covers. When we came to about 16d 16' S. latitude, the high wooded banks
seemed to leave the river, and no more tsetse appeared. Viewed from
the flat, reedy basin in which the river then flowed, the banks seemed
prolonged into ridges, of the same wooded character, two or three
hundred feet high, and stretched away to the N.N.E. and N.N.W. until
they were twenty or thirty miles apart. The intervening space, nearly
one hundred miles in length, with the Leeambye winding gently near the
middle, is the true Barotse valley. It bears a close resemblance to the
valley of the Nile, and is inundated annually, not by rains, but by the
Leeambye, exactly as Lower Egypt is flooded by the Nile. The villages
of the Barotse are built on mounds, some of which are said to have
been raised artificially by Santuru, a former chief of the Barotse, and
during the inundation the whole valley assumes the appearance of a large
lake, with the villages on the mounds like islands, just as occurs in
Egypt with the villages of the Egyptians. Some portion of the waters of
inundation comes from the northwest, where great floodings also occur,
but more comes from the north and northeast, descending the bed of the
Leeambye itself. There are but few trees in this valley: those which
stand on the mounds were nearly all transplanted by Santuru for shade.
The soil is extremely fertile, and the people are never in want of
grain, for, by taking advantage of the moisture of the inundation, they
can take two crops a year. The Barotse are strongly attached to this
fertile valley; they say, "Here hunger is not known." There are so many
things besides corn which a man can find in it for food, that it is no
wonder they desert from Linyanti to return to this place.

The great valley is not put to a tithe of the use it might be. It is
covered with coarse succulent grasses, which afford ample pasturage for
large herds of cattle; these thrive wonderfully, and give milk copiously
to their owners. When the valley is flooded, the cattle are compelled to
leave it and go to the higher lands, where they fall off in condition;
their return is a time of joy.

It is impossible to say whether this valley, which contains so much
moisture, would raise wheat as the valley of the Nile does. It is
probably too rich, and would make corn run entirely to straw, for one
species of grass was observed twelve feet high, with a stem as thick as
a man's thumb. At present the pasturage is never eaten off, though the
Makololo possess immense herds of cattle.

There are no large towns, the mounds on which the towns and villages are
built being all small, and the people require to live apart on account
of their cattle.

This visit was the first Sekeletu had made to these parts since he
attained the chieftainship. Those who had taken part with Mpepe were
consequently in great terror. When we came to the town of Mpepe's
father, as he and another man had counseled Mamochisane to put Sekeletu
to death and marry Mpepe, the two were led forth and tossed into the
river. Nokuane was again one of the executioners. When I remonstrated
against human blood being shed in the offhand way in which they were
proceeding, the counselors justified their acts by the evidence given by
Mamochisane, and calmly added, "You see we are still Boers; we are not
yet taught."

Mpepe had given full permission to the Mambari slave-dealers to trade
in all the Batoka and Bashukulompo villages to the east of this. He had
given them cattle, ivory, and children, and had received in return
a large blunderbuss to be mounted as a cannon. When the slight
circumstance of my having covered the body of the chief with my own
deranged the whole conspiracy, the Mambari, in their stockade, were
placed in very awkward circumstances. It was proposed to attack them and
drive them out of the country at once; but, dreading a commencement of
hostilities, I urged the difficulties of that course, and showed that
a stockade defended by perhaps forty muskets would be a very serious
affair. "Hunger is strong enough for that," said an under-chief; "a very
great fellow is he." They thought of attacking them by starvation. As
the chief sufferers in case of such an attack would have been the poor
slaves chained in gangs, I interceded for them, and the result of an
intercession of which they were ignorant was that they were allowed to
depart in peace.

Naliele, the capital of the Barotse, is built on a mound which was
constructed artificially by Santuru, and was his store-house for grain.
His own capital stood about five hundred yards to the south of that, in
what is now the bed of the river. All that remains of the largest mound
in the valley are a few cubic yards of earth, to erect which cost the
whole of the people of Santuru the labor of many years. The same thing
has happened to another ancient site of a town, Linangelo, also on the
left bank. It would seem, therefore, that the river in this part of the
valley must be wearing eastward. No great rise of the river is required
to submerge the whole valley; a rise of ten feet above the present
low-water mark would reach the highest point it ever attains, as seen in
the markings of the bank on which stood Santuru's ancient capital,
and two or three feet more would deluge all the villages. This never
happens, though the water sometimes comes so near the foundations of
the huts that the people can not move outside the walls of reeds which
encircle their villages. When the river is compressed among the high
rocky banks near Gonye, it rises sixty feet.

The influence of the partial obstruction it meets with there is seen
in the more winding course of the river north of 16 Deg.; and when the
swell gets past Katima-molelo, it spreads out on the lands on both banks
toward Sesheke.

Santuru, at whose ancient granary we are staying, was a great hunter,
and very fond of taming wild animals. His people, aware of his taste,
brought to him every young antelope they could catch, and, among other
things, two young hippopotami. These animals gamboled in the river
by day, but never failed to remember to come up to Naliele for their
suppers of milk and meal. They were the wonder of the country, till a
stranger, happening to come to visit Santuru, saw them reclining in the
sun, and speared one of them on the supposition that it was wild. The
same unlucky accident happened to one of the cats I had brought to
Sekeletu. A stranger, seeing an animal he had never viewed before,
killed it, and brought the trophy to the chief, thinking that he had
made a very remarkable discovery; we thereby lost the breed of cats, of
which, from the swarms of mice, we stood in great need.

On making inquiries to ascertain whether Santuru, the Moloiana, had ever
been visited by white men, I could find no vestige of any such visit;*
there is no evidence of any of Santuru's people having ever seen a white
man before the arrival of Mr. Oswell and myself in 1851. The people
have, it is true, no written records; but any remarkable event here is
commemorated in names, as was observed by Park to be the case in the
countries he traversed. The year of our arrival is dignified by the name
of the year when the white men came, or of Sebituane's death; but they
prefer the former, as they avoid, if possible, any direct reference to
the departed. After my wife's first visit, great numbers of children
were named Ma-Robert, or mother of Robert, her eldest child; others were
named Gun, Horse, Wagon, Monare, Jesus, etc.; but though our names, and
those of the native Portuguese who came in 1853, were adopted, there is
not a trace of any thing of the sort having happened previously among
the Barotse: the visit of a white man is such a remarkable event, that,
had any taken place during the last three hundred years, there must have
remained some tradition of it.

   * The Barotse call themselves the Baloiana or little Baloi, as
   if they had been an offset from Loi, or Lui, as it is often
   spelt. As Lui had been visited by Portuguese, but its position
   not well ascertained, my inquiries referred to the identity of
   Naliele with Lui.  On asking the head man of the Mambari
   party, named Porto, whether he had ever heard of Naliele being
   visited previously, he replied in the negative, and stated
   that he "had himself attempted to come from Bihe three times,
   but had always been prevented by the tribe called Ganguellas."
   He nearly succeeded in 1852, but was driven back.  He now (in
   1853) attempted to go eastward from Naliele, but came back to
   the Barotse on being unable to go beyond Kainko's village,
   which is situated on the Bashukulompo River, and eight days
   distant.  The whole party was anxious to secure a reward
   believed to be promised by the Portuguese government. Their
   want of success confirmed my impression that I ought to go
   westward. Porto kindly offered to aid me, if I would go with
   him to Bihe; but when I declined, he preceded me to Loanda,
   and was publishing his Journal when I arrived at that city.
   Ben Habib told me that Porto had sent letters to Mozambique by
   the Arab, Ben Chombo, whom I knew; and he has since asserted,
   in Portugal, that he himself went to Mozambique as well as his
   letters!

But Santuru was once visited by the Mambari, and a distinct recollection
of that visit is retained. They came to purchase slaves, and both
Santuru and his head men refused them permission to buy any of the
people. The Makololo quoted this precedent when speaking of the Mambari,
and said that they, as the present masters of the country, had as good
a right to expel them as Santuru. The Mambari reside near Bihe, under
an Ambonda chief named Kangombe. They profess to use the slaves for
domestic purposes alone.

Some of these Mambari visited us while at Naliele. They are of the
Ambonda family, which inhabits the country southeast of Angola, and
speak the Bunda dialect, which is of the same family of languages with
the Barotse, Bayeiye, etc., or those black tribes comprehended under the
general term Makalaka. They plait their hair in three-fold cords, and
lay them carefully down around the sides of the head. They are quite as
dark as the Barotse, but have among them a number of half-castes, with
their peculiar yellow sickly hue. On inquiring why they had fled on my
approach to Linyanti, they let me know that they had a vivid idea of the
customs of English cruisers on the coast. They showed also their habits
in their own country by digging up and eating, even here where
large game abounds, the mice and moles which infest the country. The
half-castes, or native Portuguese, could all read and write, and the
head of the party, if not a real Portuguese, had European hair, and,
influenced probably by the letter of recommendation which I held from
the Chevalier Duprat, his most faithful majesty's Arbitrator in the
British and Portuguese Mixed Commission at Cape Town, was evidently
anxious to show me all the kindness in his power. These persons I feel
assured were the first individuals of Portuguese blood who ever saw the
Zambesi in the centre of the country, and they had reached it two years
after our discovery in 1851.

The town or mound of Santuru's mother was shown to me; this was the
first symptom of an altered state of feeling with regard to the female
sex that I had observed. There are few or no cases of women being
elevated to the headships of towns further south. The Barotse also
showed some relics of their chief, which evinced a greater amount of the
religious feeling than I had ever known displayed among Bechuanas. His
more recent capital, Lilonda, built, too, on an artificial mound,
is covered with different kinds of trees, transplanted when young by
himself. They form a grove on the end of the mound, in which are to be
seen various instruments of iron just in the state he left them. One
looks like the guard of a basket-hilted sword; another has an upright
stem of the metal, on which are placed branches worked at the ends into
miniature axes, hoes, and spears; on these he was accustomed to present
offerings, according as he desired favors to be conferred in undertaking
hewing, agriculture, or fighting. The people still living there, in
charge of these articles, were supported by presents from the chief; and
the Makololo sometimes follow the example. This was the nearest approach
to a priesthood I met. When I asked them to part with one of these
relics, they replied, "Oh no, he refuses." "Who refuses?" "Santuru," was
their reply, showing their belief in a future state of existence. After
explaining to them, as I always did when opportunity offered, the nature
of true worship, and praying with them in the simple form which needs no
offering from the worshiper except that of the heart, and planting some
fruit-tree seeds in the grove, we departed.

Another incident, which occurred at the confluence of the Leeba and
Leeambye, may be mentioned here, as showing a more vivid perception of
the existence of spiritual beings, and greater proneness to worship than
among the Bechuanas. Having taken lunar observations in the morning,
I was waiting for a meridian altitude of the sun for the latitude; my
chief boatman was sitting by, in order to pack up the instruments
as soon as I had finished; there was a large halo, about 20 Deg. in
diameter, round the sun; thinking that the humidity of the atmosphere,
which this indicated, might betoken rain, I asked him if his experience
did not lead him to the same view. "Oh no," replied he; "it is the
Barimo (gods or departed spirits), who have called a picho; don't you
see they have the Lord (sun) in the centre?"

While still at Naliele I walked out to Katongo (lat. 15d 16' 33"), on
the ridge which bounds the valley of the Barotse in that direction, and
found it covered with trees. It is only the commencement of the lands
which are never inundated; their gentle rise from the dead level of the
valley much resembles the edge of the Desert in the valley of the Nile.
But here the Banyeti have fine gardens, and raise great quantities of
maize, millet, and native corn ('Holcus sorghum'), of large grain and
beautifully white. They grow, also, yams, sugar-cane, the Egyptian
arum, sweet potato ('Convolulus batata'), two kinds of manioc or cassava
('Jatropha manihot' and 'J. utilissima', a variety containing scarcely
any poison), besides pumpkins, melons, beans, and ground-nuts. These,
with plenty of fish in the river, its branches and lagoons, wild fruits
and water-fowl, always make the people refer to the Barotse as the land
of plenty. The scene from the ridge, on looking back, was beautiful. One
can not see the western side of the valley in a cloudy day, such as
that was when we visited the stockade, but we could see the great river
glancing out at different points, and fine large herds of cattle quietly
grazing on the green succulent herbage, among numbers of cattle-stations
and villages which are dotted over the landscape. Leches in hundreds
fed securely beside them, for they have learned only to keep out of
bow-shot, or two hundred yards. When guns come into a country the
animals soon learn their longer range, and begin to run at a distance of
five hundred yards.

I imagined the slight elevation (Katongo) might be healthy, but was
informed that no part of this region is exempt from fever. When
the waters begin to retire from this valley, such masses of decayed
vegetation and mud are exposed to the torrid sun that even the natives
suffer severely from attacks of fever. The grass is so rank in its
growth that one can not see the black alluvial soil of the bottom of
this periodical lake. Even when the grass falls down in winter, or is
"laid" by its own weight, one is obliged to lift the feet so high, to
avoid being tripped up by it, as to make walking excessively fatiguing.
Young leches are hidden beneath it by their dams; and the Makololo youth
complain of being unable to run in the Barotse land on this account.
There was evidently no healthy spot in this quarter; and the current of
the river being about four and a half miles per hour (one hundred yards
in sixty seconds), I imagined we might find what we needed in the higher
lands, from which the river seemed to come. I resolved, therefore, to
go to the utmost limits of the Barotse country before coming to a final
conclusion. Katongo was the best place we had seen; but, in order to
accomplish a complete examination, I left Sekeletu at Naliele, and
ascended the river. He furnished me with men, besides my rowers, and
among the rest a herald, that I might enter his villages in what is
considered a dignified manner. This, it was supposed, would be effected
by the herald shouting out at the top of his voice, "Here comes the
lord; the great lion;" the latter phrase being "tau e tona", which, in
his imperfect way of pronunciation, became "Sau e tona", and so like
"the great sow" that I could not receive the honor with becoming
gravity, and had to entreat him, much to the annoyance of my party, to
be silent.

In our ascent we visited a number of Makololo villages, and were always
received with a hearty welcome, as messengers to them of peace, which
they term "sleep". They behave well in public meetings, even on the
first occasion of attendance, probably from the habit of commanding the
Makalaka, crowds of whom swarm in every village, and whom the Makololo
women seem to consider as especially under their charge.

The river presents the same appearance of low banks without trees as
we have remarked it had after we came to 16d 16', until we arrive at
Libonta (14d 59' S. lat.). Twenty miles beyond that, we find forest down
to the water's edge, and tsetse. Here I might have turned back, as no
locality can be inhabited by Europeans where that scourge exists; but
hearing that we were not far from the confluence of the River of Londa
or Lunda, named Leeba or Loiba, and the chiefs of that country being
reported to be friendly to strangers, and therefore likely to be of use
to me on my return from the west coast, I still pushed on to latitude
14d 11' 3" S. There the Leeambye assumes the name Kabompo, and seems to
be coming from the east. It is a fine large river, about three hundred
yards wide, and the Leeba two hundred and fifty. The Loeti, a branch of
which is called Langebongo, comes from W.N.W., through a level grassy
plain named Mango; it is about one hundred yards wide, and enters the
Leeambye from the west; the waters of the Loeti are of a light color,
and those of the Leeba of a dark mossy hue. After the Loeti joins
the Leeambye the different colored waters flow side by side for some
distance unmixed.

Before reaching the Loeti we came to a number of people from the Lobale
region, hunting hippopotami. They fled precipitately as soon as they saw
the Makololo, leaving their canoes and all their utensils and clothing.
My own Makalaka, who were accustomed to plunder wherever they went,
rushed after them like furies, totally regardless of my shouting. As
this proceeding would have destroyed my character entirely at Lobale, I
took my stand on a commanding position as they returned, and forced them
to lay down all the plunder on a sand-bank, and leave it there for its
lawful owners.

It was now quite evident that no healthy location could be obtained in
which the Makololo would be allowed to live in peace. I had thus a fair
excuse, if I had chosen to avail myself of it, of coming home and saying
that the "door was shut", because the Lord's time had not yet come. But
believing that it was my duty to devote some portion of my life to these
(to me at least) very confiding and affectionate Makololo, I resolved
to follow out the second part of my plan, though I had failed in
accomplishing the first. The Leeba seemed to come from the N. and by
W., or N.N.W.; so, having an old Portuguese map, which pointed out the
Coanza as rising from the middle of the continent in 9 Deg. S. lat., I
thought it probable that, when we had ascended the Leeba (from 14d 11')
two or three degrees, we should then be within one hundred and twenty
miles of the Coanza, and find no difficulty in following it down to the
coast near Loanda. This was the logical deduction; but, as is the
case with many a plausible theory, one of the premises was decidedly
defective. The Coanza, as we afterward found, does not come from any
where near the centre of the country.

The numbers of large game above Libonta are prodigious, and they proved
remarkably tame. Eighty-one buffaloes defiled in slow procession before
our fire one evening, within gunshot; and herds of splendid elands stood
by day, without fear, at two hundred yards distance. They were all of
the striped variety, and with their forearm markings, large dewlaps,
and sleek skins, were a beautiful sight to see. The lions here roar much
more than in the country near the lake, Zouga, and Chobe. One evening
we had a good opportunity of hearing the utmost exertions the animal can
make in that line. We had made our beds on a large sand-bank, and could
be easily seen from all sides. A lion on the opposite shore amused
himself for hours by roaring as loudly as he could, putting, as is usual
in such cases, his mouth near the ground, to make the sound reverberate.
The river was too broad for a ball to reach him, so we let him enjoy
himself, certain that he durst not have been guilty of the impertinence
in the Bushman country. Wherever the game abounds, these animals exist
in proportionate numbers. Here they were very frequently seen, and two
of the largest I ever saw seemed about as tall as common donkeys; but
the mane made their bodies appear rather larger.

A party of Arabs from Zanzibar were in the country at this time.
Sekeletu had gone from Naliele to the town of his mother before we
arrived from the north, but left an ox for our use, and instructions for
us to follow him thither. We came down a branch of the Leeambye called
Marile, which departs from the main river in latitude 15d 15' 43" S.,
and is a fine deep stream about sixty yards wide. It makes the whole of
the country around Naliele an island. When sleeping at a village in the
same latitude as Naliele town, two of the Arabs mentioned made their
appearance. They were quite as dark as the Makololo, but, having
their heads shaved, I could not compare their hair with that of the
inhabitants of the country. When we were about to leave they came to bid
adieu, but I asked them to stay and help us to eat our ox. As they had
scruples about eating an animal not blooded in their own way, I gained
their good-will by saying I was quite of their opinion as to getting
quit of the blood, and gave them two legs of an animal slaughtered by
themselves. They professed the greatest detestation of the Portuguese,
"because they eat pigs;" and disliked the English, "because they thrash
them for selling slaves." I was silent about pork; though, had they seen
me at a hippopotamus two days afterward, they would have set me down as
being as much a heretic as any of that nation; but I ventured to tell
them that I agreed with the English, that it was better to let the
children grow up and comfort their mothers when they became old, than to
carry them away and sell them across the sea. This they never attempt
to justify; "they want them only to cultivate the land, and take care
of them as their children." It is the same old story, justifying a
monstrous wrong on pretense of taking care of those degraded portions of
humanity which can not take care of themselves; doing evil that good may
come.

These Arabs, or Moors, could read and write their own language readily;
and, when speaking about our Savior, I admired the boldness with which
they informed me "that Christ was a very good prophet, but Mohammed was
far greater." And with respect to their loathing of pork, it may have
some foundation in their nature; for I have known Bechuanas, who had
no prejudice against the wild animal, and ate the tame without scruple,
yet, unconscious of any cause of disgust, vomit it again. The Bechuanas
south of the lake have a prejudice against eating fish, and allege a
disgust to eating any thing like a serpent. This may arise from the
remnants of serpent-worship floating in their minds, as, in addition
to this horror of eating such animals, they sometimes render a sort
of obeisance to living serpents by clapping their hands to them, and
refusing to destroy the reptiles; but in the case of the hog they are
conscious of no superstitious feeling.

Having parted with our Arab friends, we proceeded down the Marile till
we re-entered the Leeambye, and went to the town of Ma-Sekeletu (mother
of Sekeletu), opposite the island of Loyela. Sekeletu had always
supplied me most liberally with food, and, as soon as I arrived,
presented me with a pot of boiled meat, while his mother handed me a
large jar of butter, of which they make great quantities for the purpose
of anointing their bodies. He had himself sometimes felt the benefit of
my way of putting aside a quantity of the meat after a meal, and had
now followed my example by ordering some to be kept for me. According
to their habits, every particle of an ox is devoured at one meal; and as
the chief can not, without a deviation from their customs, eat alone, he
is often compelled to suffer severely from hunger before another meal is
ready. We henceforth always worked into each other's hands by saving a
little for each other; and when some of the sticklers for use and custom
grumbled, I advised them to eat like men, and not like vultures.

As this was the first visit which Sekeletu had paid to this part of his
dominions, it was to many a season of great joy. The head men of each
village presented oxen, milk, and beer, more than the horde which
accompanied him could devour, though their abilities in that line are
something wonderful. The people usually show their joy and work off
their excitement in dances and songs. The dance consists of the men
standing nearly naked in a circle, with clubs or small battle-axes in
their hands, and each roaring at the loudest pitch of his voice, while
they simultaneously lift one leg, stamp heavily twice with it, then lift
the other and give one stamp with that; this is the only movement
in common. The arms and head are often thrown about also in every
direction; and all this time the roaring is kept up with the utmost
possible vigor; the continued stamping makes a cloud of dust ascend, and
they leave a deep ring in the ground where they stood. If the scene were
witnessed in a lunatic asylum it would be nothing out of the way,
and quite appropriate even, as a means of letting off the excessive
excitement of the brain; but here gray-headed men joined in the
performance with as much zest as others whose youth might be an excuse
for making the perspiration stream off their bodies with the exertion.
Motibe asked what I thought of the Makololo dance. I replied, "It is
very hard work, and brings but small profit." "It is," replied he, "but
it is very nice, and Sekeletu will give us an ox for dancing for him."
He usually does slaughter an ox for the dancers when the work is over.

The women stand by, clapping their hands, and occasionally one advances
into the circle, composed of a hundred men, makes a few movements,
and then retires. As I never tried it, and am unable to enter into
the spirit of the thing, I can not recommend the Makololo polka to the
dancing world, but I have the authority of no less a person than Motibe,
Sekeletu's father-in-law, for saying "it is very nice." They often asked
if white people ever danced. I thought of the disease called St. Vitus's
dance, but could not say that all our dancers were affected by it, and
gave an answer which, I ought to be ashamed to own, did not raise some
of our young countrywomen in the estimation of the Makololo.

As Sekeletu had been waiting for me at his mother's, we left the town
as soon as I arrived, and proceeded down the river. Our speed with the
stream was very great, for in one day we went from Litofe to Gonye,
a distance of forty-four miles of latitude; and if we add to this the
windings of the river, in longitude the distance will not be much less
than sixty geographical miles. At this rate we soon reached Sesheke, and
then the town of Linyanti.

I had been, during a nine weeks' tour, in closer contact with heathenism
than I had ever been before; and though all, including the chief, were
as kind and attentive to me as possible, and there was no want of
food (oxen being slaughtered daily, sometimes ten at a time, more than
sufficient for the wants of all), yet to endure the dancing, roaring,
and singing, the jesting, anecdotes, grumbling, quarreling, and
murdering of these children of nature, seemed more like a severe penance
than any thing I had before met with in the course of my missionary
duties. I took thence a more intense disgust at heathenism than I had
before, and formed a greatly elevated opinion of the latent effects of
missions in the south, among tribes which are reported to have been
as savage as the Makololo. The indirect benefits which, to a casual
observer, lie beneath the surface and are inappreciable, in reference
to the probable wide diffusion of Christianity at some future time, are
worth all the money and labor that have been expended to produce them.




Chapter 13.

Preliminary Arrangements for the Journey--A Picho--Twenty-seven Men
appointed to accompany me to the West--Eagerness of the Makololo for
direct Trade with the Coast--Effects of Fever--A Makololo Question--The
lost Journal--Reflections--The Outfit for the Journey--11th
November, 1853, leave Linyanti, and embark on the Chobe--Dangerous
Hippopotami--Banks of Chobe--Trees--The Course of the River--The
Island Mparia at the Confluence of the Chobe and the Leeambye--
Anecdote--Ascend the Leeambye--A Makalaka Mother defies the Authority of
the Makololo Head Man at Sesheke--Punishment of Thieves--Observance
of the new Moon--Public Addresses at Sesheke--Attention of the
People--Results--Proceed up the River--The Fruit which yields 'Nux
vomica'--Other Fruits--The Rapids--Birds--Fish--Hippopotami and their
Young.



Linyanti, SEPTEMBER, 1853. The object proposed to the Makololo seemed so
desirable that it was resolved to proceed with it as soon as the cooling
influence of the rains should be felt in November. The longitude and
latitude of Linyanti (lat. 18d 17' 20" S., long. 23d 50' 9" E.) showed
that St. Philip de Benguela was much nearer to us than Loanda; and I
might have easily made arrangements with the Mambari to allow me to
accompany them as far as Bihe, which is on the road to that port; but it
is so undesirable to travel in a path once trodden by slave-traders that
I preferred to find out another line of march.

Accordingly, men were sent at my suggestion to examine all the country
to the west, to see if any belt of country free from tsetse could be
found to afford us an outlet. The search was fruitless. The town
and district of Linyanti are surrounded by forests infested by this
poisonous insect, except at a few points, as that by which we entered
at Sanshureh and another at Sesheke. But the lands both east and west of
the Barotse valley are free from this insect plague. There, however, the
slave-trade had defiled the path, and no one ought to follow in its wake
unless well armed. The Mambari had informed me that many English lived
at Loanda, so I prepared to go thither. The prospect of meeting with
countrymen seemed to overbalance the toils of the longer march.

A "picho" was called to deliberate on the steps proposed. In these
assemblies great freedom of speech is allowed; and on this occasion one
of the old diviners said, "Where is he taking you to? This white man is
throwing you away. Your garments already smell of blood." It is curious
to observe how much identity of character appears all over the world.
This man was a noted croaker. He always dreamed something dreadful in
every expedition, and was certain that an eclipse or comet betokened
the propriety of flight. But Sebituane formerly set his visions down to
cowardice, and Sekeletu only laughed at him now. The general voice was
in my favor; so a band of twenty-seven were appointed to accompany me to
the west. These men were not hired, but sent to enable me to accomplish
an object as much desired by the chief and most of his people as by me.
They were eager to obtain free and profitable trade with white men. The
prices which the Cape merchants could give, after defraying the great
expenses of a long journey hither, being very small, made it scarce
worth while for the natives to collect produce for that market; and the
Mambari, giving only a few bits of print and baize for elephants' tusks
worth more pounds than they gave yards of cloth, had produced the belief
that trade with them was throwing ivory away. The desire of the Makololo
for direct trade with the sea-coast coincided exactly with my own
conviction that no permanent elevation of a people can be effected
without commerce. Neither could there be a permanent mission here,
unless the missionaries should descend to the level of the Makololo, for
even at Kolobeng we found that traders demanded three or four times the
price of the articles we needed, and expected us to be grateful to them
besides for letting us have them at all.

The three men whom I had brought from Kuruman had frequent relapses of
the fever; so, finding that instead of serving me I had to wait on them,
I decided that they should return to the south with Fleming as soon
as he had finished his trading. I was then entirely dependent on my
twenty-seven men, whom I might name Zambesians, for there were two
Makololo only, while the rest consisted of Barotse, Batoka, Bashubia,
and two of the Ambonda.

The fever had caused considerable weakness in my own frame, and a
strange giddiness when I looked up suddenly to any celestial object, for
every thing seemed to rush to the left, and if I did not catch hold of
some object, I fell heavily on the ground: something resembling a gush
of bile along the duct from the liver caused the same fit to occur at
night, whenever I turned suddenly round.

The Makololo now put the question, "In the event of your death, will
not the white people blame us for having allowed you to go away into
an unhealthy, unknown country of enemies?" I replied that none of my
friends would blame them, because I would leave a book with Sekeletu, to
be sent to Mr. Moffat in case I did not return, which would explain to
him all that had happened until the time of my departure. The book was
a volume of my Journal; and, as I was detained longer than I expected at
Loanda, this book, with a letter, was delivered by Sekeletu to a trader,
and I have been unable to trace it. I regret this now, as it contained
valuable notes on the habits of wild animals, and the request was made
in the letter to convey the volume to my family. The prospect of passing
away from this fair and beautiful world thus came before me in a pretty
plain, matter-of-fact form, and it did seem a serious thing to leave
wife and children--to break up all connection with earth, and enter on
an untried state of existence; and I find myself in my journal pondering
over that fearful migration which lands us in eternity, wondering
whether an angel will soothe the fluttering soul, sadly flurried as it
must be on entering the spirit world, and hoping that Jesus might
speak but one word of peace, for that would establish in the bosom an
everlasting calm. But as I had always believed that, if we serve God
at all, it ought to be done in a manly way, I wrote to my brother,
commending our little girl to his care, as I was determined to "succeed
or perish" in the attempt to open up this part of Africa. The Boers, by
taking possession of all my goods, had saved me the trouble of making
a will; and, considering the light heart now left in my bosom, and some
faint efforts to perform the duty of Christian forgiveness, I felt that
it was better to be the plundered party than one of the plunderers.

When I committed the wagon and remaining goods to the care of the
Makololo, they took all the articles except one box into their huts;
and two warriors, Ponuane and Mahale, brought forward each a fine heifer
calf. After performing a number of warlike evolutions, they asked the
chief to witness the agreement made between them, that whoever of the
two should kill a Matebele warrior first, in defense of the wagon,
should possess both the calves.

I had three muskets for my people, a rifle and double-barreled
smooth-bore for myself; and, having seen such great abundance of game in
my visit to the Leeba, I imagined that I could easily supply the wants
of my party. Wishing also to avoid the discouragement which would
naturally be felt on meeting any obstacles if my companions were obliged
to carry heavy loads, I took only a few biscuits, a few pounds of tea
and sugar, and about twenty of coffee, which, as the Arabs find, though
used without either milk or sugar, is a most refreshing beverage after
fatigue or exposure to the sun. We carried one small tin canister, about
fifteen inches square, filled with spare shirting, trowsers, and shoes,
to be used when we reached civilized life, and others in a bag, which
were expected to wear out on the way; another of the same size for
medicines; and a third for books, my stock being a Nautical Almanac,
Thomson's Logarithm Tables, and a Bible; a fourth box contained a magic
lantern, which we found of much use. The sextant and artificial horizon,
thermometer, and compasses were carried apart. My ammunition was
distributed in portions through the whole luggage, so that, if an
accident should befall one part, we could still have others to fall back
upon. Our chief hopes for food were upon that; but in case of failure,
I took about 20 lbs. of beads, worth 40s., which still remained of the
stock I brought from Cape Town, a small gipsy tent, just sufficient to
sleep in, a sheep-skin mantle as a blanket, and a horse-rug as a bed. As
I had always found that the art of successful travel consisted in taking
as few "impedimenta" as possible, and not forgetting to carry my wits
about me, the outfit was rather spare, and intended to be still more
so when we should come to leave the canoes. Some would consider it
injudicious to adopt this plan, but I had a secret conviction that if
I did not succeed, it would not be for want of the "knick-knacks"
advertised as indispensable for travelers, but from want of "pluck",
or because a large array of baggage excited the cupidity of the tribes
through whose country we wished to pass.

The instruments I carried, though few, were the best of their kind.
A sextant, by the famed makers Troughton and Sims, of Fleet Street;
a chronometer watch, with a stop to the seconds hand--an admirable
contrivance for enabling a person to take the exact time of
observations: it was constructed by Dent, of the Strand (61), for
the Royal Geographical Society, and selected for the service by the
President, Admiral Smythe, to whose judgment and kindness I am in this
and other matters deeply indebted. It was pronounced by Mr. Maclear to
equal most chronometers in performance. For these excellent instruments
I have much pleasure in recording my obligations to my good friend
Colonel Steele, and at the same time to Mr. Maclear for much of my
ability to use them. Besides these, I had a thermometer by Dollond; a
compass from the Cape Observatory, and a small pocket one in addition; a
good small telescope with a stand capable of being screwed into a tree.

11TH OF NOVEMBER, 1853. Left the town of Linyanti, accompanied by
Sekeletu and his principal men, to embark on the Chobe. The chief came
to the river in order to see that all was right at parting. We crossed
five branches of the Chobe before reaching the main stream: this
ramification must be the reason why it appeared so small to Mr. Oswell
and myself in 1851. When all the departing branches re-enter, it is
a large, deep river. The spot of embarkation was the identical island
where we met Sebituane, first known as the island of Maunku, one of
his wives. The chief lent me his own canoe, and, as it was broader than
usual, I could turn about in it with ease.

The Chobe is much infested by hippopotami, and, as certain elderly
males are expelled the herd, they become soured in their temper, and so
misanthropic as to attack every canoe that passes near them. The herd
is never dangerous, except when a canoe passes into the midst of it
when all are asleep, and some of them may strike the canoe in terror. To
avoid this, it is generally recommended to travel by day near the bank,
and by night in the middle of the stream. As a rule, these animals
flee the approach of man. The "solitaires", however, frequent certain
localities well known to the inhabitants on the banks, and, like the
rogue elephants, are extremely dangerous. We came, at this time, to a
canoe which had been smashed to pieces by a blow from the hind foot of
one of them. I was informed by my men that, in the event of a similar
assault being made upon ours, the proper way was to dive to the
bottom of the river, and hold on there for a few seconds, because the
hippopotamus, after breaking a canoe, always looks for the people on
the surface, and, if he sees none, he soon moves off. I have seen
some frightful gashes made on the legs of the people who have had the
misfortune to be attacked, and were unable to dive. This animal uses his
teeth as an offensive weapon, though he is quite a herbivorous feeder.
One of these "bachelors", living near the confluence, actually came out
of his lair, and, putting his head down, ran after some of our men who
were passing with very considerable speed.

The part of the river called Zabesa, or Zabenza, is spread out like a
little lake, surrounded on all sides by dense masses of tall reeds. The
river below that is always one hundred or one hundred and twenty yards
broad, deep, and never dries up so much as to become fordable. At
certain parts, where the partial absence of reeds affords a view of the
opposite banks, the Makololo have placed villages of observation against
their enemies the Matebele. We visited all these in succession, and
found here, as every where in the Makololo country, orders had preceded
us, "that Nake (nyake means doctor) must not be allowed to become
hungry."

The banks of the Chobe, like those of the Zouga, are of soft calcareous
tufa, and the river has cut out for itself a deep, perpendicular-sided
bed. Where the banks are high, as at the spot where the wagons stood in
1851, they are covered with magnificent trees, the habitat of tsetse,
and the retreat of various antelopes, wild hogs, zebras, buffaloes, and
elephants.

Among the trees may be observed some species of the 'Ficus Indica',
light-green colored acacias, the splendid motsintsela, and evergreen
cypress-shaped motsouri. The fruit of the last-named was ripe, and the
villagers presented many dishes of its beautiful pink-colored plums;
they are used chiefly to form a pleasant acid drink. The motsintsela is
a very lofty tree, yielding a wood of which good canoes are made;
the fruit is nutritious and good, but, like many wild fruits of this
country, the fleshy parts require to be enlarged by cultivation: it is
nearly all stone.

The course of the river we found to be extremely tortuous; so much so,
indeed, as to carry us to all points of the compass every dozen miles.
Some of us walked from a bend at the village of Moremi to another nearly
due east of that point, in six hours, while the canoes, going at more
than double our speed, took twelve to accomplish the voyage between the
same two places. And though the river is from thirteen to fifteen feet
in depth at its lowest ebb, and broad enough to allow a steamer to ply
upon it, the suddenness of the bendings would prevent navigation;
but, should the country ever become civilized, the Chobe would be a
convenient natural canal. We spent forty-two and a half hours, paddling
at the rate of five miles an hour, in coming from Linyanti to the
confluence; there we found a dike of amygdaloid lying across the
Leeambye.

This amygdaloid with analami and mesotype contains crystals, which
the water gradually dissolves, leaving the rock with a worm-eaten
appearance. It is curious to observe that the water flowing over certain
rocks, as in this instance, imbibes an appreciable, though necessarily
most minute, portion of the minerals they contain. The water of the
Chobe up to this point is of a dark mossy hue, but here it suddenly
assumes a lighter tint; and wherever this light color shows a greater
amount of mineral, there are not mosquitoes enough to cause serious
annoyance to any except persons of very irritable temperaments.

The large island called Mparia stands at the confluence. This is
composed of trap (zeolite, probably mesotype) of a younger age than the
deep stratum of tufa in which the Chobe has formed its bed, for, at
the point where they come together, the tufa has been transformed into
saccharoid limestone.

The actual point of confluence of these two rivers, the Chobe and the
Leeambye, is ill defined, on account of each dividing into several
branches as they inosculate; but when the whole body of water collects
into one bed, it is a goodly sight for one who has spent many years
in the thirsty south. Standing on one bank, even the keen eye of the
natives can not detect whether two large islands, a few miles east of
the junction, are main land or not. During a flight in former years,
when the present chief Sekomi was a child in his mother's arms, the
Bamangwato men were separated from their women, and inveigled on to
one of these islands by the Makalaka chief of Mparia, on pretense of
ferrying them across the Leeambye. They were left to perish after seeing
their wives taken prisoners by these cruel lords of the Leeambye, and
Sekomi owed his life to the compassion of one of the Bayeiye, who,
pitying the young chieftain, enabled his mother to make her escape by
night.

After spending one night at the Makololo village on Mparia, we left the
Chobe, and, turning round, began to ascend the Leeambye; on the 19th of
November we again reached the town of Sesheke. It stands on the north
bank of the river, and contains a large population of Makalaka, under
Moriantsane, brother-in-law of Sebituane. There are parties of various
tribes here, assembled under their respective head men, but a few
Makololo rule over all. Their sway, though essentially despotic, is
considerably modified by certain customs and laws. One of the Makalaka
had speared an ox belonging to one of the Makololo, and, being unable to
extract the spear, was thereby discovered to be the perpetrator of the
deed. His object had been to get a share of the meat, as Moriantsane is
known to be liberal with any food that comes into his hands. The culprit
was bound hand and foot, and placed in the sun to force him to pay a
fine, but he continued to deny his guilt. His mother, believing in
the innocence of her son, now came forward, with her hoe in hand, and,
threatening to cut down any one who should dare to interfere, untied the
cords with which he had been bound and took him home. This open defiance
of authority was not resented by Moriantsane, but referred to Sekeletu
at Linyanti.

The following circumstance, which happened here when I was present
with Sekeletu, shows that the simple mode of punishment, by forcing a
criminal to work out a fine, did not strike the Makololo mind until now.

A stranger having visited Sesheke for the purpose of barter, was robbed
by one of the Makalaka of most of his goods. The thief, when caught,
confessed the theft, and that he had given the articles to a person who
had removed to a distance. The Makololo were much enraged at the idea of
their good name being compromised by this treatment of a stranger. Their
customary mode of punishing a crime which causes much indignation is to
throw the criminal into the river; but, as this would not restore
the lost property, they were sorely puzzled how to act. The case was
referred to me, and I solved the difficulty by paying for the loss
myself, and sentencing the thief to work out an equivalent with his hoe
in a garden. This system was immediately introduced, and thieves are
now sentenced to raise an amount of corn proportioned to their offenses.
Among the Bakwains, a woman who had stolen from the garden of another
was obliged to part with her own entirely: it became the property of her
whose field was injured by the crime.

There is no stated day of rest in any part of this country, except the
day after the appearance of the new moon, and the people then refrain
only from going to their gardens. A curious custom, not to be found
among the Bechuanas, prevails among the black tribes beyond them. They
watch most eagerly for the first glimpse of the new moon, and, when they
perceive the faint outline after the sun has set deep in the west, they
utter a loud shout of "Kua!" and vociferate prayers to it. My men, for
instance, called out, "Let our journey with the white man be prosperous!
Let our enemies perish, and the children of Nake become rich! May he
have plenty of meat on this journey!" etc., etc.

I gave many public addresses to the people of Sesheke under the
outspreading camel-thorn-tree, which serves as a shade to the kotla on
the high bank of the river. It was pleasant to see the long lines of
men, women, and children winding along from different quarters of the
town, each party following behind their respective head men. They often
amounted to between five and six hundred souls, and required an exertion
of voice which brought back the complaint for which I had got the uvula
excised at the Cape. They were always very attentive; and Moriantsane,
in order, as he thought, to please me, on one occasion rose up in the
middle of the discourse, and hurled his staff at the heads of some young
fellows whom he saw working with a skin instead of listening. My hearers
sometimes put very sensible questions on the subjects brought before
them; at other times they introduced the most frivolous nonsense
immediately after hearing the most solemn truths. Some begin to pray to
Jesus in secret as soon as they hear of the white man's God, with but
little idea of what they are about; and no doubt are heard by Him who,
like a father, pitieth his children. Others, waking by night, recollect
what has been said about the future world so clearly that they tell
next day what a fright they got by it, and resolve not to listen to the
teaching again; and not a few keep to the determination not to believe,
as certain villagers in the south, who put all their cocks to death
because they crowed the words, "Tlang lo rapeleng"--"Come along to
prayers".

On recovering partially from a severe attack of fever which remained
upon me ever since our passing the village of Moremi on the Chobe, we
made ready for our departure up the river by sending messages before
us to the villages to prepare food. We took four elephants' tusks,
belonging to Sekeletu, with us, as a means of testing the difference of
prices between the Portuguese, whom we expected to reach, and the white
traders from the south. Moriantsane supplied us well with honey, milk,
and meal. The rains were just commencing in this district; but, though
showers sufficient to lay the dust had fallen, they had no influence
whatever on the amount of water in the river, yet never was there less
in any part than three hundred yards of a deep flowing stream.

Our progress up the river was rather slow; this was caused by waiting
opposite different villages for supplies of food. We might have done
with much less than we got; but my Makololo man, Pitsane, knew of the
generous orders of Sekeletu, and was not at all disposed to allow them
to remain a dead letter. The villages of the Banyeti contributed large
quantities of mosibe, a bright red bean yielded by a large tree. The
pulp inclosing the seed is not much thicker than a red wafer, and is
the portion used. It requires the addition of honey to render it at all
palatable.

To these were added great numbers of the fruit which yields a variety of
the nux vomica, from which we derive that virulent poison strychnia. The
pulp between the nuts is the part eaten, and it is of a pleasant juicy
nature, having a sweet acidulous taste. The fruit itself resembles a
large yellow orange, but the rind is hard, and, with the pips and bark,
contains much of the deadly poison. They evince their noxious qualities
by an intensely bitter taste. The nuts, swallowed inadvertently, cause
considerable pain, but not death; and to avoid this inconvenience, the
people dry the pulp before the fire, in order to be able the more easily
to get rid of the noxious seeds.

A much better fruit, called mobola, was also presented to us. This
bears, around a pretty large stone, as much of the fleshy part as the
common date, and it is stripped off the seeds and preserved in bags in
a similar manner to that fruit. Besides sweetness, the mobola has the
flavor of strawberries, with a touch of nauseousness. We carried some of
them, dried as provisions, more than a hundred miles from this spot.

The next fruit, named mamosho (mother of morning), is the most delicious
of all. It is about the size of a walnut, and, unlike most of the other
uncultivated fruits, has a seed no larger than that of a date. The
fleshy part is juicy, and somewhat like the cashew-apple, with a
pleasant acidity added. Fruits similar to those which are here found
on trees are found on the plains of the Kalahari, growing on mere
herbaceous plants. There are several other examples of a similar nature.
Shrubs, well known as such in the south, assume the rank of trees as
we go to the north; and the change is quite gradual as our latitude
decreases, the gradations being herbaceous plants, shrubs, bushes,
small, then large trees. But it is questionable if, in the cases of
mamosho, mobola, and mawa, the tree and shrub are identical, though the
fruits so closely resemble each other; for I found both the dwarf and
tree in the same latitude. There is also a difference in the leaves, and
they bear at different seasons.

The banks of the river were at this time appearing to greater advantage
than before. Many trees were putting on their fresh green leaves, though
they had got no rain, their lighter green contrasting beautifully with
the dark motsouri, or moyela, now covered with pink plums as large
as cherries. The rapids, having comparatively little water in them,
rendered our passage difficult. The canoes must never be allowed to come
broadside on to the stream, for, being flat-bottomed, they would, in
that case, be at once capsized, and every thing in them be lost. The men
work admirably, and are always in good humor; they leap into the water
without the least hesitation, to save the canoe from being caught by
eddies or dashed against the rocks. Many parts were now quite shallow,
and it required great address and power in balancing themselves to keep
the vessel free from rocks, which lay just beneath the surface. We might
have got deeper water in the middle, but the boatmen always keep near
the banks, on account of danger from the hippopotami. But, though we
might have had deeper water farther out, I believe that no part of the
rapids is very deep. The river is spread out more than a mile, and
the water flows rapidly over the rocky bottom. The portions only three
hundred yards wide are very deep, and contain large volumes of flowing
water in narrow compass, which, when spread over the much larger surface
at the rapids, must be shallow. Still, remembering that this was the end
of the dry season, when such rivers as the Orange do not even contain a
fifth part of the water of the Chobe, the difference between the rivers
of the north and south must be sufficiently obvious.

The rapids are caused by rocks of dark brown trap, or of hardened
sandstone, stretching across the stream. In some places they form miles
of flat rocky bottom, with islets covered with trees. At the cataracts
noted in the map, the fall is from four to six feet, and, in guiding up
the canoe, the stem goes under the water, and takes in a quantity before
it can attain the higher level. We lost many of our biscuits in the
ascent through this.

These rocks are covered with a small, hard aquatic plant, which, when
the surface is exposed, becomes dry and crisp, crackling under the foot
as if it contained much stony matter in its tissue. It probably assists
in disintegrating the rocks; for, in parts so high as not to be much
exposed to the action of the water or the influence of the plant, the
rocks are covered with a thin black glaze.

In passing along under the overhanging trees of the banks, we often
saw the pretty turtle-doves sitting peacefully on their nests above the
roaring torrent. An ibis* had perched her home on the end of a stump.
Her loud, harsh scream of "Wa-wa-wa", and the piping of the fish-hawk,
are sounds which can never be forgotten by any one who has sailed on
the rivers north of 20 Deg. south. If we step on shore, the 'Charadrius
caruncula', a species of plover, a most plaguy sort of "public-spirited
individual", follows you, flying overhead, and is most persevering in
its attempts to give fair warning to all the animals within hearing to
flee from the approaching danger. The alarm-note, "tinc-tinc-tinc", of
another variety of the same family ('Pluvianus armatus' of Burchell) has
so much of a metallic ring, that this bird is called "setula-tsipi", or
hammering-iron. It is furnished with a sharp spur on its shoulder, much
like that on the heel of a cock, but scarcely half an inch in length.
Conscious of power, it may be seen chasing the white-necked raven with
great fury, and making even that comparatively large bird call out
from fear. It is this bird which is famed for its friendship with the
crocodile of the Nile by the name 'siksak', and which Mr. St. John
actually saw performing the part of toothpicker to the ugly reptile.
They are frequently seen on the sand-banks with the alligator, and, to
one passing by, often appear as if on that reptile's back; but I never
had the good fortune to witness the operation described not only by
St. John and Geoffrey St. Hilaire, but also by Herodotus. However, that
which none of these authors knew my head boatman, Mashauana, stopped the
canoe to tell us, namely, that a water-turtle which, in trying to ascend
a steep bank to lay her eggs, had toppled on her back, thus enabling us
to capture her, was an infallible omen of good luck for our journey.

   * The 'Hagidash', Latham; or 'Tantalus capensis' of Lich.

Among the forest-trees which line the banks of the rocky parts of the
Leeambye several new birds were observed. Some are musical, and the
songs are pleasant in contrast with the harsh voice of the little green,
yellow-shouldered parrots of the country. There are also great numbers
of jet-black weavers, with yellowish-brown band on the shoulders.

Here we saw, for the first time, a pretty little bird, colored dark
blue, except the wings and tail, which were of a chocolate hue. From the
tail two feathers are prolonged beyond the rest six inches. Also,
little birds colored white and black, of great vivacity, and always in
companies of six or eight together, and various others. From want of
books of reference, I could not decide whether they were actually new to
science.

Francolins and Guinea-fowl abound along the banks; and on every dead
tree and piece of rock may be seen one or two species of the web-footed
'Plotus', darter, or snake-bird. They sit most of the day sunning
themselves over the stream, sometimes standing erect with their wings
outstretched; occasionally they may be seen engaged in fishing by
diving, and, as they swim about, their bodies are so much submerged that
hardly any thing appears above the water but their necks. The chief time
of feeding is by night, and, as the sun declines, they may be seen in
flocks flying from their roosting-places to the fishing-grounds. This is
a most difficult bird to catch when disabled. It is thoroughly expert
in diving--goes down so adroitly and comes up again in the most unlikely
places, that the people, though most skillful in the management of the
canoes, can rarely secure them. The rump of the darter is remarkably
prolonged, and capable of being bent, so as to act both as a rudder in
swimming, and as a lever to lift the bird high enough out of the water
to give free scope to its wings. It can rise at will from the water by
means of this appendage.

The fine fish-hawk, with white head and neck, and reddish-chocolate
colored body, may also frequently be seen perched on the trees, and fish
are often found dead which have fallen victims to its talons. One most
frequently seen in this condition is itself a destroyer of fish. It is
a stout-bodied fish, about fifteen or eighteen inches long, of a light
yellow color, and gayly ornamented with stripes and spots. It has a
most imposing array of sharp, conical teeth outside the lips--objects
of dread to the fisherman, for it can use them effectually. One which
we picked up dead had killed itself by swallowing another fish, which,
though too large for its stomach and throat, could not be disgorged.

This fish-hawk generally kills more prey than it can devour. It eats a
portion of the back of the fish, and leaves the rest for the Barotse,
who often had a race across the river when they saw an abandoned morsel
lying on the opposite sand-banks. The hawk is, however, not always so
generous, for, as I myself was a witness on the Zouga, it sometimes
plunders the purse of the pelican. Soaring over head, and seeing this
large, stupid bird fishing beneath, it watches till a fine fish is safe
in the pelican's pouch; then descending, not very quickly, but with
considerable noise of wing, the pelican looks up to see what is the
matter, and, as the hawk comes near, he supposes that he is about to
be killed, and roars out "Murder!" The opening of his mouth enables the
hawk to whisk the fish out of the pouch, upon which the pelican does not
fly away, but commences fishing again, the fright having probably made
him forget he had any thing in his purse.

A fish called mosheba, about the size of a minnow, often skims along the
surface for several yards, in order to get out of the way of the canoe.
It uses the pectoral fins, as the flying-fish do, but never makes a
clean flight. It is rather a succession of hops along the surface, made
by the aid of the side fins. It never becomes large.

Numbers of iguanos (mpulu) sit sunning themselves on overhanging
branches of the trees, and splash into the water as we approach. They
are highly esteemed as an article of food, the flesh being tender and
gelatinous. The chief boatman, who occupies the stem, has in consequence
a light javelin always at hand to spear them if they are not quickly out
of sight. These, and large alligators gliding in from the banks with
a heavy plunge as we come round a sudden bend of the stream, were the
occurrences of every hour as we sped up the river.

The rapids in the part of the river between Katima-molelo and Nameta
are relieved by several reaches of still, deep water, fifteen or twenty
miles long. In these very large herds of hippopotami are seen, and
the deep furrows they make, in ascending the banks to graze during the
nights, are every where apparent. They are guided back to the water by
the scent, but a long continued pouring rain makes it impossible for
them to perceive, by that means, in which direction the river lies, and
they are found bewildered on the land. The hunters take advantage of
their helplessness on these occasions to kill them.

It is impossible to judge of the numbers in a herd, for they are almost
always hidden beneath the waters; but as they require to come up every
few minutes to breathe, when there is a constant succession of heads
thrown up, then the herd is supposed to be large. They love a still
reach of the stream, as in the more rapid parts of the channel they are
floated down so quickly that much exertion is necessary to regain the
distance lost by frequently swimming up again: such constant exertion
disturbs them in their nap. They prefer to remain by day in a drowsy,
yawning state, and, though their eyes are open, they take little notice
of things at a distance. The males utter a loud succession of snorting
grunts, which may be heard a mile off. The canoe in which I was, in
passing over a wounded one, elicited a distinct grunting, though the
animal lay entirely under water.

The young, when very little, take their stand on the neck of the
dam, and the small head, rising above the large, comes soonest to the
surface. The dam, knowing the more urgent need of her calf, comes more
frequently to the surface when it is in her care. But in the rivers
of Londa, where they are much in danger of being shot, even the
hippopotamus gains wit by experience; for, while those in the Zambesi
put up their heads openly to blow, those referred to keep their noses
among water-plants, and breathe so quietly that one would not dream of
their existence in the river except by footprints on the banks.




Chapter 14.

Increasing Beauty of the Country--Mode of spending the Day--The People
and the Falls of Gonye--A Makololo Foray--A second prevented, and
Captives delivered up--Politeness and Liberality of the People--
The Rains--Present of Oxen--The fugitive Barotse--Sekobinyane's
Misgovernment--Bee-eaters and other Birds--Fresh-water
Sponges--Current--Death from a Lion's Bite at Libonta--Continued
Kindness--Arrangements for spending the Night during the
Journey--Cooking and Washing--Abundance of animal Life--Different
Species of Birds--Water-fowl--Egyptian Geese--Alligators--Narrow Escape
of one of my Men--Superstitious Feelings respecting the Alligator--Large
Game--The most vulnerable Spot--Gun Medicine--A Sunday--Birds of
Song--Depravity; its Treatment--Wild Fruits--Green Pigeons--Shoals of
Fish--Hippopotami.



30TH OF NOVEMBER, 1853. At Gonye Falls. No rain has fallen here, so it
is excessively hot. The trees have put on their gayest dress, and many
flowers adorn the landscape, yet the heat makes all the leaves droop at
midday and look languid for want of rain. If the country increases as
much in beauty in front as it has done within the last four degrees of
latitude, it will be indeed a lovely land.

We all felt great lassitude in traveling. The atmosphere is oppressive
both in cloud and sunshine. The evaporation from the river must be
excessively great, and I feel as if the fluids of the system joined in
the general motion of watery vapor upward, as enormous quantities of
water must be drunk to supply its place.

When under way our usual procedure is this: We get up a little before
five in the morning; it is then beginning to dawn. While I am dressing,
coffee is made; and, having filled my pannikin, the remainder is handed
to my companions, who eagerly partake of the refreshing beverage.
The servants are busy loading the canoes, while the principal men are
sipping the coffee, and, that being soon over, we embark. The next two
hours are the most pleasant part of the day's sail. The men paddle away
most vigorously; the Barotse, being a tribe of boatmen, have large,
deeply-developed chests and shoulders, with indifferent lower
extremities. They often engage in loud scolding of each other in order
to relieve the tedium of their work. About eleven we land, and eat
any meat which may have remained from the previous evening meal, or a
biscuit with honey, and drink water.

After an hour's rest we again embark and cower under an umbrella. The
heat is oppressive, and, being weak from the last attack of fever, I
can not land and keep the camp supplied with flesh. The men, being quite
uncovered in the sun, perspire profusely, and in the afternoon begin
to stop, as if waiting for the canoes which have been left behind.
Sometimes we reach a sleeping-place two hours before sunset, and, all
being troubled with languor, we gladly remain for the night. Coffee
again, and a biscuit, or a piece of coarse bread made of maize meal,
or that of the native corn, make up the bill of fare for the evening,
unless we have been fortunate enough to kill something, when we boil
a potful of flesh. This is done by cutting it up into long strips and
pouring in water till it is covered. When that is boiled dry, the meat
is considered ready.

The people at Gonye carry the canoes over the space requisite to avoid
the falls by slinging them on poles tied on diagonally. They place these
on their shoulders, and, setting about the work with good humor, soon
accomplish the task. They are a merry set of mortals; a feeble joke sets
them off in a fit of laughter. Here, as elsewhere, all petitioned for
the magic lantern, and, as it is a good means of conveying instruction,
I willingly complied.

The falls of Gonye have not been made by wearing back, like those of
Niagara, but are of a fissure form. For many miles below, the river is
confined in a narrow space of not more than one hundred yards wide.
The water goes boiling along, and gives the idea of great masses of it
rolling over and over, so that even the most expert swimmer would find
it difficult to keep on the surface. Here it is that the river, when in
flood, rises fifty or sixty feet in perpendicular height. The islands
above the falls are covered with foliage as beautiful as can be seen
any where. Viewed from the mass of rock which overhangs the fall, the
scenery was the loveliest I had seen.

Nothing worthy of note occurred on our way up to Nameta. There we heard
that a party of the Makololo, headed by Lerimo, had made a foray to the
north and up the Leeba, in the very direction in which we were about to
proceed. Mpololo, the uncle of Sekeletu, is considered the head man of
the Barotse valley; and the perpetrators had his full sanction, because
Masiko, a son of Santuru, the former chief of the Barotse, had fled high
up the Leeambye, and, establishing himself there, had sent men down to
the vicinity of Naliele to draw away the remaining Barotse from their
allegiance. Lerimo's party had taken some of this Masiko's subjects
prisoners, and destroyed several villages of the Balonda, to whom we
were going. This was in direct opposition to the policy of Sekeletu, who
wished to be at peace with these northern tribes; and Pitsane, my head
man, was the bearer of orders to Mpololo to furnish us with presents
for the very chiefs they had attacked. Thus we were to get large pots of
clarified butter and bunches of beads, in confirmation of the message of
peace we were to deliver.

When we reached Litofe, we heard that a fresh foray was in
contemplation, but I sent forward orders to disband the party
immediately. At Ma-Sekeletu's town we found the head offender, Mpololo
himself, and I gave him a bit of my mind, to the effect that, as I was
going with the full sanction of Sekeletu, if any harm happened to me
in consequence of his ill-advised expedition, the guilt would rest with
him. Ma-Sekeletu, who was present, heartily approved all I said, and
suggested that all the captives taken by Lerimo should be returned by
my hand, to show Masiko that the guilt of the foray lay not with the
superior persons of the Makololo, but with a mere servant. Her good
sense appeared in other respects besides, and, as this was exactly what
my own party had previously resolved to suggest, we were pleased to hear
Mpololo agree to do what he was advised. He asked me to lay the matter
before the under-chiefs of Naliele, and when we reached that place,
on the 9th of December, I did so in a picho, called expressly for
the purpose. Lerimo was present, and felt rather crestfallen when his
exploit was described by Mohorisi, one of my companions, as one of
extreme cowardice, he having made an attack upon the defenseless
villagers of Londa, while, as we had found on our former visit, a
lion had actually killed eight people of Naliele without his daring to
encounter it. The Makololo are cowardly in respect to animals, but brave
against men. Mpololo took all the guilt upon himself before the people,
and delivered up a captive child whom his wife had in her possession;
others followed his example, till we procured the release of five of the
prisoners. Some thought, as Masiko had tried to take their children by
stratagem, they ought to take his by force, as the two modes suited the
genius of each people--the Makalaka delight in cunning, and the Makololo
in fighting; and others thought, if Sekeletu meant them to be at peace
with Masiko, he ought to have told them so.

It is rather dangerous to tread in the footsteps of a marauding party
with men of the same tribe as the aggressors, but my people were in
good spirits, and several volunteers even offered to join our ranks.
We, however, adhered strictly to the orders of Sekeletu as to our
companions, and refused all others.

The people of every village treated us most liberally, presenting,
besides oxen, butter, milk, and meal, more than we could stow away in
our canoes. The cows in this valley are now yielding, as they frequently
do, more milk than the people can use, and both men and women present
butter in such quantity that I shall be able to refresh my men as we
move along. Anointing the skin prevents the excessive evaporation of
the fluids of the body, and acts as clothing in both sun and shade. They
always made their presents gracefully. When an ox was given, the owner
would say, "Here is a little bit of bread for you." This was pleasing,
for I had been accustomed to the Bechuanas presenting a miserable goat,
with the pompous exclamation, "Behold an ox!" The women persisted in
giving me copious supplies of shrill praises, or "lullilooing"; but,
though I frequently told them to modify their "great lords" and "great
lions" to more humble expressions, they so evidently intended to do
me honor that I could not help being pleased with the poor creatures'
wishes for our success.

The rains began while we were at Naliele; this is much later than usual;
but, though the Barotse valley has been in need of rain, the people
never lack abundance of food. The showers are refreshing, but the air
feels hot and close; the thermometer, however, in a cool hut, stands
only at 84 Deg. The access of the external air to any spot at once
raises its temperature above 90 Deg. A new attack of fever here caused
excessive languor; but, as I am already getting tired of quoting my
fevers, and never liked to read travels myself where much was said about
the illnesses of the traveler, I shall henceforth endeavor to say little
about them.

We here sent back the canoe of Sekeletu, and got the loan of others from
Mpololo. Eight riding oxen, and seven for slaughter, were, according to
the orders of that chief, also furnished; some were intended for our own
use, and others as presents to the chiefs of the Balonda. Mpololo was
particularly liberal in giving all that Sekeletu ordered, though, as
he feeds on the cattle he has in charge, he might have felt it so much
abstracted from his own perquisites. Mpololo now acts the great man,
and is followed every where by a crowd of toadies, who sing songs in
disparagement of Mpepe, of whom he always lived in fear. While Mpepe was
alive, he too was regaled with the same fulsome adulation, and now they
curse him. They are very foul-tongued; equals, on meeting, often greet
each other with a profusion of oaths, and end the volley with a laugh.

In coming up the river to Naliele we met a party of fugitive Barotse
returning to their homes, and, as the circumstance illustrates the
social status of these subjects of the Makololo, I introduce it here.
The villagers in question were the children, or serfs, if we may use the
term, of a young man of the same age and tribe as Sekeletu, who, being
of an irritable temper, went by the nickname of Sekobinyane--a little
slavish thing. His treatment of his servants was so bad that most of
them had fled; and when the Mambari came, and, contrary to the orders of
Sekeletu, purchased slaves, Sekobinyane sold one or two of the Barotse
children of his village. The rest fled immediately to Masiko, and were
gladly received by that Barotse chief as his subjects.

When Sekeletu and I first ascended the Leeambye, we met Sekobinyane
coming down, on his way to Linyanti. On being asked the news, he
remained silent about the loss of his village, it being considered a
crime among the Makololo for any one to treat his people so ill as to
cause them to run away from him. He then passed us, and, dreading the
vengeance of Sekeletu for his crime, secretly made his escape from
Linyanti to Lake Ngami. He was sent for, however, and the chief at the
lake delivered him up, on Sekeletu declaring that he had no intention
of punishing him otherwise than by scolding. He did not even do that, as
Sekobinyane was evidently terrified enough, and also became ill through
fear.

The fugitive villagers remained only a few weeks with their new master
Masiko, and then fled back again, and were received as if they had done
nothing wrong. All united in abusing the conduct of Sekobinyane, and no
one condemned the fugitives; and the cattle, the use of which they had
previously enjoyed, never having been removed from their village, they
re-established themselves with apparent gladness.

This incident may give some idea of the serfdom of the subject tribes,
and, except that they are sometimes punished for running away and other
offenses, I can add nothing more by way of showing the true nature of
this form of servitude.

Leaving Naliele, amid abundance of good wishes for the success of
our expedition, and hopes that we might return accompanied with white
traders, we began again our ascent of the river. It was now beginning to
rise, though the rains had but just commenced in the valley. The banks
are low, but cleanly cut, and seldom sloping. At low water they are from
four to eight feet high, and make the river always assume very much the
aspect of a canal. They are in some parts of whitish, tenacious clay,
with strata of black clay intermixed, and black loam in sand, or pure
sand stratified. As the river rises it is always wearing to one side or
the other, and is known to have cut across from one bend to another,
and to form new channels. As we coast along the shore, pieces which are
undermined often fall in with a splash like that caused by the plunge of
an alligator, and endanger the canoe.

These perpendicular banks afford building-places to a pretty bee-eater,*
which loves to breed in society. The face of the sand-bank is perforated
with hundreds of holes leading to their nests, each of which is about
a foot apart from the other; and as we pass they pour out of their
hiding-places, and float overhead.

   * 'Merops apiaster' and 'M. bullockoides' (Smith).

A speckled kingfisher is seen nearly every hundred yards, which builds
in similar spots, and attracts the attention of herd-boys, who dig out
its nest for the sake of the young. This, and a most lovely little blue
and orange kingfisher, are seen every where along the banks, dashing
down like a shot into the water for their prey. A third, seen more
rarely, is as large as a pigeon, and is of a slaty color.

Another inhabitant of the banks is the sand-martin, which also likes
company in the work of raising a family. They never leave this part of
the country. One may see them preening themselves in the very depth of
winter, while the swallows, of which we shall yet speak, take winter
trips. I saw sand-martins at the Orange River during a period of winter
frost; it is, therefore, probable that they do not migrate even from
thence.

Around the reeds, which in some parts line the banks, we see fresh-water
sponges. They usually encircle the stalk, and are hard and brittle,
presenting numbers of small round grains near their circumference.

The river was running at the rate of five miles an hour, and carried
bunches of reed and decaying vegetable matter on its surface; yet the
water was not discolored. It had, however, a slightly yellowish-green
tinge, somewhat deeper than its natural color. This arose from the
quantity of sand carried by the rising flood from sand-banks, which are
annually shifted from one spot to another, and from the pieces falling
in as the banks are worn; for when the water is allowed to stand in
a glass, a few seconds suffice for its deposit at the bottom. This is
considered an unhealthy period. When waiting, on one occasion, for the
other canoes to come up, I felt no inclination to leave the one I was
in; but my head boatman, Mashauana, told me never to remain on board
while so much vegetable matter was floating down the stream.

17TH DECEMBER. At Libonta. We were detained for days together collecting
contributions of fat and butter, according to the orders of Sekeletu, as
presents to the Balonda chiefs. Much fever prevailed, and ophthalmia was
rife, as is generally the case before the rains begin. Some of my own
men required my assistance, as well as the people of Libonta. A lion had
done a good deal of mischief here, and when the people went to attack it
two men were badly wounded; one of them had his thigh-bone quite broken,
showing the prodigious power of this animal's jaws. The inflammation
produced by the teeth-wounds proved fatal to one of them.

Here we demanded the remainder of the captives, and got our number
increased to nineteen. They consisted of women and children, and one
young man of twenty. One of the boys was smuggled away in the crowd as
we embarked. The Makololo under-chiefs often act in direct opposition
to the will of the head chief, trusting to circumstances and
brazenfacedness to screen themselves from his open displeasure; and as
he does not always find it convenient to notice faults, they often go to
considerable lengths in wrong-doing.

Libonta is the last town of the Makololo; so, when we parted from it, we
had only a few cattle-stations and outlying hamlets in front, and then
an uninhabited border country till we came to Londa or Lunda. Libonta is
situated on a mound like the rest of the villages in the Barotse valley,
but here the tree-covered sides of the valley begin to approach nearer
the river. The village itself belongs to two of the chief wives of
Sebituane, who furnished us with an ox and abundance of other food. The
same kindness was manifested by all who could afford to give any thing;
and as I glance over their deeds of generosity recorded in my journal,
my heart glows with gratitude to them, and I hope and pray that God may
spare me to make them some return.

Before leaving the villages entirely, we may glance at our way of
spending the nights. As soon as we land, some of the men cut a little
grass for my bed, while Mashauana plants the poles of the little tent.
These are used by day for carrying burdens, for the Barotse fashion is
exactly like that of the natives of India, only the burden is fastened
near the ends of the pole, and not suspended by long cords. The bed is
made, and boxes ranged on each side of it, and then the tent pitched
over all. Four or five feet in front of my tent is placed the principal
or kotla fire, the wood for which must be collected by the man who
occupies the post of herald, and takes as his perquisite the heads of
all the oxen slaughtered, and of all the game too. Each person knows the
station he is to occupy, in reference to the post of honor at the fire
in front of the door of the tent. The two Makololo occupy my right and
left, both in eating and sleeping, as long as the journey lasts. But
Mashauana, my head boatman, makes his bed at the door of the tent as
soon as I retire. The rest, divided into small companies according to
their tribes, make sheds all round the fire, leaving a horseshoe-shaped
space in front sufficient for the cattle to stand in. The fire gives
confidence to the oxen, so the men are always careful to keep them in
sight of it. The sheds are formed by planting two stout forked poles in
an inclined direction, and placing another over these in a horizontal
position. A number of branches are then stuck in the ground in the
direction to which the poles are inclined, the twigs drawn down to the
horizontal pole and tied with strips of bark. Long grass is then laid
over the branches in sufficient quantity to draw off the rain, and we
have sheds open to the fire in front, but secure from beasts behind.
In less than an hour we were usually all under cover. We never lacked
abundance of grass during the whole journey. It is a picturesque sight
at night, when the clear bright moon of these climates glances on the
sleeping forms around, to look out upon the attitudes of profound repose
both men and beasts assume. There being no danger from wild animals in
such a night, the fires are allowed almost to go out; and as there is
no fear of hungry dogs coming over sleepers and devouring the food, or
quietly eating up the poor fellows' blankets, which at best were but
greasy skins, which sometimes happened in the villages, the picture was
one of perfect peace.

The cooking is usually done in the natives' own style, and, as they
carefully wash the dishes, pots, and the hands before handling food,
it is by no means despicable. Sometimes alterations are made at my
suggestion, and then they believe that they can cook in thorough white
man's fashion. The cook always comes in for something left in the pot,
so all are eager to obtain the office.

I taught several of them to wash my shirts, and they did it well, though
their teacher had never been taught that work himself. Frequent changes
of linen and sunning of my blanket kept me more comfortable than
might have been anticipated, and I feel certain that the lessons of
cleanliness rigidly instilled by my mother in childhood helped to
maintain that respect which these people entertain for European ways.
It is questionable if a descent to barbarous ways ever elevates a man in
the eyes of savages.

When quite beyond the inhabited parts, we found the country abounding in
animal life of every form. There are upward of thirty species of birds
on the river itself. Hundreds of the 'Ibis religiosa' come down the
Leeambye with the rising water, as they do on the Nile; then large white
pelicans, in flocks of three hundred at a time, following each other
in long extending line, rising and falling as they fly so regularly
all along as to look like an extended coil of birds; clouds of a black
shell-eating bird, called linongolo ('Anastomus lamelligerus'); also
plovers, snipes, curlews, and herons without number.

There are, besides the more common, some strange varieties. The pretty
white 'ardetta' is seen in flocks, settling on the backs of large herds
of buffaloes, and following them on the wing when they run; while the
kala ('Textor erythrorhynchus') is a better horseman, for it sits on the
withers when the animal is at full speed.

Then those strange birds, the scissor-bills, with snow-white breast,
jet-black coat, and red beak, sitting by day on the sand-banks, the very
picture of comfort and repose. Their nests are only little hollows made
on these same sand-banks, without any attempt of concealment; they watch
them closely, and frighten away the marabou and crows from their eggs
by feigned attacks at their heads. When man approaches their nests, they
change their tactics, and, like the lapwing and ostrich, let one wing
drop and make one leg limp, as if lame. The upper mandible being so much
shorter than the lower, the young are more helpless than the stork in
the fable with the flat dishes, and must have every thing conveyed into
the mouth by the parents till they are able to provide for themselves.
The lower mandible, as thin as a paper-knife, is put into the water
while the bird skims along the surface, and scoops up any little insects
it meets. It has great length of wing, and can continue its flight with
perfect ease, the wings acting, though kept above the level of the body.
The wonder is, how this plowing of the surface of the water can be so
well performed as to yield a meal, for it is usually done in the dark.
Like most aquatic feeders, they work by night, when insects and fishes
rise to the surface. They have great affection for their young,
its amount being increased in proportion to the helplessness of the
offspring.

There are also numbers of spoonbills, nearly white in plumage; the
beautiful, stately flamingo; the Numidian crane, or demoiselle, some of
which, tamed at Government House, Cape Town, struck every one as most
graceful ornaments to a noble mansion, as they perched on its pillars.
There are two cranes besides--one light blue, the other also light blue,
but with a white neck; and gulls ('Procellaria') of different sizes
abound.

One pretty little wader, an avoset, appears as if standing on stilts,
its legs are so long; and its bill seems bent the wrong way, or upward.
It is constantly seen wading in the shallows, digging up little slippery
insects, the peculiar form of the bill enabling it to work them easily
out of the sand. When feeding, it puts its head under the water to
seize the insect at the bottom, then lifts it up quickly, making a rapid
gobbling, as if swallowing a wriggling worm.

The 'Parra Africana' runs about on the surface, as if walking on water,
catching insects. It too has long, thin legs, and extremely long toes,
for the purpose of enabling it to stand on the floating lotus-leaves
and other aquatic plants. When it stands on a lotus-leaf five inches in
diameter, the spread of the toes, acting on the principle of snow-shoes,
occupies all the surface, and it never sinks, though it obtains a
livelihood, not by swimming or flying, but by walking on the water.

Water-birds, whose prey or food requires a certain aim or action in one
direction, have bills quite straight in form, as the heron and snipe;
while those which are intended to come in contact with hard substances,
as breaking shells, have the bills gently curved, in order that the
shock may not be communicated to the brain.

The Barotse valley contains great numbers of large black geese.* They
may be seen every where walking slowly about, feeding. They have a
strong black spur on the shoulder, like the armed plover, and as strong
as that on the heel of a cock, but are never seen to use them, except
in defense of their young. They choose ant-hills for their nests, and
in the time of laying the Barotse consume vast quantities of their eggs.
There are also two varieties of geese, of somewhat smaller size, but
better eating. One of these, the Egyptian goose, or Vulpanser, can not
rise from the water, and during the floods of the river great numbers
are killed by being pursued in canoes. The third is furnished with
a peculiar knob on the beak. These, with myriads of ducks of three
varieties, abound every where on the Leeambye. On one occasion the canoe
neared a bank on which a large flock was sitting. Two shots furnished
our whole party with a supper, for we picked up seventeen ducks and a
goose. No wonder the Barotse always look back to this fruitful valley as
the Israelites did to the flesh-pots of Egypt. The poorest persons are
so well supplied with food from their gardens, fruits from the forest
trees, and fish from the river, that their children, when taken into
the service of the Makololo, where they have only one large meal a day,
become quite emaciated, and pine for a return to their parents.

   * 'Anser leucagaster' and 'melanogaster'.

Part of our company marched along the banks with the oxen, and part went
in the canoes, but our pace was regulated by the speed of the men on
shore. Their course was rather difficult, on account of the numbers of
departing and re-entering branches of the Leeambye, which they had to
avoid or wait at till we ferried them over. The number of alligators is
prodigious, and in this river they are more savage than in some others.
Many children are carried off annually at Sesheke and other towns; for,
notwithstanding the danger, when they go down for water they almost
always must play a while. This reptile is said by the natives to strike
the victim with its tail, then drag him in and drown him. When lying
in the water watching for prey, the body never appears. Many calves
are lost also, and it is seldom that a number of cows can swim over at
Sesheke without some loss. I never could avoid shuddering on seeing my
men swimming across these branches, after one of them had been caught by
the thigh and taken below. He, however, retained, as nearly all of them
in the most trying circumstances do, his full presence of mind, and,
having a small, square, ragged-edged javelin with him, when dragged to
the bottom gave the alligator a stab behind the shoulder. The alligator,
writhing in pain, left him, and he came out with the deep marks of
the reptile's teeth on his thigh. Here the people have no antipathy to
persons who have met with such an adventure, but, in the Bamangwato and
Bakwain tribes, if a man is either bitten or even has had water splashed
over him by the reptile's tail, he is expelled his tribe. When on the
Zouga we saw one of the Bamangwato living among the Bayeiye, who had
the misfortune to have been bitten and driven out of his tribe in
consequence. Fearing that I would regard him with the same disgust which
his countrymen profess to feel, he would not tell me the cause of his
exile, but the Bayeiye informed me of it, and the scars of the teeth
were visible on his thigh. If the Bakwains happened to go near an
alligator they would spit on the ground, and indicate its presence by
saying "Boleo ki bo"--"There is sin". They imagine the mere sight of
it would give inflammation of the eyes; and though they eat the zebra
without hesitation, yet if one bites a man he is expelled the tribe, and
obliged to take his wife and family away to the Kalahari. These curious
relics of the animal-worship of former times scarcely exist among the
Makololo. Sebituane acted on the principle, "Whatever is food for men is
food for me;" so no man is here considered unclean. The Barotse appear
inclined to pray to alligators and eat them too, for when I wounded
a water-antelope, called mochose, it took to the water; when near the
other side of the river an alligator appeared at its tail, and then both
sank together. Mashauana, who was nearer to it than I, told me that,
"though he had called to it to let his meat alone, it refused to
listen." One day we passed some Barotse lads who had speared an
alligator, and were waiting in expectation of its floating soon after.
The meat has a strong musky odor, not at all inviting for any one except
the very hungry.

When we had gone thirty or forty miles above Libonta we sent eleven
of our captives to the west, to the chief called Makoma, with an
explanatory message. This caused some delay; but as we were loaded
with presents of food from the Makololo, and the wild animals were in
enormous herds, we fared sumptuously. It was grievous, however, to
shoot the lovely creatures, they were so tame. With but little skill
in stalking, one could easily get within fifty or sixty yards of them.
There I lay, looking at the graceful forms and motions of beautiful
pokus,* leches, and other antelopes, often till my men, wondering what
was the matter, came up to see, and frightened them away. If we had been
starving, I could have slaughtered them with as little hesitation as I
should cut off a patient's leg; but I felt a doubt, and the antelopes
got the benefit of it. Have they a guardian spirit over them? I have
repeatedly observed, when I approached a herd lying beyond an ant-hill
with a tree on it, and viewed them with the greatest caution, they very
soon showed symptoms of uneasiness. They did not sniff danger in
the wind, for I was to leeward of them; but the almost invariable
apprehension of danger which arose, while unconscious of the direction
in which it lay, made me wonder whether each had what the ancient
physicians thought we all possessed, an archon, or presiding spirit.

   * I propose to name this new species 'Antilope Vardonii',
   after the African traveler, Major Vardon.

If we could ascertain the most fatal spot in an animal, we could
dispatch it with the least possible amount of suffering; but as that is
probably the part to which the greatest amount of nervous influence is
directed at the moment of receiving the shot, if we can not be sure of
the heart or brain, we are never certain of speedy death. Antelopes,
formed for a partially amphibious existence, and other animals of that
class, are much more tenacious of life than those which are purely
terrestrial. Most antelopes, when in distress or pursued, make for the
water. If hunted, they always do. A leche shot right through the body,
and no limb-bone broken, is almost sure to get away, while a zebra, with
a wound of no greater severity, will probably drop down dead. I have
seen a rhinoceros, while standing apparently chewing the cud, drop down
dead from a shot in the stomach, while others shot through one lung
and the stomach go off as if little hurt. But if one should crawl up
silently to within twenty yards either of the white or black rhinoceros,
throwing up a pinch of dust every now and then, to find out that the
anxiety to keep the body concealed by the bushes has not led him to
the windward side, then sit down, rest the elbow on the knees, and aim,
slanting a little upward, at a dark spot behind the shoulders, it falls
stone dead.

To show that a shock on the part of the system to which much nervous
force is at the time directed will destroy life, it may be mentioned
that an eland, when hunted, can be dispatched by a wound which does
little more than injure the muscular system; its whole nervous force is
then imbuing the organs of motion; and a giraffe, when pressed hard by a
good horse only two or three hundred yards, has been known to drop down
dead, without any wound being inflicted at all. A full gallop by an
eland or giraffe quite dissipates its power, and the hunters, aware of
this, always try to press them at once to it, knowing that they have
but a short space to run before the animals are in their power. In doing
this, the old sportsmen are careful not to go too close to the giraffe's
tail, for this animal can swing his hind foot round in a way which would
leave little to choose between a kick with it and a clap from the arm of
a windmill.

When the nervous force is entire, terrible wounds may be inflicted
without killing; a tsessebe having been shot through the neck while
quietly feeding, we went to him, and one of the men cut his throat deep
enough to bleed him largely. He started up after this and ran more than
a mile, and would have got clear off had not a dog brought him to bay
under a tree, where we found him standing.

My men, having never had fire-arms in their hands before, found it so
difficult to hold the musket steady at the flash of fire in the pan,
that they naturally expected me to furnish them with "gun medicine",
without which, it is almost universally believed, no one can shoot
straight. Great expectations had been formed when I arrived among the
Makololo on this subject; but, having invariably declined to deceive
them, as some for their own profit have done, my men now supposed that I
would at last consent, and thereby relieve myself from the hard work of
hunting by employing them after due medication. This I was most willing
to do, if I could have done it honestly; for, having but little of the
hunting 'furore' in my composition, I always preferred eating the
game to killing it. Sulphur is the remedy most admired, and I remember
Sechele giving a large price for a very small bit. He also gave some
elephants' tusks, worth 30 Pounds, for another medicine which was to
make him invulnerable to musket balls. As I uniformly recommended that
these things should be tested by experiment, a calf was anointed with
the charm and tied to a tree. It proved decisive, and Sechele remarked
it was "pleasanter to be deceived than undeceived." I offered sulphur
for the same purpose, but that was declined, even though a person
came to the town afterward and rubbed his hands with a little before a
successful trial of shooting at a mark.

I explained to my men the nature of a gun, and tried to teach them, but
they would soon have expended all the ammunition in my possession. I
was thus obliged to do all the shooting myself ever afterward. Their
inability was rather a misfortune; for, in consequence of working too
soon after having been bitten by the lion, the bone of my left arm
had not united well. Continual hard manual labor, and some falls from
ox-back, lengthened the ligament by which the ends of the bones were
united, and a false joint was the consequence. The limb has never been
painful, as those of my companions on the day of the rencounter with the
lion have been, but, there being a joint too many, I could not steady
the rifle, and was always obliged to shoot with the piece resting on
the left shoulder. I wanted steadiness of aim, and it generally happened
that the more hungry the party became, the more frequently I missed the
animals.

We spent a Sunday on our way up to the confluence of the Leeba and
Leeambye. Rains had fallen here before we came, and the woods had put on
their gayest hue. Flowers of great beauty and curious forms grow every
where; they are unlike those in the south, and so are the trees. Many
of the forest-tree leaves are palmated and largely developed; the trunks
are covered with lichens, and the abundance of ferns which appear in the
woods shows we are now in a more humid climate than any to the south of
the Barotse valley. The ground begins to swarm with insect life; and in
the cool, pleasant mornings the welkin rings with the singing of birds,
which is not so delightful as the notes of birds at home, because I
have not been familiar with them from infancy. The notes here, however,
strike the mind by their loudness and variety, as the wellings forth
from joyous hearts of praise to Him who fills them with overflowing
gladness. All of us rise early to enjoy the luscious balmy air of the
morning. We then have worship; but, amid all the beauty and loveliness
with which we are surrounded, there is still a feeling of want in the
soul in viewing one's poor companions, and hearing bitter, impure words
jarring on the ear in the perfection of the scenes of Nature, and a
longing that both their hearts and ours might be brought into harmony
with the Great Father of Spirits. I pointed out, in, as usual, the
simplest words I could employ, the remedy which God has presented to
us, in the inexpressibly precious gift of His own Son, on whom the Lord
"laid the iniquity of us all." The great difficulty in dealing with
these people is to make the subject plain. The minds of the auditors
can not be understood by one who has not mingled much with them. They
readily pray for the forgiveness of sins, and then sin again; confess
the evil of it, and there the matter ends.

I shall not often advert to their depravity. My practice has always been
to apply the remedy with all possible earnestness, but never allow my
own mind to dwell on the dark shades of men's characters. I have never
been able to draw pictures of guilt, as if that could awaken Christian
sympathy. The evil is there. But all around in this fair creation are
scenes of beauty, and to turn from these to ponder on deeds of sin can
not promote a healthy state of the faculties. I attribute much of the
bodily health I enjoy to following the plan adopted by most physicians,
who, while engaged in active, laborious efforts to assist the needy,
at the same time follow the delightful studies of some department of
natural history. The human misery and sin we endeavor to alleviate and
cure may be likened to the sickness and impurity of some of the back
slums of great cities. One contents himself by ministering to the sick
and trying to remove the causes, without remaining longer in the filth
than is necessary for his work; another, equally anxious for the public
good, stirs up every cesspool, that he may describe its reeking vapors,
and, by long contact with impurities, becomes himself infected, sickens,
and dies.

The men went about during the day, and brought back wild fruits of
several varieties, which I had not hitherto seen. One, called mogametsa,
is a bean with a little pulp round it, which tastes like sponge-cake;
another, named mawa, grows abundantly on a low bush. There are many
berries and edible bulbs almost every where. The mamosho or moshomosho,
and milo (a medlar), were to be found near our encampment. These are
both good, if indeed one can be a fair judge who felt quite disposed to
pass a favorable verdict on every fruit which had the property of being
eatable at all. Many kinds are better than our crab-apple or sloe, and,
had they the care and culture these have enjoyed, might take high rank
among the fruits of the world. All that the Africans have thought of has
been present gratification; and now, as I sometimes deposit date-seeds
in the soil, and tell them I have no hope whatever of seeing the fruit,
it seems to them as the act of the South Sea Islanders appears to us,
when they planted in their gardens iron nails received from Captain
Cook.

There are many fruits and berries in the forests, the uses of which are
unknown to my companions. Great numbers of a kind of palm I have never
met with before were seen growing at and below the confluence of the
Loeti and Leeambye; the seed probably came down the former river. It is
nearly as tall as the palmyra. The fruit is larger than of that species;
it is about four inches long, and has a soft yellow pulp round the
kernel or seed; when ripe, it is fluid and stringy, like the wild mango,
and not very pleasant to eat.

Before we came to the junction of the Leeba and Leeambye we found
the banks twenty feet high, and composed of marly sandstone. They are
covered with trees, and the left bank has the tsetse and elephants. I
suspect the fly has some connection with this animal, and the Portuguese
in the district of Tete must think so too, for they call it the 'Musca
da elephant' (the elephant fly).

The water of inundation covers even these lofty banks, but does not
stand long upon them; hence the crop of trees. Where it remains for any
length of time, trees can not live. On the right bank, or that in which
the Loeti flows, there is an extensive flat country called Manga, which,
though covered with grass, is destitute in a great measure of trees.

Flocks of green pigeons rose from the trees as we passed along the
banks, and the notes of many birds told that we were now among strangers
of the feathered tribe. The beautiful trogon, with bright scarlet breast
and black back, uttered a most peculiar note, similar to that we read
of as having once been emitted by Memnon, and likened to the tuning of
a lyre. The boatmen answered it by calling "Nama, nama!"--meat, meat--as
if they thought that a repetition of the note would be a good omen for
our success in hunting. Many more interesting birds were met; but I
could make no collection, as I was proceeding on the plan of having as
little luggage as possible, so as not to excite the cupidity of those
through whose country we intended to pass.

Vast shoals of fish come down the Leeambye with the rising waters, as
we observed they also do in the Zouga. They are probably induced to make
this migration by the increased rapidity of the current dislodging them
from their old pasture-grounds higher up the river. Insects constitute
but a small portion of the food of many fish. Fine vegetable matter,
like slender mosses, growing on the bottom, is devoured greedily; and
as the fishes are dislodged from the main stream by the force of the
current, and find abundant pasture on the flooded plains, the whole
community becomes disturbed and wanders.

The mosala ('Clarias Capensis' and 'Glanis siluris'), the mullet ('Mugil
Africanus'), and other fishes, spread over the Barotse valley in such
numbers that when the waters retire all the people are employed in
cutting them up and drying them in the sun. The supply exceeds the
demand, and the land in numerous places is said to emit a most offensive
smell. Wherever you see the Zambesi in the centre of the country, it is
remarkable for the abundance of animal life in and upon its waters, and
on the adjacent banks.

We passed great numbers of hippopotami. They are very numerous in the
parts of the river where they are never hunted. The males appear of a
dark color, the females of yellowish brown. There is not such a complete
separation of the sexes among them as among elephants. They spend most
of their time in the water, lolling about in a listless, dreamy manner.
When they come out of the river by night, they crop off the soft
succulent grasses very neatly. When they blow, they puff up the water
about three feet high.




Chapter 15.

Message to Masiko, the Barotse Chief, regarding the Captives--
Navigation of the Leeambye--Capabilities of this District--The
Leeba--Flowers and Bees--Buffalo-hunt--Field for a Botanist--Young
Alligators; their savage Nature--Suspicion of the Balonda--Sekelenke's
Present--A Man and his two Wives--Hunters--Message from Manenko,
a female Chief--Mambari Traders--A Dream--Sheakondo and his
People--Teeth-filing--Desire for Butter--Interview with Nyamoana,
another female Chief--Court Etiquette--Hair versus Wool--Increase of
Superstition--Arrival of Manenko; her Appearance and Husband--Mode
of Salutation--Anklets--Embassy, with a Present from Masiko--Roast
Beef--Manioc--Magic Lantern--Manenko an accomplished Scold: compels us
to wait--Unsuccessful Zebra-hunt.



On the 27th of December we were at the confluence of the Leeba and
Leeambye (lat. 14d 10' 52" S., long. 23d 35' 40" E.). Masiko, the
Barotse chief, for whom we had some captives, lived nearly due east of
this point. They were two little boys, a little girl, a young man, and
two middle-aged women. One of these was a member of a Babimpe tribe, who
knock out both upper and lower front teeth as a distinction. As we had
been informed by the captives on the previous Sunday that Masiko was in
the habit of seizing all orphans, and those who have no powerful friend
in the tribe whose protection they can claim, and selling them for
clothing to the Mambari, we thought the objection of the women to go
first to his town before seeing their friends quite reasonable, and
resolved to send a party of our own people to see them safely among
their relatives. I told the captive young man to inform Masiko that he
was very unlike his father Santuru, who had refused to sell his people
to Mambari. He will probably be afraid to deliver such a message
himself, but it is meant for his people, and they will circulate it
pretty widely, and Masiko may yet feel a little pressure from without.
We sent Mosantu, a Batoka man, and his companions, with the captives.
The Barotse whom we had were unwilling to go to Masiko, since they owe
him allegiance as the son of Santuru, and while they continue with the
Makololo are considered rebels. The message by Mosantu was, that "I was
sorry to find that Santuru had not borne a wiser son. Santuru loved to
govern men, but Masiko wanted to govern wild beasts only, as he sold
his people to the Mambari;" adding an explanation of the return of the
captives, and an injunction to him to live in peace, and prevent
his people kidnapping the children and canoes of the Makololo, as a
continuance in these deeds would lead to war, which I wished to prevent.
He was also instructed to say, if Masiko wanted fuller explanation of my
views, he must send a sensible man to talk with me at the first town of
the Balonda, to which I was about to proceed.

We ferried Mosantu over to the left bank of the Leeba. The journey
required five days, but it could not have been at a quicker rate than
ten or twelve miles per day; the children were between seven and eight
years of age, and unable to walk fast in a hot sun.

Leaving Mosantu to pursue his course, we shall take but one glance down
the river, which we are now about to leave, for it comes at this point
from the eastward, and our course is to be directed to the northwest,
as we mean to go to Loanda in Angola. From the confluence, where we now
are, down to Mosioatunya, there are many long reaches, where a vessel
equal to the Thames steamers plying between the bridges could run as
freely as they do on the Thames. It is often, even here, as broad as
that river at London Bridge, but, without accurate measurement of the
depth, one could not say which contained most water. There are, however,
many and serious obstacles to a continued navigation for hundreds of
miles at a stretch. About ten miles below the confluence of the Loeti,
for instance, there are many large sand-banks in the stream; then you
have a hundred miles to the River Simah, where a Thames steamer could
ply at all times of the year; but, again, the space between Simah and
Katima-molelo has five or six rapids with cataracts, one of which,
Gonye, could not be passed at any time without portage. Between these
rapids there are reaches of still, deep water, of several miles in
length. Beyond Katima-molelo to the confluence of the Chobe you have
nearly a hundred miles again, of a river capable of being navigated in
the same way as in the Barotse valley.

Now I do not say that this part of the river presents a very inviting
prospect for extemporaneous European enterprise; but when we have a
pathway which requires only the formation of portages to make it equal
to our canals for hundreds of miles, where the philosophers supposed
there was naught but an extensive sandy desert, we must confess that
the future partakes at least of the elements of hope. My deliberate
conviction was and is that the part of the country indicated is as
capable of supporting millions of inhabitants as it is of its thousands.
The grass of the Barotse valley, for instance, is such a densely-matted
mass that, when "laid", the stalks bear each other up, so that one feels
as if walking on the sheaves of a hay-stack, and the leches nestle under
it to bring forth their young. The soil which produces this, if placed
under the plow, instead of being mere pasturage, would yield grain
sufficient to feed vast multitudes.

We now began to ascend the Leeba. The water is black in color as
compared with the main stream, which here assumes the name of Kabompo.
The Leeba flows placidly, and, unlike the parent river, receives numbers
of little rivulets from both sides. It winds slowly through the most
charming meadows, each of which has either a soft, sedgy centre, large
pond, or trickling rill down the middle. The trees are now covered with
a profusion of the freshest foliage, and seem planted in groups of such
pleasant, graceful outline that art could give no additional charm. The
grass, which had been burned off and was growing again after the
rains, was short and green, and all the scenery so like that of a
carefully-tended gentleman's park, that one is scarcely reminded that
the surrounding region is in the hands of simple nature alone. I suspect
that the level meadows are inundated annually, for the spots on which
the trees stand are elevated three or four feet above them, and these
elevations, being of different shapes, give the strange variety of
outline of the park-like woods. Numbers of a fresh-water shell are
scattered all over these valleys. The elevations, as I have observed
elsewhere, are of a soft, sandy soil, and the meadows of black, rich
alluvial loam. There are many beautiful flowers, and many bees to sip
their nectar. We found plenty of honey in the woods, and saw the stages
on which the Balonda dry their meat, when they come down to hunt and
gather the produce of the wild hives. In one part we came upon groups of
lofty trees as straight as masts, with festoons of orchilla-weed hanging
from the branches. This, which is used as a dye-stuff, is found nowhere
in the dry country to the south. It prefers the humid climate near the
west coast.

A large buffalo was wounded, and ran into the thickest part of the
forest, bleeding profusely. The young men went on his trail; and, though
the vegetation was so dense that no one could have run more than a few
yards, most of them went along quite carelessly, picking and eating
a fruit of the melon family called Mponko. When the animal heard them
approach he always fled, shifting his stand and doubling on his course
in the most cunning manner. In other cases I have known them to turn
back to a point a few yards from their own trail, and then lie down in
a hollow waiting for the hunter to come up. Though a heavy,
lumbering-looking animal, his charge is then rapid and terrific. More
accidents happen by the buffalo and the black rhinoceros than by the
lion. Though all are aware of the mischievous nature of the buffalo when
wounded, our young men went after him quite carelessly. They never lose
their presence of mind, but, as a buffalo charges back in a forest, dart
dexterously out of his way behind a tree, and, wheeling round, stab him
as he passes.

A tree in flower brought the pleasant fragrance of hawthorn hedges back
to memory; its leaves, flowers, perfumes, and fruit resembled those
of the hawthorn, only the flowers were as large as dog-roses, and the
"haws" like boys' marbles. Here the flowers smell sweetly, while few
in the south emit any scent at all, or only a nauseous odor. A botanist
would find a rich harvest on the banks of the Leeba. This would be his
best season, for the flowers all run rapidly to seed, and then insects
of every shape spring into existence to devour them. The climbing plants
display great vigor of growth, being not only thick in the trunk, but
also at the very point, in the manner of quickly-growing asparagus. The
maroro or malolo now appears, and is abundant in many parts between
this and Angola. It is a small bush with a yellow fruit, and in its
appearance a dwarf "anona". The taste is sweet, and the fruit is
wholesome: it is full of seeds, like the custard-apple.

On the 28th we slept at a spot on the right bank from which had just
emerged two broods of alligators. We had seen many young ones as we came
up, so this seems to be their time of coming forth from the nests, for
we saw them sunning themselves on sand-banks in company with the old
ones. We made our fire in one of the deserted nests, which were strewed
all over with the broken shells. At the Zouga we saw sixty eggs taken
out of one such nest alone. They are about the size of those of a goose,
only the eggs of the alligator are of the same diameter at both ends,
and the white shell is partially elastic, from having a strong internal
membrane and but little lime in its composition. The distance from the
water was about ten feet, and there were evidences of the same place
having been used for a similar purpose in former years. A broad path
led up from the water to the nest, and the dam, it was said by my
companions, after depositing the eggs, covers them up, and returns
afterward to assist the young out of the place of confinement and out of
the egg. She leads them to the edge of the water, and then leaves them
to catch small fish for themselves. Assistance to come forth seems
necessary, for here, besides the tough membrane of the shell, they had
four inches of earth upon them; but they do not require immediate aid
for food, because they all retain a portion of yolk, equal to that of a
hen's egg, in a membrane in the abdomen, as a stock of nutriment, while
only beginning independent existence by catching fish. Fish is the
principal food of both small and large, and they are much assisted
in catching them by their broad, scaly tails. Sometimes an alligator,
viewing a man in the water from the opposite bank, rushes across the
stream with wonderful agility, as is seen by the high ripple he makes
on the surface caused by his rapid motion at the bottom; but in general
they act by stealth, sinking underneath as soon as they see man. They
seldom leave the water to catch prey, but often come out by day to enjoy
the pleasure of basking in the sun. In walking along the bank of the
Zouga once, a small one, about three feet long, made a dash at my feet,
and caused me to rush quickly in another direction; but this is unusual,
for I never heard of a similar case. A wounded leche, chased into any
of the lagoons in the Barotse valley, or a man or dog going in for the
purpose of bringing out a dead one, is almost sure to be seized, though
the alligators may not appear on the surface. When employed in looking
for food they keep out of sight; they fish chiefly by night. When
eating, they make a loud, champing noise, which when once heard is never
forgotten.

The young, which had come out of the nests where we spent the night, did
not appear wary; they were about ten inches long, with yellow eyes, and
pupil merely a perpendicular slit. They were all marked with transverse
slips of pale green and brown, half an inch broad. When speared,
they bit the weapon savagely, though their teeth were but partially
developed, uttering at the same time a sharp bark like that of a whelp
when it first begins to use its voice. I could not ascertain whether
the dam devours them, as reported, or whether the ichneumon has the same
reputation here as in Egypt. Probably the Barotse and Bayeiye would not
look upon it as a benefactor; they prefer to eat the eggs themselves,
and be their own ichneumons. The white of the egg does not coagulate,
but the yolk does, and this is the only part eaten.

As the population increases, the alligators will decrease, for their
nests will be oftener found; the principal check on their inordinate
multiplication seems to be man. They are more savage and commit more
mischief in the Leeambye than in any other river. After dancing long in
the moonlight nights, young men run down to the water to wash off the
dust and cool themselves before going to bed, and are thus often carried
away. One wonders they are not afraid; but the fact is, they have as
little sense of danger impending over them as the hare has when not
actually pursued by the hound, and in many rencounters, in which
they escape, they had not time to be afraid, and only laugh at the
circumstance afterward: there is a want of calm reflection. In many
cases, not referred to in this book, I feel more horror now in thinking
on dangers I have run than I did at the time of their occurrence.

When we reached the part of the river opposite to the village of
Manenko, the first female chief whom we encountered, two of the people
called Balunda, or Balonda, came to us in their little canoe. From them
we learned that Kolimbota, one of our party, who had been in the habit
of visiting these parts, was believed by the Balonda to have acted as
a guide to the marauders under Lerimo, whose captives we were now
returning. They very naturally suspected this, from the facility with
which their villages had been found, and, as they had since removed them
to some distance from the river, they were unwilling to lead us to their
places of concealment. We were in bad repute, but, having a captive
boy and girl to show in evidence of Sekeletu and ourselves not being
partakers in the guilt of inferior men, I could freely express my desire
that all should live in peace. They evidently felt that I ought to have
taught the Makololo first, before coming to them, for they remarked that
what I advanced was very good, but guilt lay at the door of the Makololo
for disturbing the previously existing peace. They then went away to
report us to Manenko.

When the strangers visited us again in the evening, they were
accompanied by a number of the people of an Ambonda chief named
Sekelenke. The Ambonda live far to the N.W.; their language, the Bonda,
is the common dialect in Angola. Sekelenke had fled, and was now living
with his village as a vassal of Masiko. As notices of such men will
perhaps convey the best idea of the state of the inhabitants to the
reader, I shall hereafter allude to the conduct of Sekelenke, whom I at
present only introduce. Sekelenke had gone with his villagers to hunt
elephants on the right bank of the Leeba, and was now on his way back to
Masiko. He sent me a dish of boiled zebra's flesh, and a request that I
should lend him a canoe to ferry his wives and family across the river
to the bank on which we were encamped. Many of Sekelenke's people came
to salute the first white man they ever had an opportunity of seeing;
but Sekelenke himself did not come near. We heard he was offended with
some of his people for letting me know he was among the company. He
said that I should be displeased with him for not coming and making
some present. This was the only instance in which I was shunned in this
quarter.

As it would have been impolitic to pass Manenko, or any chief, without
at least showing so much respect as to call and explain the objects
of our passing through the country, we waited two entire days for the
return of the messengers to Manenko; and as I could not hurry matters, I
went into the adjacent country to search for meat for the camp.

The country is furnished largely with forest, having occasionally open
lawns covered with grass, not in tufts as in the south, but so closely
planted that one can not see the soil. We came upon a man and his two
wives and children, burning coarse rushes and the stalks of tsitla,
growing in a brackish marsh, in order to extract a kind of salt from the
ashes. They make a funnel of branches of trees, and line it with grass
rope, twisted round until it is, as it were, a beehive-roof inverted.
The ashes are put into water, in a calabash, and then it is allowed to
percolate through the small hole in the bottom and through the grass.
When this water is evaporated in the sun, it yields sufficient salt to
form a relish with food. The women and children fled with precipitation,
but we sat down at a distance, and allowed the man time to gain courage
enough to speak. He, however, trembled excessively at the apparition
before him; but when we explained that our object was to hunt game, and
not men, he became calm, and called back his wives. We soon afterward
came to another party on the same errand with ourselves. The man had a
bow about six feet long, and iron-headed arrows about thirty inches in
length; he had also wooden arrows neatly barbed, to shoot in cases
where he might not be quite certain of recovering them again. We soon
afterward got a zebra, and gave our hunting acquaintances such a liberal
share that we soon became friends. All whom we saw that day then came
with us to the encampment to beg a little meat; and as they have so
little salt, I have no doubt they felt grateful for what we gave.

Sekelenke and his people, twenty-four in number, defiled past our camp
carrying large bundles of dried elephants' meat. Most of them came to
say good-by, and Sekelenke himself sent to say that he had gone to visit
a wife living in the village of Manenko. It was a mere African manoeuvre
to gain information, and not commit himself to either one line of action
or another with respect to our visit. As he was probably in the party
before us, I replied that it was all right, and when my people came up
from Masiko I would go to my wife too. Another zebra came to our camp,
and, as we had friends near, it was shot. It was the 'Equus montanus',
though the country is perfectly flat, and was finely marked down to the
feet, as all the zebras are in these parts.

To our first message, offering a visit of explanation to Manenko, we got
an answer, with a basket of manioc roots, that we must remain where we
were till she should visit us. Having waited two days already for her,
other messengers arrived with orders for me to come to her. After four
days of rains and negotiation, I declined going at all, and proceeded
up the river to the small stream Makondo (lat. 13d 23' 12" S.), which
enters the Leeba from the east, and is between twenty and thirty yards
broad.

JANUARY 1ST, 1854. We had heavy rains almost every day; indeed, the
rainy season had fairly set in. Baskets of the purple fruit called mawa
were frequently brought to us by the villagers; not for sale, but from a
belief that their chiefs would be pleased to hear that they had treated
us well; we gave them pieces of meat in return.

When crossing at the confluence of the Leeba and Makondo, one of my men
picked up a bit of a steel watch-chain of English manufacture, and we
were informed that this was the spot where the Mambari cross in
coming to Masiko. Their visits explain why Sekelenke kept his tusks so
carefully. These Mambari are very enterprising merchants: when they mean
to trade with a town, they deliberately begin the affair by building
huts, as if they knew that little business could be transacted without a
liberal allowance of time for palaver. They bring Manchester goods into
the heart of Africa; these cotton prints look so wonderful that the
Makololo could not believe them to be the work of mortal hands. On
questioning the Mambari they were answered that English manufactures
came out of the sea, and beads were gathered on its shore. To Africans
our cotton mills are fairy dreams. "How can the irons spin, weave, and
print so beautifully?" Our country is like what Taprobane was to our
ancestors--a strange realm of light, whence came the diamond, muslin,
and peacocks; an attempt at explanation of our manufactures usually
elicits the expression, "Truly ye are gods!"

When about to leave the Makondo, one of my men had dreamed that Mosantu
was shut up a prisoner in a stockade: this dream depressed the spirits
of the whole party, and when I came out of my little tent in the
morning, they were sitting the pictures of abject sorrow. I asked if
we were to be guided by dreams, or by the authority I derived from
Sekeletu, and ordered them to load the boats at once; they seemed
ashamed to confess their fears; the Makololo picked up courage and
upbraided the others for having such superstitious views, and said this
was always their way; if even a certain bird called to them, they would
turn back from an enterprise, saying it was unlucky. They entered the
canoes at last, and were the better of a little scolding for being
inclined to put dreams before authority. It rained all the morning,
but about eleven we reached the village of Sheakondo, on a small stream
named Lonkonye. We sent a message to the head man, who soon appeared
with two wives, bearing handsome presents of manioc: Sheakondo could
speak the language of the Barotse well, and seemed awestruck when told
some of the "words of God". He manifested no fear, always spoke frankly,
and when he made an asseveration, did so by simply pointing up to the
sky above him. The Balonda cultivate the manioc or cassava extensively;
also dura, ground-nuts, beans, maize, sweet potatoes, and yams, here
called "lekoto", but as yet we see only the outlying villages.

The people who came with Sheakondo to our bivouac had their teeth filed
to a point by way of beautifying them, though those which were left
untouched were always the whitest; they are generally tattooed in
various parts, but chiefly on the abdomen: the skin is raised in small
elevated cicatrices, each nearly half an inch long and a quarter of an
inch in diameter, so that a number of them may constitute a star, or
other device. The dark color of the skin prevents any coloring matter
being deposited in these figures, but they love much to have the whole
surface of their bodies anointed with a comfortable varnish of oil. In
their unassisted state they depend on supplies of oil from the Palma
Christi, or castor-oil plant, or from various other oliferous seeds, but
they are all excessively fond of clarified butter or ox fat. Sheakondo's
old wife presented some manioc roots, and then politely requested to
be anointed with butter: as I had been bountifully supplied by the
Makololo, I gave her as much as would suffice, and as they have little
clothing, I can readily believe that she felt her comfort greatly
enhanced thereby.

The favorite wife, who was also present, was equally anxious for butter.
She had a profusion of iron rings on her ankles, to which were attached
little pieces of sheet iron, to enable her to make a tinkling as she
walked in her mincing African style; the same thing is thought pretty by
our own dragoons in walking jauntingly.

We had so much rain and cloud that I could not get a single observation
for either longitude or latitude for a fortnight. Yet the Leeba does
not show any great rise, nor is the water in the least discolored. It
is slightly black, from the number of mossy rills which fall into it. It
has remarkably few birds and fish, while the Leeambye swarms with both.
It is noticeable that alligators here possess more of the fear of man
than in the Leeambye. The Balonda have taught them, by their poisoned
arrows, to keep out of sight. We did not see one basking in the sun. The
Balonda set so many little traps for birds that few appear. I observed,
however, many (to me) new small birds of song on its banks. More rain
has been falling in the east than here, for the Leeambye was rising fast
and working against the sandy banks so vigorously that a slight yellow
tinge was perceptible in it.

One of our men was bitten by a non-venomous serpent, and of course felt
no harm. The Barotse concluded that this was owing to many of them being
present and seeing it, as if the sight of human eyes could dissolve the
poison and act as a charm.

On the 6th of January we reached the village of another female chief,
named Nyamoana, who is said to be the mother of Manenko, and sister
of Shinte or Kabompo, the greatest Balonda chief in this part of the
country. Her people had but recently come to the present locality, and
had erected only twenty huts. Her husband, Samoana, was clothed in a
kilt of green and red baize, and was armed with a spear and a broadsword
of antique form, about eighteen inches long and three broad. The chief
and her husband were sitting on skins placed in the middle of a circle
thirty paces in diameter, a little raised above the ordinary level of
the ground, and having a trench round it. Outside the trench sat about a
hundred persons of all ages and both sexes. The men were well armed with
bows, arrows, spears, and broadswords. Beside the husband sat a rather
aged woman, having a bad outward squint in the left eye. We put down
our arms about forty yards off, and I walked up to the centre of the
circular bench, and saluted him in the usual way by clapping the hands
together in their fashion. He pointed to his wife, as much as to say,
the honor belongs to her. I saluted her in the same way, and a mat
having been brought, I squatted down in front of them.

The talker was then called, and I was asked who was my spokesman. Having
pointed to Kolimbota, who knew their dialect best, the palaver began
in due form. I explained the real objects I had in view, without any
attempt to mystify or appear in any other character than my own, for
I have always been satisfied that, even though there were no other
considerations, the truthful way of dealing with the uncivilized is
unquestionably the best. Kolimbota repeated to Nyamoana's talker what
I had said to him. He delivered it all verbatim to her husband, who
repeated it again to her. It was thus all rehearsed four times over,
in a tone loud enough to be heard by the whole party of auditors. The
response came back by the same roundabout route, beginning at the lady
to her husband, etc.

After explanations and re-explanations, I perceived that our new friends
were mixing up my message of peace and friendship with Makololo affairs,
and stated that it was not delivered on the authority of any one less
than that of their Creator, and that if the Makololo did again break His
laws and attack the Balonda, the guilt would rest with the Makololo and
not with me. The palaver then came to a close.

By way of gaining their confidence, I showed them my hair, which is
considered a curiosity in all this region. They said, "Is that hair?
It is the mane of a lion, and not hair at all." Some thought that I
had made a wig of lion's mane, as they sometimes do with fibres of the
"ife", and dye it black, and twist it so as to resemble a mass of their
own wool. I could not return the joke by telling them that theirs was
not hair, but the wool of sheep, for they have none of these in the
country; and even though they had, as Herodotus remarked, "the African
sheep are clothed with hair, and men's heads with wool." So I had to
be content with asserting that mine was the real original hair, such as
theirs would have been had it not been scorched and frizzled by the sun.
In proof of what the sun could do, I compared my own bronzed face
and hands, then about the same in complexion as the lighter-colored
Makololo, with the white skin of my chest. They readily believed that,
as they go nearly naked and fully exposed to that influence, we might be
of common origin after all. Here, as every where, when heat and moisture
are combined, the people are very dark, but not quite black. There is
always a shade of brown in the most deeply colored. I showed my watch
and pocket compass, which are considered great curiosities; but,
though the lady was called on by her husband to look, she would not be
persuaded to approach near enough.

These people are more superstitious than any we had yet encountered;
though still only building their village, they had found time to erect
two little sheds at the chief dwelling in it, in which were placed two
pots having charms in them. When asked what medicine they contained,
they replied, "Medicine for the Barimo;" but when I rose and looked into
them, they said they were medicine for the game. Here we saw the first
evidence of the existence of idolatry in the remains of an old idol at a
deserted village. It was simply a human head carved on a block of wood.
Certain charms mixed with red ochre and white pipe-clay are dotted over
them when they are in use; and a crooked stick is used in the same way
for an idol when they have no professional carver.

As the Leeba seemed still to come from the direction in which we wished
to go, I was desirous of proceeding farther up with the canoes; but
Nyamoana was anxious that we should allow her people to conduct us
to her brother Shinte; and when I explained the advantage of
water-carriage, she represented that her brother did not live near the
river, and, moreover, there was a cataract in front, over which it
would be difficult to convey the canoes. She was afraid, too, that the
Balobale, whose country lies to the west of the river, not knowing the
objects for which we had come, would kill us. To my reply that I had
been so often threatened with death if I visited a new tribe that I was
now more afraid of killing any one than of being killed, she rejoined
that the Balobale would not kill me, but the Makololo would all be
sacrificed as their enemies. This produced considerable effect on my
companions, and inclined them to the plan of Nyamoana, of going to the
town of her brother rather than ascending the Leeba. The arrival of
Manenko herself on the scene threw so much weight into the scale on
their side that I was forced to yield the point.

Manenko was a tall, strapping woman about twenty, distinguished by a
profusion of ornaments and medicines hung round her person; the latter
are supposed to act as charms. Her body was smeared all over with a
mixture of fat and red ochre, as a protection against the weather; a
necessary precaution, for, like most of the Balonda ladies, she was
otherwise in a state of frightful nudity. This was not from want of
clothing, for, being a chief, she might have been as well clad as any of
her subjects, but from her peculiar ideas of elegance in dress. When she
arrived with her husband, Sambanza, they listened for some time to
the statements I was making to the people of Nyamoana, after which the
husband, acting as spokesman, commenced an oration, stating the
reasons for their coming, and, during every two or three seconds of the
delivery, he picked up a little sand, and rubbed it on the upper part
of his arms and chest. This is a common mode of salutation in Londa; and
when they wish to be excessively polite, they bring a quantity of ashes
or pipe-clay in a piece of skin, and, taking up handfuls, rub it on the
chest and upper front part of each arm; others, in saluting, drum their
ribs with their elbows; while others still touch the ground with one
cheek after the other, and clap their hands. The chiefs go through the
manoeuvre of rubbing the sand on the arms, but only make a feint at
picking up some. When Sambanza had finished his oration, he rose up,
and showed his ankles ornamented with a bundle of copper rings; had they
been very heavy, they would have made him adopt a straggling walk. Some
chiefs have really so many as to be forced, by the weight and size,
to keep one foot apart from the other, the weight being a serious
inconvenience in walking. The gentlemen like Sambanza, who wish to
imitate their betters, do so in their walk; so you see men, with only
a few ounces of ornament on their legs, strutting along as if they
had double the number of pounds. When I smiled at Sambanza's walk, the
people remarked, "That is the way in which they show off their lordship
in these parts."

Manenko was quite decided in the adoption of the policy of friendship
with the Makololo which we recommended; and, by way of cementing the
bond, she and her counselors proposed that Kolimbota should take a wife
among them. By this expedient she hoped to secure his friendship, and
also accurate information as to the future intentions of the Makololo.
She thought that he would visit the Balonda more frequently afterward,
having the good excuse of going to see his wife; and the Makololo would
never, of course, kill the villagers among whom so near a relative of
one of their own children dwells. Kolimbota, I found, thought favorably
of the proposition, and it afterward led to his desertion from us.

On the evening of the day in which Manenko arrived, we were delighted
by the appearance of Mosantu and an imposing embassy from Masiko. It
consisted of all his under-chiefs, and they brought a fine elephant's
tusk, two calabashes of honey, and a large piece of blue baize, as a
present. The last was intended perhaps to show me that he was a truly
great chief, who had such stores of white men's goods at hand that he
could afford to give presents of them; it might also be intended for
Mosantu, for chiefs usually remember the servants; I gave it to him.
Masiko expressed delight, by his principal men, at the return of the
captives, and at the proposal of peace and alliance with the Makololo.
He stated that he never sold any of his own people to the Mambari, but
only captives whom his people kidnapped from small neighboring tribes.
When the question was put whether his people had been in the habit of
molesting the Makololo by kidnapping their servants and stealing canoes,
it was admitted that two of his men, when hunting, had gone to the
Makololo gardens, to see if any of their relatives were there. As the
great object in all native disputes is to get both parties to turn over
a new leaf, I explained the desirableness of forgetting past feuds,
accepting the present Makololo professions as genuine, and avoiding in
future to give them any cause for marauding. I presented Masiko with an
ox, furnished by Sekeletu as provision for ourselves. All these people
are excessively fond of beef and butter, from having been accustomed to
them in their youth, before the Makololo deprived them of cattle. They
have abundance of game, but I am quite of their opinion that, after all,
there is naught in the world equal to roast beef, and that in their
love for it the English show both good taste and sound sense. The ox was
intended for Masiko, but his men were very anxious to get my sanction
for slaughtering it on the spot. I replied that when it went out of
my hands I had no more to do with it. They, however, wished the
responsibility of slaughtering it to rest with me; if I had said they
might kill it, not many ounces would have remained in the morning. I
would have given permission, but had nothing else to offer in return for
Masiko's generosity.

We were now without any provisions except a small dole of manioc roots
each evening from Nyamoana, which, when eaten raw, produce poisonous
effects. A small loaf, made from nearly the last morsel of maize-meal
from Libonta, was my stock, and our friends from Masiko were still more
destitute; yet we all rejoiced so much at their arrival that we resolved
to spend a day with them. The Barotse of our party, meeting with
relatives and friends among the Barotse of Masiko, had many old tales to
tell; and, after pleasant hungry converse by day, we regaled our friends
with the magic lantern by night, and, in order to make the thing of use
to all, we removed our camp up to the village of Nyamoana. This is a
good means of arresting the attention, and conveying important facts to
the minds of these people.

When erecting our sheds at the village, Manenko fell upon our friends
from Masiko in a way that left no doubt on our minds but that she is
a most accomplished scold. Masiko had, on a former occasion, sent to
Samoana for a cloth, a common way of keeping up intercourse, and, after
receiving it, sent it back, because it had the appearance of having had
"witchcraft medicine" on it; this was a grave offense, and now Manenko
had a good excuse for venting her spleen, the embassadors having called
at her village, and slept in one of the huts without leave. If her
family was to be suspected of dealing in evil charms, why were Masiko's
people not to be thought guilty of leaving the same in her hut? She
advanced and receded in true oratorical style, belaboring her own
servants as well for allowing the offense, and, as usual in more
civilized feminine lectures, she leaned over the objects of her ire, and
screamed forth all their faults and failings ever since they were born,
and her despair of ever seeing them become better, until they were all
"killed by alligators". Masiko's people followed the plan of receiving
this torrent of abuse in silence, and, as neither we nor they had any
thing to eat, we parted next morning. In reference to Masiko selling
slaves to the Mambari, they promised to explain the relationship which
exists between even the most abject of his people and our common Father;
and that no more kidnapping ought to be allowed, as he ought to give
that peace and security to the smaller tribes on his eastern borders
which he so much desired to obtain himself from the Makololo. We
promised to return through his town when we came back from the
sea-coast.

Manenko gave us some manioc roots in the morning, and had determined
to carry our baggage to her uncle's, Kabompo or Shinte. We had heard a
sample of what she could do with her tongue; and as neither my men nor
myself had much inclination to encounter a scolding from this black Mrs.
Caudle, we made ready the packages; but she came and said the men whom
she had ordered for the service had not yet come; they would arrive
to-morrow. Being on low and disagreeable diet, I felt annoyed at this
further delay, and ordered the packages to be put into the canoes to
proceed up the river without her servants; but Manenko was not to be
circumvented in this way; she came forward with her people, and said her
uncle would be angry if she did not carry forward the tusks and goods
of Sekeletu, seized the luggage, and declared that she would carry it in
spite of me. My men succumbed sooner to this petticoat government than
I felt inclined to do, and left me no power; and, being unwilling to
encounter her tongue, I was moving off to the canoes, when she gave me
a kind explanation, and, with her hand on my shoulder, put on a motherly
look, saying, "Now, my little man, just do as the rest have done." My
feelings of annoyance of course vanished, and I went out to try and get
some meat.

The only game to be found in these parts are the ZEBRA, the KUALATA or
tahetsi ('Aigoceros equina'), kama ('Bubalus caama'), buffaloes, and the
small antelope hakitenwe ('Philantomba').

The animals can be seen here only by following on their trail for many
miles. Urged on by hunger, we followed that of some zebras during the
greater part of the day: when within fifty yards of them, in a dense
thicket, I made sure of one, but, to my infinite disgust, the gun missed
fire, and off they bounded. The climate is so very damp, from daily
heavy rains, that every thing becomes loaded with moisture, and the
powder in the gun-nipples can not be kept dry. It is curious to mark the
intelligence of the game; in districts where they are much annoyed by
fire-arms, they keep out on the most open spots of country they can
find, in order to have a widely-extended range of vision, and a man
armed is carefully shunned. From the frequency with which I have been
allowed to approach nearer without than with a gun, I believe they know
the difference between safety and danger in the two cases. But here,
where they are killed by the arrows of the Balonda, they select for
safety the densest forest, where the arrow can not be easily shot.
The variation in the selection of standing-spots during the day may,
however, be owing partly to the greater heat of the sun, for here it
is particularly sharp and penetrating. However accounted for, the wild
animals here do select the forests by day, while those farther south
generally shun these covers, and, on several occasions, I have observed
there was no sunshine to cause them to seek for shade.




Chapter 16.

Nyamoana's Present--Charms--Manenko's pedestrian Powers--An Idol--
Balonda Arms--Rain--Hunger--Palisades--Dense Forests--Artificial
Beehives--Mushrooms--Villagers lend the Roofs of their Houses
--Divination and Idols--Manenko's Whims--A night Alarm--Shinte's
Messengers and Present--The proper Way to approach a Village--A
Merman--Enter Shinte's Town: its Appearance--Meet two half-caste
Slave-traders--The Makololo scorn them--The Balonda real Negroes--Grand
Reception from Shinte--His Kotla--Ceremony of Introduction--The
Orators--Women--Musicians and Musical Instruments--A disagreeable
Request--Private Interviews with Shinte--Give him an Ox--Fertility
of Soil--Manenko's new Hut--Conversation with Shinte--Kolimbota's
Proposal--Balonda's Punctiliousness--Selling Children--Kidnapping--
Shinte's Offer of a Slave--Magic Lantern--Alarm of Women--
Delay--Sambanza returns intoxicated--The last and greatest Proof of
Shinte's Friendship.



11TH OF JANUARY, 1854. On starting this morning, Samoana (or rather
Nyamoana, for the ladies are the chiefs here) presented a string of
beads, and a shell highly valued among them, as an atonement for having
assisted Manenko, as they thought, to vex me the day before. They seemed
anxious to avert any evil which might arise from my displeasure; but
having replied that I never kept my anger up all night, they were much
pleased to see me satisfied. We had to cross, in a canoe, a stream which
flows past the village of Nyamoana. Manenko's doctor waved some charms
over her, and she took some in her hand and on her body before she
ventured upon the water. One of my men spoke rather loudly when near the
doctor's basket of medicines. The doctor reproved him, and always spoke
in a whisper himself, glancing back to the basket as if afraid of being
heard by something therein. So much superstition is quite unknown in the
south, and is mentioned here to show the difference in the feelings of
this new people, and the comparative want of reverence on these points
among Caffres and Bechuanas.

Manenko was accompanied by her husband and her drummer; the latter
continued to thump most vigorously until a heavy, drizzling mist set in
and compelled him to desist. Her husband used various incantations and
vociferations to drive away the rain, but down it poured incessantly,
and on our Amazon went, in the very lightest marching order, and at a
pace that few of the men could keep up with. Being on ox-back, I kept
pretty close to our leader, and asked her why she did not clothe herself
during the rain, and learned that it is not considered proper for a
chief to appear effeminate. He or she must always wear the appearance
of robust youth, and bear vicissitudes without wincing. My men, in
admiration of her pedestrian powers, every now and then remarked,
"Manenko is a soldier;" and thoroughly wet and cold, we were all glad
when she proposed a halt to prepare our night's lodging on the banks of
a stream.

The country through which we were passing was the same succession of
forest and open lawns as formerly mentioned: the trees were nearly all
evergreens, and of good, though not very gigantic size. The lawns were
covered with grass, which, in thickness of crop, looked like ordinary
English hay. We passed two small hamlets surrounded by gardens of maize
and manioc, and near each of these I observed, for the first time,
an ugly idol common in Londa--the figure of an animal, resembling an
alligator, made of clay. It is formed of grass, plastered over with
soft clay; two cowrie-shells are inserted as eyes, and numbers of the
bristles from the tail of an elephant are stuck in about the neck. It is
called a lion, though, if one were not told so, he would conclude it to
be an alligator. It stood in a shed, and the Balonda pray and beat drums
before it all night in cases of sickness.

Some of the men of Manenko's train had shields made of reeds, neatly
woven into a square shape, about five feet long and three broad. With
these, and short broadswords and sheaves of iron-headed arrows, they
appeared rather ferocious. But the constant habit of wearing arms is
probably only a substitute for the courage they do not possess. We
always deposited our fire-arms and spears outside a village before
entering it, while the Balonda, on visiting us at our encampment, always
came fully armed, until we ordered them either to lay down their weapons
or be off. Next day we passed through a piece of forest so dense that no
one could have penetrated it without an axe. It was flooded, not by
the river, but by the heavy rains which poured down every day, and kept
those who had clothing constantly wet. I observed, in this piece of
forest, a very strong smell of sulphureted hydrogen. This I had
observed repeatedly in other parts before. I had attacks of fever of the
intermittent type again and again, in consequence of repeated drenchings
in these unhealthy spots.

On the 11th and 12th we were detained by incessant rains, and so heavy
I never saw the like in the south. I had a little tapioca and a small
quantity of Libonta meal, which I still reserved for worse times. The
patience of my men under hunger was admirable; the actual want of the
present is never so painful as the thought of getting nothing in the
future. We thought the people of some large hamlets very niggardly and
very independent of their chiefs, for they gave us and Manenko nothing,
though they had large fields of maize in an eatable state around them.
When she went and kindly begged some for me, they gave her five ears
only. They were subjects of her uncle; and, had they been Makololo,
would have been lavish in their gifts to the niece of their chief. I
suspected that they were dependents of some of Shinte's principal men,
and had no power to part with the maize of their masters.

Each house of these hamlets has a palisade of thick stakes around it,
and the door is made to resemble the rest of the stockade; the door is
never seen open; when the owner wishes to enter, he removes a stake or
two, squeezes his body in, then plants them again in their places, so
that an enemy coming in the night would find it difficult to discover
the entrance. These palisades seem to indicate a sense of insecurity
in regard to their fellow-men, for there are no wild beasts to disturb
them; the bows and arrows have been nearly as efficacious in clearing
the country here as guns have in the country farther south. This was a
disappointment to us, for we expected a continuance of the abundance of
game in the north which we found when we first came up to the confluence
of the Leeba and Leeambye.

A species of the silver-tree of the Cape ('Leucodendron argenteum') is
found in abundance in the parts through which we have traveled since
leaving Samoana's. As it grows at a height of between two and three
thousand feet above the level of the sea, on the Cape Table Mountain,
and again on the northern slope of the Cashan Mountains, and here at
considerably greater heights (four thousand feet), the difference of
climate prevents the botanical range being considered as affording a
good approximation to the altitude. The rapid flow of the Leeambye,
which once seemed to me evidence of much elevation of the country
from which it comes, I now found, by the boiling point of water, was
fallacious.*

   * On examining this subject when I returned to Linyanti, I
   found that, according to Dr. Arnott, a declivity of three
   inches per mile gives a velocity in a smooth, straight channel
   of three miles an hour. The general velocity of the Zambesi is
   three miles and three quarters per hour, though in the rocky
   parts it is sometimes as much as four and a half.  If,
   however, we make allowances for roughness of bottom, bendings
   of channel, and sudden descents at cataracts, and say the
   declivity is even seven inches per mile, those 800 miles
   between the east coast and the great falls would require less
   than 500 feet to give the observed velocity, and the
   additional distance to this point would require but 150 feet
   of altitude more.  If my observation of this altitude may be
   depended on, we have a steeper declivity for the Zambesi than
   for some other great rivers.  The Ganges, for instance, is
   said to be at 1800 miles from its mouth only 800 feet above
   the level of the sea, and water requires a month to come that
   distance. But there are so many modifying circumstances, it is
   difficult to draw any reliable conclusion from the currents.
   The Chobe is sometimes heard of as flooded, about 40 miles
   above Linyanti, a fortnight before the inundation reaches that
   point, but it is very tortuous. The great river Magdalena
   falls only 500 feet in a thousand miles; other rivers much
   more.

The forests became more dense as we went north. We traveled much more in
the deep gloom of the forest than in open sunlight. No passage existed
on either side of the narrow path made by the axe. Large climbing plants
entwined themselves around the trunks and branches of gigantic trees
like boa constrictors, and they often do constrict the trees by which
they rise, and, killing them, stand erect themselves. The bark of a
fine tree found in abundance here, and called "motuia", is used by
the Barotse for making fish-lines and nets, and the "molompi", so well
adapted for paddles by its lightness and flexibility, was abundant.
There were other trees quite new to my companions; many of them ran up
to a height of fifty feet of one thickness, and without branches.

In these forests we first encountered the artificial beehives so
commonly met with all the way from this to Angola. They consist of about
five feet of the bark of a tree fifteen or eighteen inches in diameter.
Two incisions are made right round the tree at points five feet apart,
then one longitudinal slit from one of these to the other; the workman
next lifts up the bark on each side of this slit, and detaches it from
the trunk, taking care not to break it, until the whole comes from the
tree. The elasticity of the bark makes it assume the form it had before;
the slit is sewed or pegged up with wooden pins, and ends made of coiled
grass-rope are inserted, one of which has a hole for the ingress of the
bees in the centre, and the hive is complete. These hives are placed in
a horizontal position on high trees in different parts of the forest,
and in this way all the wax exported from Benguela and Loanda is
collected. It is all the produce of free labor. A "piece of medicine"
is tied round the trunk of the tree, and proves sufficient protection
against thieves. The natives seldom rob each other, for all believe
that certain medicines can inflict disease and death; and though they
consider that these are only known to a few, they act on the principle
that it is best to let them all alone. The gloom of these forests
strengthens the superstitious feelings of the people. In other quarters,
where they are not subjected to this influence, I have heard the chiefs
issue proclamations to the effect that real witchcraft medicines had
been placed at certain gardens from which produce had been stolen, the
thieves having risked the power of the ordinary charms previously placed
there.

This being the rainy season, great quantities of mushrooms were met
with, and were eagerly devoured by my companions: the edible variety is
always found growing out of ant-hills, and attains the diameter of the
crown of a hat; they are quite white, and very good, even when eaten
raw; they occupy an extensive region of the interior; some, not edible,
are of a brilliant red, and others are of the same light blue as the
paper used by apothecaries to put up their medicines.

There was a considerable pleasure, in spite of rain and fever, in this
new scenery. The deep gloom contrasted strongly with the shadeless glare
of the Kalahari, which had left an indelible impression on my memory.
Though drenched day by day at this time, and for months afterward, it
was long before I could believe that we were getting too much of a good
thing. Nor could I look at water being thrown away without a slight,
quick impression flitting across the mind that we were guilty of wasting
it. Every now and then we emerged from the deep gloom into a pretty
little valley, having a damp portion in the middle; which, though now
filled with water, at other times contains moisture enough for wells
only. These wells have shades put over them in the form of little huts.

We crossed, in canoes, a little never-failing stream, which passes
by the name of Lefuje, or "the rapid". It comes from a goodly high
mountain, called Monakadzi (the woman), which gladdened our eyes as
it rose to our sight about twenty or thirty miles to the east of our
course. It is of an oblong shape, and seemed at least eight hundred feet
above the plains. The Lefuje probably derives its name from the rapid
descent of the short course it has to flow from Monakadzi to the Leeba.

The number of little villages seemed about equal to the number of
valleys. At some we stopped and rested, the people becoming more liberal
as we advanced. Others we found deserted, a sudden panic having seized
the inhabitants, though the drum of Manenko was kept beaten pretty
constantly, in order to give notice of the approach of great people.
When we had decided to remain for the night at any village, the
inhabitants lent us the roofs of their huts, which in form resemble
those of the Makololo, or a Chinaman's hat, and can be taken off the
walls at pleasure. They lifted them off, and brought them to the spot we
had selected as our lodging, and, when my men had propped them up with
stakes, they were then safely housed for the night. Every one who comes
to salute either Manenko or ourselves rubs the upper parts of the arms
and chest with ashes; those who wish to show profounder reverence put
some also on the face.

We found that every village had its idols near it. This is the case all
through the country of the Balonda, so that, when we came to an idol in
the woods, we always knew that we were within a quarter of an hour of
human habitations. One very ugly idol we passed rested on a horizontal
beam placed on two upright posts. This beam was furnished with two loops
of cord, as of a chain, to suspend offerings before it. On remarking to
my companions that these idols had ears, but that they heard not,
etc., I learned that the Balonda, and even the Barotse, believe that
divination may be performed by means of these blocks of wood and clay;
and though the wood itself could not hear, the owners had medicines by
which it could be made to hear and give responses, so that if an enemy
were approaching they would have full information. Manenko having
brought us to a stand on account of slight indisposition and a desire
to send forward notice of our approach to her uncle, I asked why it was
necessary to send forward information of our movements, if Shinte had
idols who could tell him every thing. "She did it only,"* was the reply.
It is seldom of much use to show one who worships idols the folly
of idolatry without giving something else as an object of adoration
instead. They do not love them. They fear them, and betake themselves to
their idols only when in perplexity and danger.

   * This is a curious African idiom, by which a person implies
   he had no particular reason for his act.

While delayed, by Manenko's management, among the Balonda villages, a
little to the south of the town of Shinte, we were well supplied by
the villagers with sweet potatoes and green maize; Sambanza went to his
mother's village for supplies of other food. I was laboring under fever,
and did not find it very difficult to exercise patience with her whims;
but it being Saturday, I thought we might as well go to the town for
Sunday (15th). "No; her messenger must return from her uncle first."
Being sure that the answer of the uncle would be favorable, I thought we
might go on at once, and not lose two days in the same spot. "No, it
is our custom;" and every thing else I could urge was answered in the
genuine pertinacious lady style. She ground some meal for me with her
own hands, and when she brought it told me she had actually gone to a
village and begged corn for the purpose. She said this with an air as if
the inference must be drawn by even a stupid white man: "I know how to
manage, don't I?" It was refreshing to get food which could be eaten
without producing the unpleasantness described by the Rev. John Newton,
of St. Mary's, Woolnoth, London, when obliged to eat the same roots
while a slave in the West Indies. The day (January 14th), for a wonder,
was fair, and the sun shone, so as to allow us to dry our clothing
and other goods, many of which were mouldy and rotten from the
long-continued damp. The guns rusted, in spite of being oiled every
evening.

During the night we were all awakened by a terrific shriek from one of
Manenko's ladies. She piped out so loud and long that we all imagined
she had been seized by a lion, and my men snatched up their arms, which
they always place so as to be ready at a moment's notice, and ran to
the rescue; but we found the alarm had been caused by one of the oxen
thrusting his head into her hut and smelling her: she had put her hand
on his cold, wet nose, and thought it was all over with her.

On Sunday afternoon messengers arrived from Shinte, expressing his
approbation of the objects we had in view in our journey through the
country, and that he was glad of the prospect of a way being opened by
which white men might visit him, and allow him to purchase ornaments at
pleasure. Manenko now threatened in sport to go on, and I soon afterward
perceived that what now seemed to me the dilly-dallying way of this lady
was the proper mode of making acquaintance with the Balonda; and much of
the favor with which I was received in different places was owing to
my sending forward messengers to state the object of our coming before
entering each town and village. When we came in sight of a village we
sat down under the shade of a tree and sent forward a man to give notice
who we were and what were our objects. The head man of the village then
sent out his principal men, as Shinte now did, to bid us welcome and
show us a tree under which we might sleep. Before I had profited by the
rather tedious teaching of Manenko, I sometimes entered a village and
created unintentional alarm. The villagers would continue to look upon
us with suspicion as long as we remained. Shinte sent us two large
baskets of manioc and six dried fishes. His men had the skin of a
monkey, called in their tongue "poluma" ('Colobus guereza'), of a jet
black color, except the long mane, which is pure white: it is said to be
found in the north, in the country of Matiamvo, the paramount chief
of all the Balonda. We learned from them that they are in the habit of
praying to their idols when unsuccessful in killing game or in any other
enterprise. They behaved with reverence at our religious services. This
will appear important if the reader remembers the almost total want of
prayer and reverence we encountered in the south.

Our friends informed us that Shinte would be highly honored by the
presence of three white men in his town at once. Two others had sent
forward notice of their approach from another quarter (the west); could
it be Barth or Krapf? How pleasant to meet with Europeans in such an
out-of-the-way region! The rush of thoughts made me almost forget my
fever. Are they of the same color as I am? "Yes; exactly so." And have
the same hair? "Is that hair? we thought it was a wig; we never saw the
like before; this white man must be of the sort that lives in the sea."
Henceforth my men took the hint, and always sounded my praises as a true
specimen of the variety of white men who live in the sea. "Only look at
his hair; it is made quite straight by the sea-water!"

I explained to them again and again that, when it was said we came out
of the sea, it did not mean that we came from beneath the water; but the
fiction has been widely spread in the interior by the Mambari that the
real white men live in the sea, and the myth was too good not to be
taken advantage of by my companions; so, notwithstanding my injunctions,
I believe that, when I was out of hearing, my men always represented
themselves as led by a genuine merman: "Just see his hair!" If I
returned from walking to a little distance, they would remark of some to
whom they had been holding forth, "These people want to see your hair."

As the strangers had woolly hair like themselves, I had to give up the
idea of meeting any thing more European than two half-caste Portuguese,
engaged in trading for slaves, ivory, and bees'-wax.

16TH. After a short march we came to a most lovely valley about a mile
and a half wide, and stretching away eastward up to a low prolongation
of Monakadzi. A small stream meanders down the centre of this pleasant
green glen; and on a little rill, which flows into it from the western
side, stands the town of Kabompo, or, as he likes best to be called,
Shinte. (Lat. 12d 37' 35" S., long. 22d 47' E.) When Manenko thought the
sun was high enough for us to make a lucky entrance, we found the town
embowered in banana and other tropical trees having great expansion of
leaf; the streets are straight, and present a complete contrast to those
of the Bechuanas, which are all very tortuous. Here, too, we first saw
native huts with square walls and round roofs. The fences or walls of
the courts which surround the huts are wonderfully straight, and made
of upright poles a few inches apart, with strong grass or leafy bushes
neatly woven between. In the courts were small plantations of tobacco,
and a little solanaceous plant which the Balonda use as a relish; also
sugar-cane and bananas. Many of the poles have grown again, and trees of
the 'Ficus Indica' family have been planted around, in order to give to
the inhabitants a grateful shade: they regard this tree with some sort
of veneration as a medicine or charm. Goats were browsing about, and,
when we made our appearance, a crowd of negroes, all fully armed, ran
toward us as if they would eat us up; some had guns, but the manner in
which they were held showed that the owners were more accustomed to bows
and arrows than to white men's weapons. After surrounding and staring at
us for an hour, they began to disperse.

The two native Portuguese traders of whom we had heard had erected a
little encampment opposite the place where ours was about to be made.
One of them, whose spine had been injured in youth--a rare sight in this
country--came and visited us. I returned the visit next morning. His
tall companion had that sickly yellow hue which made him look fairer
than myself, but his head was covered with a crop of unmistakable wool.
They had a gang of young female slaves in a chain, hoeing the ground
in front of their encampment to clear it of weeds and grass; these were
purchased recently in Lobale, whence the traders had now come. There
were many Mambari with them, and the establishment was conducted
with that military order which pervades all the arrangements of the
Portuguese colonists. A drum was beaten and trumpet sounded at certain
hours, quite in military fashion. It was the first time most of my men
had seen slaves in chains. "They are not men," they exclaimed (meaning
they are beasts), "who treat their children so."

The Balonda are real negroes, having much more wool on their heads and
bodies than any of the Bechuana or Caffre tribes. They are generally
very dark in color, but several are to be seen of a lighter hue; many of
the slaves who have been exported to Brazil have gone from this region;
but while they have a general similarity to the typical negro, I never
could, from my own observation, think that our ideal negro, as seen
in tobacconists' shops, is the true type. A large proportion of the
Balonda, indeed, have heads somewhat elongated backward and upward,
thick lips, flat noses, elongated 'ossa calces', etc., etc.; but there
are also many good-looking, well-shaped heads and persons among them.

17TH, TUESDAY. We were honored with a grand reception by Shinte about
eleven o'clock. Sambanza claimed the honor of presenting us, Manenko
being slightly indisposed. The native Portuguese and Mambari went fully
armed with guns, in order to give Shinte a salute; their drummer and
trumpeter making all the noise that very old instruments would produce.
The kotla, or place of audience, was about a hundred yards square, and
two graceful specimens of a species of banian stood near one end; under
one of these sat Shinte, on a sort of throne covered with a leopard's
skin. He had on a checked jacket, and a kilt of scarlet baize edged with
green; many strings of large beads hung from his neck, and his limbs
were covered with iron and copper armlets and bracelets; on his head he
wore a helmet made of beads woven neatly together, and crowned with a
great bunch of goose-feathers. Close to him sat three lads with large
sheaves of arrows over their shoulders.

When we entered the kotla, the whole of Manenko's party saluted Shinte
by clapping their hands, and Sambanza did obeisance by rubbing his chest
and arms with ashes. One of the trees being unoccupied, I retreated to
it for the sake of the shade, and my whole party did the same. We were
now about forty yards from the chief, and could see the whole ceremony.
The different sections of the tribe came forward in the same way that we
did, the head man of each making obeisance with ashes which he carried
with him for the purpose; then came the soldiers, all armed to the
teeth, running and shouting toward us, with their swords drawn, and
their faces screwed up so as to appear as savage as possible, for the
purpose, I thought, of trying whether they could not make us take to our
heels. As we did not, they turned round toward Shinte and saluted him,
then retired. When all had come and were seated, then began the curious
capering usually seen in pichos. A man starts up, and imitates the most
approved attitudes observed in actual fight, as throwing one javelin,
receiving another on the shield, springing to one side to avoid a third,
running backward or forward, leaping, etc. This over, Sambanza and the
spokesman of Nyamoana stalked backward and forward in front of Shinte,
and gave forth, in a loud voice, all they had been able to learn,
either from myself or people, of my past history and connection with the
Makololo; the return of the captives; the wish to open the country to
trade; the Bible as a word from heaven; the white man's desire for
the tribes to live in peace: he ought to have taught the Makololo that
first, for the Balonda never attacked them, yet they had assailed the
Balonda: perhaps he is fibbing, perhaps not; they rather thought he was;
but as the Balonda had good hearts, and Shinte had never done harm to
any one, he had better receive the white man well, and send him on his
way. Sambanza was gayly attired, and, besides a profusion of beads, had
a cloth so long that a boy carried it after him as a train.

Behind Shinte sat about a hundred women, clothed in their best, which
happened to be a profusion of red baize. The chief wife of Shinte, one
of the Matebele or Zulus, sat in front with a curious red cap on her
head. During the intervals between the speeches, these ladies burst
forth into a sort of plaintive ditty; but it was impossible for any of
us to catch whether it was in praise of the speaker, of Shinte, or of
themselves. This was the first time I had ever seen females present in
a public assembly. In the south the women are not permitted to enter the
kotla; and even when invited to come to a religious service there, would
not enter until ordered to do so by the chief; but here they expressed
approbation by clapping their hands, and laughing to different speakers;
and Shinte frequently turned round and spoke to them.

A party of musicians, consisting of three drummers and four performers
on the piano, went round the kotla several times, regaling us with their
music. Their drums are neatly carved from the trunk of a tree, and have
a small hole in the side covered with a bit of spider's web: the ends
are covered with the skin of an antelope pegged on; and when they
wish to tighten it, they hold it to the fire to make it contract: the
instruments are beaten with the hands.

The piano, named "marimba", consists of two bars of wood placed side
by side, here quite straight, but, farther north, bent round so as to
resemble half the tire of a carriage-wheel; across these are placed
about fifteen wooden keys, each of which is two or three inches broad,
and fifteen or eighteen inches long; their thickness is regulated
according to the deepness of the note required: each of the keys has a
calabash beneath it; from the upper part of each a portion is cut off to
enable them to embrace the bars, and form hollow sounding-boards to the
keys, which also are of different sizes, according to the note required;
and little drumsticks elicit the music. Rapidity of execution seems much
admired among them, and the music is pleasant to the ear. In Angola the
Portuguese use the marimba in their dances.

When nine speakers had concluded their orations, Shinte stood up, and so
did all the people. He had maintained true African dignity of manner all
the while, but my people remarked that he scarcely ever took his eyes
off me for a moment. About a thousand people were present, according to
my calculation, and three hundred soldiers. The sun had now become hot;
and the scene ended by the Mambari discharging their guns.

18TH. We were awakened during the night by a message from Shinte,
requesting a visit at a very unseasonable hour. As I was just in the
sweating stage of an intermittent, and the path to the town lay through
a wet valley, I declined going. Kolimbota, who knows their customs best,
urged me to go; but, independent of sickness, I hated words of the night
and deeds of darkness. "I was neither a hyaena nor a witch." Kolimbota
thought that we ought to conform to their wishes in every thing: I
thought we ought to have some choice in the matter as well, which put
him into high dudgeon. However, at ten next morning we went, and were
led into the courts of Shinte, the walls of which were woven rods, all
very neat and high. Many trees stood within the inclosure and afforded a
grateful shade. These had been planted, for we saw some recently put
in, with grass wound round the trunk to protect them from the sun. The
otherwise waste corners of the streets were planted with sugar-cane and
bananas, which spread their large light leaves over the walls.

The Ficus Indica tree, under which we now sat, had very large leaves,
but showed its relationship to the Indian banian by sending down shoots
toward the ground. Shinte soon came, and appeared a man of upward of
fifty-five years of age, of frank and open countenance, and about
the middle height. He seemed in good humor, and said he had expected
yesterday "that a man who came from the gods would have approached
and talked to him." That had been my own intention in going to the
reception; but when we came and saw the formidable preparations, and all
his own men keeping at least forty yards off from him, I yielded to the
solicitations of my men, and remained by the tree opposite to that under
which he sat. His remark confirmed my previous belief that a frank,
open, fearless manner is the most winning with all these Africans. I
stated the object of my journey and mission, and to all I advanced the
old gentleman clapped his hands in approbation. He replied through a
spokesman; then all the company joined in the response by clapping of
hands too.

After the more serious business was over, I asked if he had ever seen a
white man before. He replied, "Never; you are the very first I have seen
with a white skin and straight hair; your clothing, too, is different
from any we have ever seen." They had been visited by native Portuguese
and Mambari only.

On learning from some of the people that "Shinte's mouth was bitter
for want of tasting ox-flesh," I presented him with an ox, to his great
delight; and, as his country is so well adapted for cattle, I advised
him to begin a trade in cows with the Makololo. He was pleased with the
idea, and when we returned from Loanda, we found that he had profited by
the hint, for he had got three, and one of them justified my opinion of
the country, for it was more like a prize heifer for fatness than any
we had seen in Africa. He soon afterward sent us a basket of green maize
boiled, another of manioc-meal, and a small fowl. The maize shows by
its size the fertility of the black soil of all the valleys here, and so
does the manioc, though no manure is ever applied. We saw manioc attain
a height of six feet and upward, and this is a plant which requires the
very best soil.

During this time Manenko had been extremely busy with all her people
in getting up a very pretty hut and court-yard, to be, as she said, her
residence always when white men were brought by her along the same path.
When she heard that we had given an ox to her uncle, she came forward
to us with the air of one wronged, and explained that "this white man
belonged to her; she had brought him here, and therefore the ox was
hers, not Shinte's." She ordered her men to bring it, got it slaughtered
by them, and presented her uncle with a leg only. Shinte did not seem at
all annoyed at the occurrence.

19TH. I was awakened at an early hour by a messenger from Shinte; but
the thirst of a raging fever being just assuaged by the bursting forth
of a copious perspiration, I declined going for a few hours. Violent
action of the heart all the way to the town did not predispose me to be
patient with the delay which then occurred, probably on account of
the divination being unfavorable: "They could not find Shinte." When I
returned to bed, another message was received, "Shinte wished to say all
he had to tell me at once." This was too tempting an offer, so we
went, and he had a fowl ready in his hand to present, also a basket
of manioc-meal, and a calabash of mead. Referring to the
constantly-recurring attacks of fever, he remarked that it was the only
thing which would prevent a successful issue to my journey, for he had
men to guide me who knew all the paths which led to the white men.
He had himself traveled far when a young man. On asking what he would
recommend for the fever, "Drink plenty of the mead, and as it gets in,
it will drive the fever out." It was rather strong, and I suspect he
liked the remedy pretty well, even though he had no fever. He had always
been a friend to Sebituane, and, now that his son Sekeletu was in his
place, Shinte was not merely a friend, but a father to him; and if a son
asks a favor, the father must give it. He was highly pleased with the
large calabashes of clarified butter and fat which Sekeletu had sent
him, and wished to detain Kolimbota, that he might send a present back
to Sekeletu by his hands. This proposition we afterward discovered
was Kolimbota's own, as he had heard so much about the ferocity of the
tribes through which we were to pass that he wished to save his skin.
It will be seen farther on that he was the only one of our party who
returned with a wound.

We were particularly struck, in passing through the village, with the
punctiliousness of manners shown by the Balonda. The inferiors, on
meeting their superiors in the street, at once drop on their knees
and rub dust on their arms and chest; they continue the salutation of
clapping the hands until the great ones have passed. Sambanza knelt down
in this manner till the son of Shinte had passed him.

We several times saw the woman who occupies the office of drawer of
water for Shinte; she rings a bell as she passes along to give warning
to all to keep out of her way; it would be a grave offense for any one
to come near her, and exercise an evil influence by his presence on the
drink of the chief. I suspect that offenses of the slightest character
among the poor are made the pretext for selling them or their children
to the Mambari. A young man of Lobale had fled into the country of
Shinte, and located himself without showing himself to the chief. This
was considered an offense sufficient to warrant his being seized and
offered for sale while we were there. He had not reported himself, so
they did not know the reason of his running away from his own chief, and
that chief might accuse them of receiving a criminal. It was curious
to notice the effect of the slave-trade in blunting the moral
susceptibility: no chief in the south would treat a fugitive in this
way. My men were horrified at the act, even though old Shinte and his
council had some show of reason on their side; and both the Barotse
and the Makololo declared that, if the Balonda only knew of the policy
pursued by them to fugitives, but few of the discontented would remain
long with Shinte. My men excited the wonder of his people by stating
that every one of them had one cow at least in his possession.

Another incident, which occurred while we were here, may be mentioned,
as of a character totally unknown in the south. Two children, of seven
and eight years old, went out to collect firewood a short distance from
their parents' home, which was a quarter of a mile from the village, and
were kidnapped; the distracted parents could not find a trace of them.
This happened so close to the town, where there are no beasts of prey,
that we suspect some of the high men of Shinte's court were the guilty
parties: they can sell them by night. The Mambari erect large huts of a
square shape to stow these stolen ones in; they are well fed, but aired
by night only. The frequent kidnapping from outlying hamlets explains
the stockades we saw around them; the parents have no redress, for even
Shinte himself seems fond of working in the dark. One night he sent for
me, though I always stated I liked all my dealings to be aboveboard.
When I came he presented me with a slave girl about ten years old; he
said he had always been in the habit of presenting his visitors with a
child. On my thanking him, and saying that I thought it wrong to take
away children from their parents, that I wished him to give up this
system altogether, and trade in cattle, ivory, and bees'-wax, he urged
that she was "to be a child" to bring me water, and that a great man
ought to have a child for the purpose, yet I had none. As I replied that
I had four children, and should be very sorry if my chief were to take
my little girl and give her away, and that I would prefer this child to
remain and carry water for her own mother, he thought I was dissatisfied
with her size, and sent for one a head taller; after many explanations
of our abhorrence of slavery, and how displeasing it must be to God
to see his children selling one another, and giving each other so much
grief as this child's mother must feel, I declined her also. If I could
have taken her into my family for the purpose of instruction, and then
returned her as a free woman, according to a promise I should have made
to the parents, I might have done so; but to take her away, and probably
never be able to secure her return, would have produced no good effect
on the minds of the Balonda; they would not then have seen evidence of
our hatred to slavery, and the kind attentions of my friends would, as
it almost always does in similar cases, have turned the poor thing's
head. The difference in position between them and us is as great as
between the lowest and highest in England, and we know the effects of
sudden elevation on wiser heads than hers, whose owners had not been
born to it.

Shinte was most anxious to see the pictures of the magic lantern; but
fever had so weakening an effect, and I had such violent action of the
heart, with buzzing in the ears, that I could not go for several days;
when I did go for the purpose, he had his principal men and the same
crowd of court beauties near him as at the reception. The first picture
exhibited was Abraham about to slaughter his son Isaac; it was shown
as large as life, and the uplifted knife was in the act of striking the
lad; the Balonda men remarked that the picture was much more like a god
than the things of wood or clay they worshiped. I explained that this
man was the first of a race to whom God had given the Bible we now held,
and that among his children our Savior appeared. The ladies listened
with silent awe; but, when I moved the slide, the uplifted dagger moving
toward them, they thought it was to be sheathed in their bodies instead
of Isaac's. "Mother! mother!" all shouted at once, and off they rushed
helter-skelter, tumbling pell-mell over each other, and over the little
idol-huts and tobacco-bushes: we could not get one of them back again.
Shinte, however, sat bravely through the whole, and afterward examined
the instrument with interest. An explanation was always added after
each time of showing its powers, so that no one should imagine there was
aught supernatural in it; and had Mr. Murray, who kindly brought it from
England, seen its popularity among both Makololo and Balonda, he would
have been gratified with the direction his generosity then took. It was
the only mode of instruction I was ever pressed to repeat. The people
came long distances for the express purpose of seeing the objects and
hearing the explanations.

One can not get away quickly from these chiefs; they like to have the
honor of strangers residing in their villages. Here we had an additional
cause of delay in frequent rains; twenty-four hours never elapsed
without heavy showers; every thing is affected by the dampness; surgical
instruments become all rusty, clothing mildewed, and shoes mouldy; my
little tent was now so rotten and so full of small holes that every
smart shower caused a fine mist to descend on my blanket, and made me
fain to cover the head with it. Heavy dews lay on every thing in the
morning, even inside the tent; there is only a short time of sunshine in
the afternoon, and even that is so interrupted by thunder-showers that
we can not dry our bedding.

The winds coming from the north always bring heavy clouds and rain; in
the south, the only heavy rains noticed are those which come from the
northeast or east. The thermometer falls as low as 72 Degrees when
there is no sunshine, though, when the weather is fair, the protected
thermometer generally rises as high as 82 Degrees, even in the mornings
and evenings.

24TH. We expected to have started to-day, but Sambanza, who had been
sent off early in the morning for guides, returned at midday without
them, and drunk. This was the first case of real babbling intoxication
we had seen in this region. The boyaloa, or beer of the country, has
more of a stupefying than exciting nature; hence the beer-bibbers are
great sleepers; they may frequently be seen lying on their faces
sound asleep. This peculiarity of posture was ascribed, by no less an
authority than Aristotle, to wine, while those who were sent asleep by
beer were believed "to lie upon their backs."

Sambanza had got into a state of inebriation from indulging in mead,
similar to that which Shinte presented to us, which is much more
powerful than boyaloa. As far as we could collect from his incoherent
sentences, Shinte had said the rain was too heavy for our departure, and
the guides still required time for preparation. Shinte himself was busy
getting some meal ready for my use in the journey. As it rained nearly
all day, it was no sacrifice to submit to his advice and remain.
Sambanza staggered to Manenko's hut; she, however, who had never
promised "to love, honor, and obey him," had not been "nursing her wrath
to keep it warm," so she coolly bundled him into the hut, and put him to
bed.

As the last proof of friendship, Shinte came into my tent, though
it could scarcely contain more than one person, looked at all the
curiosities, the quicksilver, the looking-glass, books, hair-brushes,
comb, watch, etc., etc., with the greatest interest; then closing the
tent, so that none of his own people might see the extravagance of which
he was about to be guilty, he drew out from his clothing a string of
beads, and the end of a conical shell, which is considered, in regions
far from the sea, of as great value as the Lord Mayor's badge is in
London. He hung it round my neck, and said, "There, now you HAVE a proof
of my friendship."

My men informed me that these shells are so highly valued in this
quarter, as evidences of distinction, that for two of them a slave
might be bought, and five would be considered a handsome price for
an elephant's tusk worth ten pounds. At our last interview old Shinte
pointed out our principal guide, Intemese, a man about fifty, who was,
he said, ordered to remain by us till we should reach the sea; that I
had now left Sekeletu far behind, and must henceforth look to Shinte
alone for aid, and that it would always be most cheerfully rendered.
This was only a polite way of expressing his wishes for my success. It
was the good words only of the guides which were to aid me from the next
chief, Katema, on to the sea; they were to turn back on reaching him;
but he gave a good supply of food for the journey before us, and, after
mentioning as a reason for letting us go even now that no one could say
we had been driven away from the town, since we had been several days
with him, he gave a most hearty salutation, and we parted with the wish
that God might bless him.




Chapter 17.

Leave Shinte--Manioc Gardens--Mode of preparing the poisonous kind--Its
general Use--Presents of Food--Punctiliousness of the Balonda--
Their Idols and Superstition--Dress of the Balonda--Villages beyond
Lonaje--Cazembe--Our Guides and the Makololo--Night Rains--Inquiries
for English cotton Goods--Intemese's Fiction--Visit from an old
Man--Theft--Industry of our Guide--Loss of Pontoon--Plains covered
with Water--Affection of the Balonda for their Mothers--A Night on an
Island--The Grass on the Plains--Source of the Rivers--Loan of the
Roofs of Huts--A Halt--Fertility of the Country through which the
Lokalueje flows--Omnivorous Fish--Natives' Mode of catching them--
The Village of a Half-brother of Katema, his Speech and Present--Our
Guide's Perversity--Mozenkwa's pleasant Home and Family--Clear Water of
the flooded Rivers--A Messenger from Katema--Quendende's Village: his
Kindness--Crop of Wool--Meet People from the Town of Matiamvo--Fireside
Talk--Matiamvo's Character and Conduct--Presentation at Katema's Court:
his Present, good Sense, and Appearance--Interview on the following
Day--Cattle--A Feast and a Makololo Dance--Arrest of a Fugitive--
Dignified old Courtier--Katema's lax Government--Cold Wind from the
North--Canaries and other singing Birds--Spiders, their Nests and
Webs--Lake Dilolo--Tradition--Sagacity of Ants.



26TH. Leaving Shinte, with eight of his men to aid in carrying our
luggage, we passed, in a northerly direction, down the lovely valley
on which the town stands, then went a little to the west through pretty
open forest, and slept at a village of Balonda. In the morning we had
a fine range of green hills, called Saloisho, on our right, and were
informed that they were rather thickly inhabited by the people of
Shinte, who worked in iron, the ore of which abounds in these hills.

The country through which we passed possessed the same general character
of flatness and forest that we noticed before. The soil is dark, with a
tinge of red--in some places it might be called red--and appeared very
fertile. Every valley contained villages of twenty or thirty huts, with
gardens of manioc, which here is looked upon as the staff of life. Very
little labor is required for its cultivation. The earth is drawn up into
oblong beds, about three feet broad and one in height, and in these are
planted pieces of the manioc stalk, at four feet apart. A crop of beans
or ground-nuts is sown between them, and when these are reaped the land
around the manioc is cleared of weeds. In from ten to eighteen months
after planting, according to the quality of the soil, the roots are fit
for food. There is no necessity for reaping soon, as the roots do not
become bitter and dry until after three years. When a woman takes up the
roots, she thrusts a piece or two of the upper stalks into the hole
she has made, draws back the soil, and a new crop is thereby begun. The
plant grows to a height of six feet, and every part of it is useful: the
leaves may be cooked as a vegetable. The roots are from three to four
inches in diameter, and from twelve to eighteen inches long.

There are two varieties of the manioc or cassava--one sweet and
wholesome, the other bitter and containing poison, but much more
speedy in its growth than the former. This last property causes its
perpetuation. When we reached the village of Kapende, on the banks of
the rivulet Lonaje, we were presented with so much of the poisonous kind
that we were obliged to leave it. To get rid of the poison, the people
place it four days in a pool of water. It then becomes partially
decomposed, and is taken out, stripped of its skin, and exposed to the
sun. When dried, it is easily pounded into a fine white meal, closely
resembling starch, which has either a little of the peculiar taste
arising from decomposition, or no more flavor than starch. When intended
to be used as food, this meal is stirred into boiling water: they put
in as much as can be moistened, one man holding the vessel and the other
stirring the porridge with all his might. This is the common mess of the
country. Though hungry, we could just manage to swallow it with the aid
of a little honey, which I shared with my men as long as it lasted. It
is very unsavory (Scottice: wersh); and no matter how much one may eat,
two hours afterward he is as hungry as ever. When less meal is employed,
the mess is exactly like a basin of starch in the hands of a laundress;
and if the starch were made from diseased potatoes, some idea might be
formed of the Balonda porridge, which hunger alone forced us to
eat. Santuru forbade his nobles to eat it, as it caused coughing and
expectoration.

Our chief guide, Intemese, sent orders to all the villages around our
route that Shinte's friends must have abundance of provisions. Our
progress was impeded by the time requisite for communicating the chief's
desire and consequent preparation of meal. We received far more food
from Shinte's people than from himself. Kapende, for instance, presented
two large baskets of meal, three of manioc roots steeped and dried in
the sun and ready to be converted into flour, three fowls, and seven
eggs, with three smoke-dried fishes; and others gave with similar
liberality. I gave to the head men small bunches of my stock of beads,
with an apology that we were now on our way to the market for these
goods. The present was always politely received.

We had an opportunity of observing that our guides had much more
etiquette than any of the tribes farther south. They gave us food, but
would not partake of it when we had cooked it, nor would they eat their
own food in our presence. When it was cooked they retired into a thicket
and ate their porridge; then all stood up, and clapped their hands, and
praised Intemese for it. The Makololo, who are accustomed to the most
free and easy manners, held out handfuls of what they had cooked to
any of the Balonda near, but they refused to taste. They are very
punctilious in their manners to each other. Each hut has its own fire,
and when it goes out they make it afresh for themselves rather than take
it from a neighbor. I believe much of this arises from superstitious
fears. In the deep, dark forests near each village, as already
mentioned, you see idols intended to represent the human head or a
lion, or a crooked stick smeared with medicine, or simply a small pot of
medicine in a little shed, or miniature huts with little mounds of earth
in them. But in the darker recesses we meet with human faces cut in the
bark of trees, the outlines of which, with the beards, closely resemble
those seen on Egyptian monuments. Frequent cuts are made on the trees
along all the paths, and offerings of small pieces of manioc roots or
ears of maize are placed on branches. There are also to be seen every
few miles heaps of sticks, which are treated in cairn fashion, by every
one throwing a small branch to the heap in passing; or a few sticks are
placed on the path, and each passer-by turns from his course, and forms
a sudden bend in the road to one side. It seems as if their minds were
ever in doubt and dread in these gloomy recesses of the forest, and
that they were striving to propitiate, by their offerings, some superior
beings residing there.

The dress of the Balonda men consists of the softened skins of small
animals, as the jackal or wild cat, hung before and behind from a girdle
round the loins. The dress of the women is of a nondescript character;
but they were not immodest. They stood before us as perfectly
unconscious of any indecorum as we could be with our clothes on. But,
while ignorant of their own deficiency, they could not maintain their
gravity at the sight of the nudity of my men behind. Much to the
annoyance of my companions, the young girls laughed outright whenever
their backs were turned to them.

After crossing the Lonaje, we came to some pretty villages, embowered,
as the negro villages usually are, in bananas, shrubs, and manioc,
and near the banks of the Leeba we formed our encampment in a nest of
serpents, one of which bit one of our men, but the wound was harmless.
The people of the surrounding villages presented us with large
quantities of food, in obedience to the mandate of Shinte, without
expecting any equivalent. One village had lately been transferred hither
from the country of Matiamvo. They, of course, continue to acknowledge
him as paramount chief; but the frequent instances which occur of people
changing from one part of the country to another, show that the great
chiefs possess only a limited power. The only peculiarity we observed in
these people is the habit of plaiting the beard into a three-fold cord.

The town of the Balonda chief Cazembe was pointed out to us as lying to
the N.E. and by E. from the town of Shinte, and great numbers of people
in this quarter have gone thither for the purpose of purchasing copper
anklets, made at Cazembe's, and report the distance to be about five
days' journey. I made inquiries of some of the oldest inhabitants of the
villages at which we were staying respecting the visit of Pereira and
Lacerda to that town. An old gray-headed man replied that they had often
heard of white men before, but never had seen one, and added that one
had come to Cazembe when our informant was young, and returned again
without entering this part of the country. The people of Cazembe are
Balonda or Baloi, and his country has been termed Londa, Lunda, or Lui,
by the Portuguese.

It was always difficult to get our guides to move away from a place.
With the authority of the chief, they felt as comfortable as king's
messengers could, and were not disposed to forego the pleasure of living
at free quarters. My Makololo friends were but ill drilled as yet; and
since they had never left their own country before, except for purposes
of plunder, they did not take readily to the peaceful system we now
meant to follow. They either spoke too imperiously to strangers, or,
when reproved for that, were disposed to follow the dictation of every
one we met. When Intemese, our guide, refused to stir toward the Leeba
on the 31st of January, they would make no effort to induce him to go;
but, having ordered them to get ready, Intemese saw the preparations,
and soon followed the example. It took us about four hours to cross the
Leeba, which is considerably smaller here than where we left it--indeed,
only about a hundred yards wide. It has the same dark mossy hue. The
villagers lent us canoes to effect our passage; and, having gone to
a village about two miles beyond the river, I had the satisfaction of
getting observations for both longitude and latitude--for the former,
the distance between Saturn and the Moon, and for the latter a meridian
altitude of Canopus. Long. 22d 57' E., lat. 12d 6' 6" S.

These were the only opportunities I had of ascertaining my whereabouts
in this part of Londa. Again and again did I take out the instruments,
and, just as all was right, the stars would be suddenly obscured by
clouds. I had never observed so great an amount of cloudiness in any
part of the south country; and as for the rains, I believe that years
at Kolobeng would not have made my little tent so rotten and thin as one
month had done in Londa. I never observed in the south the heavy night
and early morning rains we had in this country. They often continued all
night, then became heavier about an hour before dawn. Or if fair during
the night, as day drew nigh, an extremely heavy, still, pouring rain set
in without warning. Five out of every six days we had this pouring rain,
at or near break of day, for months together; and it soon beat my tent
so thin, that a mist fell through on my face and made every thing damp.
The rains were occasionally, but not always, accompanied with very loud
thunder.

FEBRUARY 1ST. This day we had a fine view of two hills called Piri
(Peeri), meaning "two", on the side of the river we had left. The
country there is named Mokwankwa. And there Intemese informed us one of
Shinte's children was born, when he was in his progress southward from
the country of Matiamvo. This part of the country would thus seem not to
have been inhabited by the people of Shinte at any very remote period.
He told me himself that he had come into his present country by command
of Matiamvo.

Here we were surprised to hear English cotton cloth much more eagerly
inquired after than beads and ornaments. They are more in need of
clothing than the Bechuana tribes living adjacent to the Kalahari
Desert, who have plenty of skins for the purpose. Animals of all kinds
are rare here, and a very small piece of calico is of great value.

In the midst of the heavy rain, which continued all the morning,
Intemese sent to say he was laid up with pains in the stomach, and must
not be disturbed; but when it cleared up, about eleven, I saw our friend
walking off to the village, and talking with a very loud voice. On
reproaching him for telling an untruth, he turned it off with a laugh by
saying he really had a complaint in his stomach, which I might cure
by slaughtering one of the oxen and allowing him to eat beef. He was
evidently reveling in the abundance of good food the chief's orders
brought us; and he did not feel the shame I did when I gave a few beads
only in return for large baskets of meal.

A very old man visited us here with a present of maize: like the others,
he had never before seen a white man, and, when conversing with him,
some of the young men remarked that they were the true ancients, for
they had now seen more wonderful things than their forefathers.

One of Intemese's men stole a fowl given me by a lady of the village.
When charged with the theft, every one of Intemese's party vociferated
his innocence and indignation at being suspected, continuing their
loud asseverations and gesticulations for some minutes. One of my men,
Loyanke, went off to the village, brought the lady who had presented the
fowl to identify it, and then pointed to the hut in which it was hidden.
The Balonda collected round him, evincing great wrath; but Loyanke
seized his battle-axe in the proper manner for striking, and, placing
himself on a little hillock, soon made them moderate their tones.
Intemese then called on me to send one of my people to search the huts
if I suspected his people. The man sent soon found it, and brought it
out, to the confusion of Intemese and the laughter of our party. This
incident is mentioned to show that the greater superstition which exists
here does not lead to the practice of the virtues. We never met an
instance like this of theft from a white man among the Makololo, though
they complain of the Makalaka as addicted to pilfering. The honesty of
the Bakwains has been already noticed. Probably the estimation in which
I was held as a public benefactor, in which character I was not yet
known to the Balonda, may account for the sacredness with which my
property was always treated before. But other incidents which happened
subsequently showed, as well as this, that idolaters are not so virtuous
as those who have no idols.

As the people on the banks of the Leeba were the last of Shinte's tribe
over which Intemese had power, he was naturally anxious to remain as
long as possible. He was not idle, but made a large wooden mortar and
pestle for his wife during our journey. He also carved many wooden
spoons and a bowl; then commenced a basket; but as what he considered
good living was any thing but agreeable to us, who had been accustomed
to milk and maize, we went forward on the 2d without him. He soon
followed, but left our pontoon, saying it would be brought by the head
man of the village. This was a great loss, as we afterward found; it
remained at this village more than a year, and when we returned a mouse
had eaten a hole in it.

We entered on an extensive plain beyond the Leeba, at least twenty miles
broad, and covered with water, ankle deep in the shallowest parts. We
deviated somewhat from our N.W. course by the direction of Intemese, and
kept the hills Piri nearly on our right during a great part of the first
day, in order to avoid the still more deeply flooded plains of Lobale
(Luval?) on the west. These, according to Intemese, are at present
impassable on account of being thigh deep. The plains are so perfectly
level that rain-water, which this was, stands upon them for months
together. They were not flooded by the Leeba, for that was still far
within its banks. Here and there, dotted over the surface, are little
islands, on which grow stunted date-bushes and scraggy trees. The plains
themselves are covered with a thick sward of grass, which conceals
the water, and makes the flats appear like great pale yellow-colored
prairie-lands, with a clear horizon, except where interrupted here and
there by trees. The clear rain-water must have stood some time among the
grass, for great numbers of lotus-flowers were seen in full blow; and
the runs of water tortoises and crabs were observed; other animals also,
which prey on the fish that find their way to the plains.

The continual splashing of the oxen keeps the feet of the rider
constantly wet, and my men complain of the perpetual moisture of the
paths by which we have traveled in Londa as softening their horny soles.
The only information we can glean is from Intemese, who points out the
different localities as we pass along, and among the rest "Mokala
a Mama", his "mamma's home". It was interesting to hear this tall
gray-headed man recall the memories of boyhood. All the Makalaka
children cleave to the mother in cases of separation, or removal from
one part of the country to another. This love for mothers does not argue
superior morality in other respects, or else Intemese has forgotten any
injunctions his mamma may have given him not to tell lies. The respect,
however, with which he spoke of her was quite characteristic of his
race. The Bechuanas, on the contrary, care nothing for their mothers,
but cling to their fathers, especially if they have any expectation of
becoming heirs to their cattle. Our Bakwain guide to the lake, Rachosi,
told me that his mother lived in the country of Sebituane, but, though
a good specimen of the Bechuanas, he laughed at the idea of going so
far as from the Lake Ngami to the Chobe merely for the purpose of seeing
her. Had he been one of the Makalaka, he never would have parted from
her.

We made our beds on one of the islands, and were wretchedly supplied
with firewood. The booths constructed by the men were but sorry shelter,
for the rain poured down without intermission till midday. There is no
drainage for the prodigious masses of water on these plains, except slow
percolation into the different feeders of the Leeba, and into that
river itself. The quantity of vegetation has prevented the country
from becoming furrowed by many rivulets or "nullahs". Were it not so
remarkably flat, the drainage must have been effected by torrents, even
in spite of the matted vegetation.

That these extensive plains are covered with grasses only, and the
little islands with but scraggy trees, may be accounted for by the fact,
observable every where in this country, that, where water stands for any
length of time, trees can not live. The want of speedy drainage destroys
them, and injures the growth of those that are planted on the islands,
for they have no depth of earth not subjected to the souring influence
of the stagnant water. The plains of Lobale, to the west of these, are
said to be much more extensive than any we saw, and their vegetation
possesses similar peculiarities. When the stagnant rain-water has all
soaked in, as must happen during the months in which there is no rain,
travelers are even put to straits for want of water. This is stated
on native testimony; but I can very well believe that level plains, in
which neither wells nor gullies are met with, may, after the dry season,
present the opposite extreme to what we witnessed. Water, however, could
always be got by digging, a proof of which we had on our return when
brought to a stand on this very plain by severe fever: about twelve
miles from the Kasai my men dug down a few feet, and found an abundant
supply; and we saw on one of the islands the garden of a man who, in
the dry season, had drunk water from a well in like manner. Plains
like these can not be inhabited while the present system of cultivation
lasts. The population is not yet so very large as to need them. They
find garden-ground enough on the gentle slopes at the sides of the
rivulets, and possess no cattle to eat off the millions of acres of fine
hay we were now wading through. Any one who has visited the Cape Colony
will understand me when I say that these immense crops resemble sown
grasses more than the tufty vegetation of the south.

I would here request the particular attention of the reader to the
phenomena these periodically deluged plains present, because they have a
most important bearing on the physical geography of a very large portion
of this country. The plains of Lobale, to the west of this, give rise
to a great many streams, which unite, and form the deep, never-failing
Chobe. Similar extensive flats give birth to the Loeti and Kasai, and,
as we shall see further on, all the rivers of an extensive region owe
their origin to oozing bogs, and not to fountains.

When released from our island by the rain ceasing, we marched on till
we came to a ridge of dry inhabited land in the N.W. The inhabitants,
according to custom, lent us the roofs of some huts to save the men the
trouble of booth-making. I suspect that the story in Park's "Travels",
of the men lifting up the hut to place it on the lion, referred to the
roof only. We leave them for the villagers to replace at their leisure.
No payment is expected for the use of them. By night it rained so
copiously that all our beds were flooded from below; and from this time
forth we always made a furrow round each booth, and used the earth to
raise our sleeping-places. My men turned out to work in the wet most
willingly; indeed, they always did. I could not but contrast their
conduct with that of Intemese. He was thoroughly imbued with the slave
spirit, and lied on all occasions without compunction. Untruthfulness is
a sort of refuge for the weak and oppressed. We expected to move on the
4th, but he declared that we were so near Katema's, if we did not send
forward to apprise that chief of our approach, he would certainly impose
a fine. It rained the whole day, so we were reconciled to the delay; but
on Sunday, the 5th, he let us know that we were still two days distant
from Katema. We unfortunately could not manage without him, for the
country was so deluged, we should have been brought to a halt before
we went many miles by some deep valley, every one of which was full of
water. Intemese continued to plait his basket with all his might, and
would not come to our religious service. He seemed to be afraid of our
incantations, but was always merry and jocular.

6TH. Soon after starting we crossed a branch of the Lokalueje by means
of a canoe, and in the afternoon passed over the main stream by a like
conveyance. The former, as is the case with all branches of rivers
in this country, is called nyuana Kalueje (child of the Kalueje).
Hippopotami exist in the Lokalueje, so it may be inferred to be
perennial, as the inhabitants asserted. We can not judge of the size
of the stream from what we now saw. It had about forty yards of deep,
fast-flowing water, but probably not more than half that amount in the
dry season. Besides these, we crossed numerous feeders in our N.N.W.
course, and, there being no canoes, got frequently wet in the course of
the day. The oxen in some places had their heads only above water, and
the stream, flowing over their backs, wetted our blankets, which we used
as saddles. The arm-pit was the only safe spot for carrying the watch,
for there it was preserved from rains above and waters below. The men on
foot crossed these gullies holding up their burdens at arms' length.

The Lokalueje winds from northeast to southwest into the Leeba. The
country adjacent to its banks is extremely fine and fertile, with
here and there patches of forest or clumps of magnificent trees. The
villagers through whose gardens we passed continue to sow and reap all
the year round. The grains, as maize, lotsa ('Pennisetum typhoideum'),
lokesh or millet, are to be seen at all stages of their growth--some
just ripe, while at this time the Makololo crops are not half grown. My
companions, who have a good idea of the different qualities of soils,
expressed the greatest admiration of the agricultural capabilities of
the whole of Londa, and here they were loud in their praises of the
pasturage. They have an accurate idea of the varieties of grasses best
adapted for different kinds of stock, and lament because here there
are no cows to feed off the rich green crop, which at this time imparts
special beauty to the landscape.

Great numbers of the omnivorous feeding fish, 'Glanis siluris', or
mosala, spread themselves over the flooded plains, and, as the waters
retire, try to find their way back again to the rivers. The Balonda make
earthen dikes and hedges across the outlets of the retreating waters,
leaving only small spaces through which the chief part of the water
flows. In these open spaces they plant creels, similar in shape to our
own, into which the fish can enter, but can not return. They secure
large quantities of fish in this way, which, when smoke-dried, make a
good relish for their otherwise insipid food. They use also a weir of
mats made of reeds sewed together, with but half an inch between each.
Open spaces are left for the insertion of the creels as before.

In still water, a fish-trap is employed of the same shape and plan as
the common round wire mouse-trap, which has an opening surrounded with
wires pointing inward. This is made of reeds and supple wands, and food
is placed inside to attract the fish.

Besides these means of catching fish, they use a hook of iron without a
barb; the point is bent inward instead, so as not to allow the fish to
escape. Nets are not so common as in the Zouga and Leeambye, but they
kill large quantities of fishes by means of the bruised leaves of a
shrub, which may be seen planted beside every village in the country.

On the 7th we came to the village of Soana Molopo, a half-brother of
Katema, a few miles beyond the Lokalueje. When we went to visit him, we
found him sitting with about one hundred men. He called on Intemese to
give some account of us, though no doubt it had been done in private
before. He then pronounced the following sentences: "The journey of the
white man is very proper, but Shinte has disturbed us by showing the
path to the Makololo who accompany him. He ought to have taken them
through the country without showing them the towns. We are afraid of
the Makololo." He then gave us a handsome present of food, and seemed
perplexed by my sitting down familiarly, and giving him a few of our
ideas. When we left, Intemese continued busily imparting an account
of all we had given to Shinte and Masiko, and instilling the hope that
Soana Molopo might obtain as much as they had received. Accordingly,
when we expected to move on the morning of the 8th, we got some hints
about the ox which Soana Molopo expected to eat, but we recommended him
to get the breed of cattle for himself, seeing his country was so well
adapted for rearing stock. Intemese also refused to move; he, moreover,
tried to frighten us into parting with an ox by saying that Soana Molopo
would send forward a message that we were a marauding party; but we
packed up and went on without him. We did not absolutely need him, but
he was useful in preventing the inhabitants of secluded villages from
betaking themselves to flight. We wished to be on good terms with
all, and therefore put up with our guide's peccadilloes. His good word
respecting us had considerable influence, and he was always asked if we
had behaved ourselves like men on the way. The Makololo are viewed as
great savages, but Intemese could not justly look with scorn on them,
for he has the mark of a large gash on his arm, got in fighting; and he
would never tell the cause of battle, but boasted of his powers as the
Makololo do, till asked about a scar on his back, betokening any thing
but bravery.

Intemese was useful in cases like that of Monday, when we came upon
a whole village in a forest enjoying their noonday nap. Our sudden
appearance in their midst so terrified them that one woman nearly went
into convulsions from fear. When they saw and heard Intemese, their
terror subsided.

As usual, we were caught by rains after leaving Soana Molopo's, and made
our booths at the house of Mozinkwa, a most intelligent and friendly man
belonging to Katema. He had a fine large garden in cultivation, and well
hedged round. He had made the walls of his compound, or court-yard, of
branches of the banian, which, taking root, had grown to be a live hedge
of that tree. Mozinkwa's wife had cotton growing all round her premises,
and several plants used as relishes to the insipid porridge of the
country. She cultivated also the common castor-oil plant, and a larger
shrub ('Jatropha curcas'), which also yields a purgative oil. Here,
however, the oil is used for anointing the heads and bodies alone.
We saw in her garden likewise the Indian bringalls, yams, and sweet
potatoes. Several trees were planted in the middle of the yard, and
in the deep shade they gave stood the huts of his fine family. His
children, all by one mother, very black, but comely to view, were the
finest negro family I ever saw. We were much pleased with the frank
friendship and liberality of this man and his wife. She asked me to
bring her a cloth from the white man's country; but, when we returned,
poor Mozinkwa's wife was in her grave, and he, as is the custom, had
abandoned trees, garden, and huts to ruin. They can not live on a spot
where a favorite wife has died, probably because unable to bear the
remembrance of the happy times they have spent there, or afraid to
remain in a spot where death has once visited the establishment. If ever
the place is revisited, it is to pray to her, or make some offering.
This feeling renders any permanent village in the country impossible.

We learned from Mozinkwa that Soana Molopo was the elder brother of
Katema, but that he was wanting in wisdom; and Katema, by purchasing
cattle and receiving in a kind manner all the fugitives who came to
him, had secured the birthright to himself, so far as influence in the
country is concerned. Soana's first address to us did not savor much of
African wisdom.

FRIDAY, 10TH. On leaving Mozinkwa's hospitable mansion we crossed
another stream, about forty yards wide, in canoes. While this tedious
process was going on, I was informed that it is called the Mona-Kalueje,
or brother of Kalueje, as it flows into that river; that both the
Kalueje and Livoa flow into the Leeba; and that the Chifumadze, swollen
by the Lotembwa, is a feeder of that river also, below the point where
we lately crossed it. It may be remarked here that these rivers were now
in flood, and that the water was all perfectly clear. The vegetation
on the banks is so thickly planted that the surface of the earth is not
abraded by the torrents. The grass is laid flat, and forms a protection
to the banks, which are generally a stiff black loam. The fact of canoes
being upon them shows that, though not large, they are not like the
southern rivulets, which dry up during most of the year, and render
canoes unnecessary.

As we were crossing the river we were joined by a messenger from Katema,
called Shakatwala. This person was a sort of steward or factotum to his
chief. Every chief has one attached to his person, and, though generally
poor, they are invariably men of great shrewdness and ability. They
act the part of messengers on all important occasions, and possess
considerable authority in the chief's household. Shakatwala informed
us that Katema had not received precise information about us, but if we
were peaceably disposed, as he loved strangers, we were to come to his
town. We proceeded forthwith, but were turned aside, by the strategy of
our friend Intemese, to the village of Quendende, the father-in-law
of Katema. This fine old man was so very polite that we did not regret
being obliged to spend Sunday at his village. He expressed his pleasure
at having a share in the honor of a visit as well as Katema, though it
seemed to me that the conferring that pleasure required something like a
pretty good stock of impudence, in leading twenty-seven men through
the country without the means of purchasing food. My men did a little
business for themselves in the begging line; they generally commenced
every interview with new villagers by saying "I have come from afar;
give me something to eat." I forbade this at first, believing that, as
the Makololo had a bad name, the villagers gave food from fear. But,
after some time, it was evident that in many cases maize and manioc were
given from pure generosity. The first time I came to this conclusion was
at the house of Mozinkwa; scarcely any one of my men returned from
it without something in his hand; and as they protested they had not
begged, I asked himself, and found that it was the case, and that he had
given spontaneously. In other parts the chiefs attended to my wants,
and the common people gave liberally to my men. I presented some of my
razors and iron spoons to different head men, but my men had nothing to
give; yet every one tried to appropriate an individual in each village
as "Molekane", or comrade, and the villagers often assented; so, if the
reader remembers the molekane system of the Mopato, he may perceive that
those who presented food freely would expect the Makololo to treat them
in like manner, should they ever be placed in similar circumstances.
Their country is so fertile that they are in no want of food themselves;
however, their generosity was remarkable; only one woman refused to
give some of my men food, but her husband calling out to her to be more
liberal, she obeyed, scolding all the while.

In this part of the country, buffaloes, elands, koodoos, and various
antelopes are to be found, but we did not get any, as they are
exceedingly wary from being much hunted. We had the same woodland and
meadow as before, with here and there pleasant negro villages; and being
all in good health, could enjoy the fine green scenery.

Quendende's head was a good specimen of the greater crop of wool with
which the negroes of Londa are furnished. The front was parted in the
middle, and plaited into two thick rolls, which, falling down behind the
ears, reached the shoulders; the rest was collected into a large knot,
which lay on the nape of the neck. As he was an intelligent man, we had
much conversation together: he had just come from attending the funeral
of one of his people, and I found that the great amount of drum-beating
which takes place on these occasions was with the idea that the Barimo,
or spirits, could be drummed to sleep. There is a drum in every village,
and we often hear it going from sunset to sunrise. They seem to look
upon the departed as vindictive beings, and, I suspect, are more
influenced by fear than by love. In beginning to speak on religious
subjects with those who have never heard of Christianity, the great
fact of the Son of God having come down from heaven to die for us is the
prominent theme. No fact more striking can be mentioned. "He actually
came to men. He himself told us about his Father, and the dwelling-place
whither he has gone. We have his words in this book, and he really
endured punishment in our stead from pure love," etc. If this fails to
interest them, nothing else will succeed.

We here met with some people just arrived from the town of Matiamvo
(Muata yanvo), who had been sent to announce the death of the late
chieftain of that name. Matiamvo is the hereditary title, muata meaning
lord or chief. The late Matiamvo seems, from the report of these men, to
have become insane, for he is said to have sometimes indulged the whim
of running a muck in the town and beheading whomsoever he met, until
he had quite a heap of human heads. Matiamvo explained this conduct by
saying that his people were too many, and he wanted to diminish them.
He had absolute power of life and death. On inquiring whether human
sacrifices were still made, as in the time of Pereira, at Cazembe's, we
were informed that these had never been so common as was represented
to Pereira, but that it occasionally happened, when certain charms were
needed by the chief, that a man was slaughtered for the sake of some
part of his body. He added that he hoped the present chief would not
act like his (mad) predecessor, but kill only those who were guilty of
witchcraft or theft. These men were very much astonished at the liberty
enjoyed by the Makololo; and when they found that all my people
held cattle, we were told that Matiamvo alone had a herd. One very
intelligent man among them asked, "If he should make a canoe, and take
it down the river to the Makololo, would he get a cow for it?" This
question, which my men answered in the affirmative, was important,
as showing the knowledge of a water communication from the country of
Matiamvo to the Makololo; and the river runs through a fertile country
abounding in large timber. If the tribes have intercourse with each
other, it exerts a good influence on their chiefs to hear what other
tribes think of their deeds. The Makololo have such a bad name, on
account of their perpetual forays, that they have not been known in
Londa except as ruthless destroyers. The people in Matiamvo's country
submit to much wrong from their chiefs, and no voice can be raised
against cruelty, because they are afraid to flee elsewhere.

We left Quendende's village in company with Quendende himself, and the
principal man of the embassadors of Matiamvo, and after two or three
miles' march to the N.W., came to the ford of the Lotembwa, which flows
southward. A canoe was waiting to ferry us over, but it was very tedious
work; for, though the river itself was only eighty yards wide, the whole
valley was flooded, and we were obliged to paddle more than half a mile
to get free of the water. A fire was lit to warm old Quendende, and
enable him to dry his tobacco-leaves. The leaves are taken from the
plant, and spread close to the fire until they are quite dry and crisp;
they are then put into a snuff-box, which, with a little pestle, serves
the purpose of a mill to grind them into powder; it is then used
as snuff. As we sat by the fire, the embassadors communicated their
thoughts freely respecting the customs of their race. When a chief dies,
a number of servants are slaughtered with him to form his company in the
other world. The Barotse followed the same custom, and this and other
usages show them to be genuine negroes, though neither they nor the
Balonda resemble closely the typical form of that people. Quendende said
if he were present on these occasions he would hide his people, so that
they might not be slaughtered. As we go north, the people become more
bloodily superstitious.

We were assured that if the late Matiamvo took a fancy to any thing,
such, for instance, as my watch-chain, which was of silver wire, and was
a great curiosity, as they had never seen metal plaited before, he would
order a whole village to be brought up to buy it from a stranger. When
a slave-trader visited him, he took possession of all his goods; then,
after ten days or a fortnight, he would send out a party of men to
pounce upon some considerable village, and, having killed the head
man, would pay for all the goods by selling the inhabitants. This has
frequently been the case, and nearly all the visitants he ever had were
men of color. On asking if Matiamvo did not know he was a man, and
would be judged, in company with those he destroyed, by a Lord who is no
respector of persons? the embassador replied, "We do not go up to God,
as you do; we are put into the ground." I could not ascertain that even
those who have such a distinct perception of the continued existence of
departed spirits had any notion of heaven; they appear to imagine the
souls to be always near the place of sepulture.

After crossing the River Lotembwa we traveled about eight miles, and
came to Katema's straggling town (lat. 11d 35' 49" S., long. 22d 27'
E.). It is more a collection of villages than a town. We were led out
about half a mile from the houses, that we might make for ourselves the
best lodging we could of the trees and grass, while Intemese was taken
to Katema to undergo the usual process of pumping as to our past conduct
and professions. Katema soon afterward sent a handsome present of food.

Next morning we had a formal presentation, and found Katema seated on a
sort of throne, with about three hundred men on the ground around, and
thirty women, who were said to be his wives, close behind him. The main
body of the people were seated in a semicircle, at a distance of fifty
yards. Each party had its own head man stationed at a little distance
in front, and, when beckoned by the chief, came near him as councilors.
Intemese gave our history, and Katema placed sixteen large baskets of
meal before us, half a dozen fowls, and a dozen eggs, and expressed
regret that we had slept hungry: he did not like any stranger to suffer
want in his town; and added, "Go home, and cook and eat, and you will
then be in a fit state to speak to me at an audience I will give you
to-morrow." He was busily engaged in hearing the statements of a large
body of fine young men who had fled from Kangenke, chief of Lobale,
on account of his selling their relatives to the native Portuguese who
frequent his country. Katema is a tall man, about forty years of age,
and his head was ornamented with a helmet of beads and feathers. He had
on a snuff-brown coat, with a broad band of tinsel down the arms, and
carried in his hand a large tail made of the caudal extremities of a
number of gnus. This has charms attached to it, and he continued waving
it in front of himself all the time we were there. He seemed in good
spirits, laughing heartily several times. This is a good sign, for a man
who shakes his sides with mirth is seldom difficult to deal with. When
we rose to take leave, all rose with us, as at Shinte's.

Returning next morning, Katema addressed me thus: "I am the great Moene
(lord) Katema, the fellow of Matiamvo. There is no one in the country
equal to Matiamvo and me. I have always lived here, and my forefathers
too. There is the house in which my father lived. You found no human
skulls near the place where you are encamped. I never killed any of the
traders; they all come to me. I am the great Moene Katema, of whom you
have heard." He looked as if he had fallen asleep tipsy, and dreamed of
his greatness. On explaining my objects to him, he promptly pointed out
three men who would be our guides, and explained that the northwest path
was the most direct, and that by which all traders came, but that the
water at present standing on the plains would reach up to the loins; he
would therefore send us by a more northerly route, which no trader had
yet traversed. This was more suited to our wishes, for we never found a
path safe that had been trodden by slave-traders.

We presented a few articles, which pleased him highly: a small shawl,
a razor, three bunches of beads, some buttons, and a powder-horn.
Apologizing for the insignificance of the gift, I wished to know what
I could bring him from Loanda, saying, not a large thing, but something
small. He laughed heartily at the limitation, and replied, "Every thing
of the white people would be acceptable, and he would receive any thing
thankfully; but the coat he then had on was old, and he would like
another." I introduced the subject of the Bible, but one of the old
councilors broke in, told all he had picked up from the Mambari, and
glided off into several other subjects. It is a misery to speak through
an interpreter, as I was now forced to do. With a body of men like mine,
composed as they were of six different tribes, and all speaking the
language of the Bechuanas, there was no difficulty in communicating on
common subjects with any tribe we came to; but doling out a story in
which they felt no interest, and which I understood only sufficiently
well to perceive that a mere abridgment was given, was uncommonly
slow work. Neither could Katema's attention be arrested, except by
compliments, of which they have always plenty to bestow as well as
receive. We were strangers, and knew that, as Makololo, we had not the
best of characters, yet his treatment of us was wonderfully good and
liberal.

I complimented him on the possession of cattle, and pleased him by
telling him how he might milk the cows. He has a herd of about thirty,
really splendid animals, all reared from two which he bought from the
Balobale when he was young. They are generally of a white color, and are
quite wild, running off with graceful ease like a herd of elands on the
approach of a stranger. They excited the unbounded admiration of the
Makololo, and clearly proved that the country was well adapted for them.
When Katema wishes to slaughter one, he is obliged to shoot it as if
it were a buffalo. Matiamvo is said to possess a herd of cattle in a
similar state. I never could feel certain as to the reason why they do
not all possess cattle in a country containing such splendid pasturage.

As Katema did not offer an ox, as would have been done by a Makololo
or Caffre chief, we slaughtered one of our own, and all of us were
delighted to get a meal of meat, after subsisting so long on the light
porridge and green maize of Londa. On occasions of slaughtering an
animal, some pieces of it are in the fire before the skin is all removed
from the body. A frying-pan full of these pieces having been got quickly
ready, my men crowded about their father, and I handed some all round.
It was a strange sight to the Balonda, who were looking on, wondering.
I offered portions to them too, but these were declined, though they
are excessively fond of a little animal food to eat with their vegetable
diet. They would not eat with us, but they would take the meat and cook
it in their own way, and then use it. I thought at one time that they
had imported something from the Mohammedans, and the more especially as
an exclamation of surprise, "Allah", sounds like the Illah of the
Arabs; but we found, a little farther on, another form of salutation,
of Christian (?) origin, "Ave-rie" (Ave Marie). The salutations probably
travel farther than the faith. My people, when satisfied with a meal
like that which they enjoy so often at home, amused themselves by an
uproarious dance. Katema sent to ask what I had given them to produce so
much excitement. Intemese replied it was their custom, and they meant no
harm. The companion of the ox we slaughtered refused food for two days,
and went lowing about for him continually. He seemed inconsolable for
his loss, and tried again and again to escape back to the Makololo
country. My men remarked, "He thinks they will kill me as well as my
friend." Katema thought it the result of art, and had fears of my skill
in medicine, and of course witchcraft. He refused to see the magic
lantern.

One of the affairs which had been intrusted by Shinte to Intemese
was the rescue of a wife who had eloped with a young man belonging to
Katema. As this was the only case I have met with in the interior in
which a fugitive was sent back to a chief against his own will, I am
anxious to mention it. On Intemese claiming her as his master's wife,
she protested loudly against it, saying "she knew she was not going back
to be a wife again; she was going back to be sold to the Mambari." My
men formed many friendships with the people of Katema, and some of the
poorer classes said in confidence, "We wish our children could go back
with you to the Makololo country; here we are all in danger of being
sold." My men were of opinion that it was only the want of knowledge of
the southern country which prevented an exodus of all the lower portions
of Londa population thither.

It is remarkable how little people living in a flat forest country like
this know of distant tribes. An old man, who said he had been born about
the same time as the late Matiamvo, and had been his constant companion
through life, visited us; and as I was sitting on some grass in front
of the little gipsy tent mending my camp stool, I invited him to take
a seat on the grass beside me. This was peremptorily refused: "he had
never sat on the ground during the late chief's reign, and he was not
going to degrade himself now." One of my men handed him a log of wood
taken from the fire, and helped him out of the difficulty. When I
offered him some cooked meat on a plate, he would not touch that either,
but would take it home. So I humored him by sending a servant to bear a
few ounces of meat to the town behind him. He mentioned the Lolo (Lulua)
as the branch of the Leeambye which flows southward or S.S.E.; but the
people of Matiamvo had never gone far down it, as their chief had always
been afraid of encountering a tribe whom, from the description given,
I could recognize as the Makololo. He described five rivers as falling
into the Lolo, viz., the Lishish, Liss or Lise, Kalileme, Ishidish, and
Molong. None of these are large, but when they are united in the Lolo
they form a considerable stream. The country through which the Lolo
flows is said to be flat, fertile, well peopled, and there are large
patches of forest. In this report he agreed perfectly with the people of
Matiamvo, whom we had met at Quendende's village. But we never could get
him, or any one in this quarter, to draw a map on the ground, as people
may readily be got to do in the south.

Katema promised us the aid of some of his people as carriers, but his
rule is not very stringent or efficient, for they refused to turn out
for the work. They were Balobale; and he remarked on their disobedience
that, though he received them as fugitives, they did not feel grateful
enough to obey, and if they continued rebellious he must drive them back
whence they came; but there is little fear of that, as all the chiefs
are excessively anxious to collect men in great numbers around them.
These Balobale would not go, though our guide Shakatwala ran after some
of them with a drawn sword. This degree of liberty to rebel was very
striking to us, as it occurred in a country where people may be sold,
and often are so disposed of when guilty of any crime; and we well knew
that open disobedience like this among the Makololo would be punished
with death without much ceremony.

On Sunday, the 19th, both I and several of our party were seized with
fever, and I could do nothing but toss about in my little tent, with the
thermometer above 90 Deg., though this was the beginning of winter, and
my men made as much shade as possible by planting branches of trees
all round and over it. We have, for the first time in my experience in
Africa, had a cold wind from the north. All the winds from that quarter
are hot, and those from the south are cold, but they seldom blow from
either direction.

20TH. We were glad to get away, though not on account of any scarcity
of food; for my men, by giving small presents of meat as an earnest of
their sincerity, formed many friendships with the people of Katema.
We went about four or five miles in a N.N.W. direction, then two in a
westerly one, and came round the small end of Lake Dilolo. It seemed, as
far as we could at this time discern, to be like a river a quarter of
a mile wide. It is abundantly supplied with fish and hippopotami; the
broad part, which we did not this time see, is about three miles wide,
and the lake is almost seven or eight long. If it be thought strange
that I did not go a few miles to see the broad part, which, according
to Katema, had never been visited by any of the traders, it must be
remembered that in consequence of fever I had eaten nothing for two
entire days, and, instead of sleep, the whole of the nights were
employed in incessant drinking of water, and I was now so glad to get on
in the journey and see some of my fellow fever-patients crawling along,
that I could not brook the delay, which astronomical observations
for accurately determining the geographical position of this most
interesting spot would have occasioned.

We observed among the people of Katema a love for singing-birds. One
pretty little songster, named "cabazo", a species of canary, is kept in
very neatly made cages, having traps on the top to entice its still free
companions. On asking why they kept them in confinement, "Because they
sing sweetly," was the answer. They feed them on the lotsa ('Pennisetum
typhoideum'), of which great quantities are cultivated as food for man,
and these canaries plague the gardeners here, very much in the same way
as our sparrows do at home.

I was pleased to hear the long-forgotten cry of alarm of the canaries
in the woods, and observed one warbling forth its song, and keeping in
motion from side to side, as these birds do in the cage. We saw also
tame pigeons; and the Barotse, who always take care to exalt Santuru,
reminded us that this chief had many doves, and kept canaries which had
reddish heads when the birds attained maturity. Those we now see have
the real canary color on the breast, with a tinge of green; the back,
yellowish green, with darker longitudinal bands meeting in the centre; a
narrow dark band passes from the bill over the eye and back to the bill
again.

The birds of song here set up quite a merry chorus in the mornings, and
abound most near the villages. Some sing as loudly as our thrushes, and
the king-hunter ('Halcyon Senegalensis') makes a clear whirring sound
like that of a whistle with a pea in it. During the heat of the day all
remain silent, and take their siesta in the shadiest parts of the
trees, but in the cool of the evening they again exert themselves in the
production of pleasant melody. It is remarkable that so many songbirds
abound where there is a general paucity of other animal life. As we went
forward we were struck by the comparative absence of game and the larger
kind of fowls. The rivers contain very few fish. Common flies are not
troublesome, as they are wherever milk is abundant; they are seen in
company with others of the same size and shape, but whose tiny feet do
not tickle the skin, as is the case with their companions. Mosquitoes
are seldom so numerous as to disturb the slumbers of a weary man.

But, though this region is free from common insect plagues, and from
tsetse, it has others. Feeling something running across my forehead as
I was falling asleep, I put up the hand to wipe it off, and was sharply
stung both on the hand and head; the pain was very acute. On obtaining
a light, we found that it had been inflicted by a light-colored spider,
about half an inch in length, and, one of the men having crushed it with
his fingers, I had no opportunity of examining whether the pain had been
produced by poison from a sting or from its mandibles. No remedy was
applied, and the pain ceased in about two hours. The Bechuanas believe
that there is a small black spider in the country whose bite is fatal.
I have not met with an instance in which death could be traced to this
insect, though a very large black, hairy spider, an inch and a quarter
long and three quarters of an inch broad, is frequently seen, having a
process at the end of its front claws similar to that at the end of
the scorpion's tail, and when the bulbous portion of it is pressed, the
poison may be seen oozing out from the point.

We have also spiders in the south which seize their prey by leaping
upon it from a distance of several inches. When alarmed, they can spring
about a foot away from the object of their own fear. Of this kind there
are several varieties.

A large reddish spider ('Mygale') obtains its food in a different manner
than either patiently waiting in ambush or by catching it with a bound.
It runs about with great velocity in and out, behind and around every
object, searching for what it may devour, and, from its size and rapid
motions, excites the horror of every stranger. I never knew it to do any
harm except frightening the nervous, and I believe few could look upon
it for the first time without feeling himself in danger. It is named by
the natives "selali", and is believed to be the maker of a hinged cover
for its nest. You see a door, about the size of a shilling, lying beside
a deep hole of nearly similar diameter. The inside of the door lying
upward, and which attracts your notice, is of a pure white silky
substance, like paper. The outer side is coated over with earth,
precisely like that in which the hole is made. If you try to lift it,
you find it is fastened by a hinge on one side, and, if it is turned
over upon the hole, it fits it exactly, and the earthy side being then
uppermost, it is quite impossible to detect the situation of the nest.
Unfortunately, this cavity for breeding is never seen except when the
owner is out, and has left the door open behind her.

In some parts of the country there are great numbers of a large,
beautiful yellow-spotted spider, the webs of which are about a yard in
diameter. The lines on which these webs are spun are suspended from one
tree to another, and are as thick as coarse thread. The fibres radiate
from a central point, where the insect waits for its prey. The webs are
placed perpendicularly, and a common occurrence in walking is to get the
face enveloped in them as a lady is in a veil.

Another kind of spider lives in society, and forms so great a collection
of webs placed at every angle, that the trunk of a tree surrounded by
them can not be seen. A piece of hedge is often so hidden by this spider
that the branches are invisible. Another is seen on the inside of the
walls of huts among the Makololo in great abundance. It is round in
shape, spotted, brown in color, and the body half an inch in diameter;
the spread of the legs is an inch and a half. It makes a smooth spot
for itself on the wall, covered with the above-mentioned white silky
substance. There it is seen standing the whole day, and I never could
ascertain how it fed. It has no web, but a carpet, and is a harmless,
though an ugly neighbor.

Immediately beyond Dilolo there is a large flat about twenty miles in
breadth. Here Shakatwala insisted on our remaining to get supplies of
food from Katema's subjects, before entering the uninhabited watery
plains. When asked the meaning of the name Dilolo, Shakatwala gave the
following account of the formation of the lake. A female chief, called
Moene (lord) Monenga, came one evening to the village of Mosogo, a man
who lived in the vicinity, but who had gone to hunt with his dogs. She
asked for a supply of food, and Mosogo's wife gave her a sufficient
quantity. Proceeding to another village standing on the spot now
occupied by the water, she preferred the same demand, and was not only
refused, but, when she uttered a threat for their niggardliness, was
taunted with the question, "What could she do though she were thus
treated?" In order to show what she could do, she began a song, in slow
time, and uttered her own name, Monenga-wo-o. As she prolonged the
last note, the village, people, fowls, and dogs sank into the space now
called Dilolo. When Kasimakate, the head man of this village, came home
and found out the catastrophe, he cast himself into the lake, and is
supposed to be in it still. The name is derived from "ilolo", despair,
because this man gave up all hope when his family was destroyed. Monenga
was put to death. This may be a faint tradition of the Deluge, and it is
remarkable as the only one I have met with in this country.

Heavy rains prevented us from crossing the plain in front (N.N.W.) in
one day, and the constant wading among the grass hurt the feet of the
men. There is a footpath all the way across, but as this is worn down
beneath the level of the rest of the plain, it is necessarily the
deepest portion, and the men, avoiding it, make a new walk by its side.
A path, however narrow, is a great convenience, as any one who has
traveled on foot in Africa will admit. The virtual want of it here
caused us to make slow and painful progress.

Ants surely are wiser than some men, for they learn by experience. They
have established themselves even on these plains, where water stands so
long annually as to allow the lotus, and other aqueous plants, to come
to maturity. When all the ant horizon is submerged a foot deep, they
manage to exist by ascending to little houses built of black tenacious
loam on stalks of grass, and placed higher than the line of inundation.
This must have been the result of experience; for, if they had waited
till the water actually invaded their terrestrial habitations, they
would not have been able to procure materials for their aerial quarters,
unless they dived down to the bottom for every mouthful of clay. Some of
these upper chambers are about the size of a bean, and others as large
as a man's thumb. They must have built in anticipation, and if so, let
us humbly hope that the sufferers by the late inundations in France may
be possessed of as much common sense as the little black ants of the
Dilolo plains.




Chapter 18.

The Watershed between the northern and southern Rivers--A deep Valley--
Rustic Bridge--Fountains on the Slopes of the Valleys--Village of
Kabinje--Good Effects of the Belief in the Power of Charms--Demand
for Gunpowder and English Calico--The Kasai--Vexatious Trick--Want
of Food--No Game--Katende's unreasonable Demand--A grave
Offense--Toll-bridge Keeper--Greedy Guides--Flooded Valleys--Swim the
Nyuana Loke--Prompt Kindness of my Men--Makololo Remarks on the rich
uncultivated Valleys--Difference in the Color of Africans--Reach a
Village of the Chiboque--The Head Man's impudent Message--Surrounds our
Encampment with his Warriors--The Pretense--Their Demand--Prospect of
a Fight--Way in which it was averted--Change our Path--Summer--
Fever--Beehives and the Honey-guide--Instinct of Trees--Climbers--The
Ox Sinbad--Absence of Thorns in the Forests--Plant peculiar to a
forsaken Garden--Bad Guides--Insubordination suppressed--Beset by
Enemies--A Robber Party--More Troubles--Detained by Ionga Panza--His
Village--Annoyed by Bangala Traders--My Men discouraged--Their
Determination and Precaution.



24TH OF FEBRUARY. On reaching unflooded lands beyond the plain, we
found the villages there acknowledged the authority of the chief named
Katende, and we discovered, also, to our surprise, that the almost
level plain we had passed forms the watershed between the southern and
northern rivers, for we had now entered a district in which the rivers
flowed in a northerly direction into the Kasai or Loke, near to which
we now were, while the rivers we had hitherto crossed were all running
southward. Having met with kind treatment and aid at the first
village, Katema's guides returned, and we were led to the N.N.W. by the
inhabitants, and descended into the very first really deep valley we had
seen since leaving Kolobeng. A stream ran along the bottom of a slope of
three or four hundred yards from the plains above.

We crossed this by a rustic bridge at present submerged thigh-deep by
the rains. The trees growing along the stream of this lovely valley were
thickly planted and very high. Many had sixty or eighty feet of clean
straight trunk, and beautiful flowers adorned the ground beneath them.
Ascending the opposite side, we came, in two hours' time, to another
valley, equally beautiful, and with a stream also in its centre. It may
seem mere trifling to note such an unimportant thing as the occurrence
of a valley, there being so many in every country under the sun; but as
these were branches of that in which the Kasai or Loke flows, and both
that river and its feeders derive their water in a singular manner from
the valley sides, I may be excused for calling particular attention to
the more furrowed nature of the country.

At different points on the slopes of these valleys which we now for the
first time entered, there are oozing fountains, surrounded by clumps of
the same evergreen, straight, large-leaved trees we have noticed along
the streams. These spots are generally covered with a mat of grassy
vegetation, and possess more the character of bogs than of fountains.
They slowly discharge into the stream below, and are so numerous along
both banks as to give a peculiar character to the landscape. These
groups of sylvan vegetation are generally of a rounded form, and the
trunks of the trees are tall and straight, while those on the level
plains above are low and scraggy in their growth. There can be little
doubt but that the water, which stands for months on the plains, soaks
in, and finds its way into the rivers and rivulets by percolating
through the soil, and out by these oozing bogs; and the difference
between the growth of these trees, though they be of different species,
may be a proof that the stuntedness of those on the plains is owing
to being, in the course of each year, more subjected to drought than
moisture.

Reaching the village of Kabinje, in the evening he sent us a present of
tobacco, Mutokuane or "bang" ('Cannabis sativa'), and maize, by the
man who went forward to announce our arrival, and a message expressing
satisfaction at the prospect of having trade with the coast. The westing
we were making brought us among people who are frequently visited by the
Mambari as slave-dealers. This trade causes bloodshed; for when a poor
family is selected as the victims, it is necessary to get rid of the
older members of it, because they are supposed to be able to give
annoyance to the chief afterward by means of enchantments. The belief
in the power of charms for good or evil produces not only honesty, but
a great amount of gentle dealing. The powerful are often restrained in
their despotism from a fear that the weak and helpless may injure them
by their medical knowledge. They have many fears. A man at one of the
villages we came to showed us the grave of his child, and, with much
apparent feeling, told us she had been burned to death in her hut. He
had come with all his family, and built huts around it in order to weep
for her. He thought, if the grave were left unwatched, the witches would
come and bewitch them by putting medicines on the body. They have a more
decided belief in the continued existence of departed spirits than any
of the more southerly tribes. Even the Barotse possess it in a strong
degree, for one of my men of that tribe, on experiencing headache, said,
with a sad and thoughtful countenance, "My father is scolding me because
I do not give him any of the food I eat." I asked where his father was.
"Among the Barimo," was the reply.

When we wished to move on, Kabinje refused a guide to the next village
because he was at war with it; but, after much persuasion, he consented,
provided that the guide should be allowed to return as soon as he came
in sight of the enemy's village. This we felt to be a misfortune, as the
people all suspect a man who comes telling his own tale; but there being
no help for it, we went on, and found the head man of a village on the
rivulet Kalomba, called Kangenke, a very different man from what his
enemy represented. We found, too, that the idea of buying and selling
took the place of giving for friendship. As I had nothing with which to
purchase food except a parcel of beads which were preserved for worse
times, I began to fear that we should soon be compelled to suffer more
from hunger than we had done. The people demanded gunpowder for every
thing. If we had possessed any quantity of that article, we should have
got on well, for here it is of great value. On our return, near
this spot we found a good-sized fowl was sold for a single charge of
gunpowder. Next to that, English calico was in great demand, and so were
beads; but money was of no value whatever. Gold is quite unknown; it
is thought to be brass; trade is carried on by barter alone. The people
know nothing of money. A purse-proud person would here feel the ground
move from beneath his feet. Occasionally a large piece of copper, in the
shape of a St. Andrew's cross, is offered for sale.

FEBRUARY 27TH. Kangenke promptly furnished guides this morning, so
we went briskly on a short distance, and came to a part of the Kasye,
Kasai, or Loke, where he had appointed two canoes to convey us across.
This is a most beautiful river, and very much like the Clyde in
Scotland. The slope of the valley down to the stream is about five
hundred yards, and finely wooded. It is, perhaps, one hundred yards
broad, and was winding slowly from side to side in the beautiful green
glen, in a course to the north and northeast. In both the directions
from which it came and to which it went it seemed to be alternately
embowered in sylvan vegetation, or rich meadows covered with tall grass.
The men pointed out its course, and said, "Though you sail along it for
months, you will turn without seeing the end of it."

While at the ford of the Kasai we were subjected to a trick, of which we
had been forewarned by the people of Shinte. A knife had been dropped by
one of Kangenke's people in order to entrap my men; it was put down near
our encampment, as if lost, the owner in the mean time watching till one
of my men picked it up. Nothing was said until our party was divided,
one half on this, and the other on that bank of the river. Then the
charge was made to me that one of my men had stolen a knife. Certain of
my people's honesty, I desired the man, who was making a great noise, to
search the luggage for it; the unlucky lad who had taken the bait then
came forward and confessed that he had the knife in a basket, which was
already taken over the river. When it was returned, the owner would not
receive it back unless accompanied with a fine. The lad offered beads,
but these were refused with scorn. A shell hanging round his neck,
similar to that which Shinte had given me, was the object demanded, and
the victim of the trick, as we all knew it to be, was obliged to part
with his costly ornament. I could not save him from the loss, as all had
been forewarned; and it is the universal custom among the Makololo and
many other tribes to show whatever they may find to the chief person of
their company, and make a sort of offer of it to him. This lad ought to
have done so to me; the rest of the party always observed this custom. I
felt annoyed at the imposition, but the order we invariably followed in
crossing a river forced me to submit. The head of the party remained to
be ferried over last; so, if I had not come to terms, I would have been,
as I always was in crossing rivers which we could not swim, completely
in the power of the enemy. It was but rarely we could get a head man so
witless as to cross a river with us, and remain on the opposite bank
in a convenient position to be seized as a hostage in case of my being
caught.

This trick is but one of a number equally dishonorable which are
practiced by tribes that lie adjacent to the more civilized settlements.
The Balonda farther east told us, by way of warning, that many parties
of the more central tribes had at various periods set out, in order to
trade with the white men themselves, instead of through the Mambari, but
had always been obliged to return without reaching their destination, in
consequence of so many pretexts being invented by the tribes encountered
in the way for fining them of their ivory.

This ford was in 11d 15' 47" S. latitude, but the weather was so
excessively cloudy we got no observation for longitude.

We were now in want of food, for, to the great surprise of my
companions, the people of Kangenke gave nothing except by way of sale,
and charged the most exorbitant prices for the little meal and manioc
they brought. The only article of barter my men had was a little fat
saved from the ox we slaughtered at Katema's, so I was obliged to give
them a portion of the stock of beads. One day (29th) of westing brought
us from the Kasai to near the village of Katende, and we saw that we
were in a land where no hope could be entertained of getting supplies of
animal food, for one of our guides caught a light-blue colored mole and
two mice for his supper. The care with which he wrapped them up in a
leaf and slung them on his spear told that we could not hope to enjoy
any larger game. We saw no evidence of any animals besides; and, on
coming to the villages beyond this, we often saw boys and girls engaged
in digging up these tiny quadrupeds.

Katende sent for me on the day following our arrival, and, being quite
willing to visit him, I walked, for this purpose, about three miles from
our encampment. When we approached the village we were desired to enter
a hut, and, as it was raining at the time, we did so. After a long time
spent in giving and receiving messages from the great man, we were told
that he wanted either a man, a tusk, beads, copper rings, or a shell, as
payment for leave to pass through his country. No one, we were assured,
was allowed that liberty, or even to behold him, without something of
the sort being presented. Having humbly explained our circumstances, and
that he could not expect to "catch a humble cow by the horns"--a proverb
similar to ours that "you can't draw milk out of a stone"--we were told
to go home, and he would speak again to us next day. I could not avoid
a hearty laugh at the cool impudence of the savage, and made the best
of my way home in the still pouring rain. My men were rather nettled at
this want of hospitality, but, after talking over the matter with one of
Katende's servants, he proposed that some small article should be given,
and an attempt made to please Katende. I turned out my shirts, and
selected the worst one as a sop for him, and invited Katende to come and
choose any thing else I had, but added that, when I should reach my own
chief naked, and was asked what I had done with my clothes, I should
be obliged to confess that I had left them with Katende. The shirt was
dispatched to him, and some of my people went along with the servant;
they soon returned, saying that the shirt had been accepted, and guides
and food too would be sent to us next day. The chief had, moreover,
expressed a hope to see me on my return. He is reported to be very
corpulent. The traders who have come here seem to have been very timid,
yielding to every demand made on the most frivolous pretenses. One of my
men, seeing another much like an acquaintance at home, addressed him by
the name of the latter in sport, telling him, at the same time, why
he did so; this was pronounced to be a grave offense, and a large fine
demanded; when the case came before me I could see no harm in what had
been done, and told my people not to answer the young fellow. The latter
felt himself disarmed, for it is chiefly in a brawl they have power;
then words are spoken in anger which rouse the passions of the
complainant's friends. In this case, after vociferating some time, the
would-be offended party came and said to my man that, if they exchanged
some small gift, all would be right, but, my man taking no notice of
him, he went off rather crestfallen.

My men were as much astonished as myself at the demand for payment
for leave to pass, and the almost entire neglect of the rules of
hospitality. Katende gave us only a little meal and manioc, and a fowl.
Being detained two days by heavy rains, we felt that a good stock of
patience was necessary in traveling through this country in the rainy
season.

Passing onward without seeing Katende, we crossed a small rivulet, the
Sengko, by which we had encamped, and after two hours came to another,
the Totelo, which was somewhat larger, and had a bridge over it. At the
farther end of this structure stood a negro, who demanded fees. He said
the bridge was his; the path his; the guides were his children; and
if we did not pay him he would prevent farther progress. This piece of
civilization I was not prepared to meet, and stood a few seconds looking
at our bold toll-keeper, when one of my men took off three copper
bracelets, which paid for the whole party. The negro was a better man
than he at first seemed, for he immediately went to his garden and
brought us some leaves of tobacco as a present.

When we had got fairly away from the villages, the guides from Kangenke
sat down and told us that there were three paths in front, and, if we
did not at once present them with a cloth, they would leave us to take
whichever we might like best. As I had pointed out the direction in
which Loanda lay, and had only employed them for the sake of knowing the
paths between villages which lay along our route, and always objected
when they led us in any other than the Loanda direction, I wished my
men now to go on without the guides, trusting to ourselves to choose
the path which would seem to lead us in the direction we had always
followed. But Mashauana, fearing lest we might wander, asked leave to
give his own cloth, and when the guides saw that, they came forward
shouting "Averie, Averie!"

In the afternoon of this day we came to a valley about a mile wide,
filled with clear, fast-flowing water. The men on foot were chin deep in
crossing, and we three on ox-back got wet to the middle, the weight of
the animals preventing them from swimming. A thunder-shower descending
completed the partial drenching of the plain, and gave a cold,
uncomfortable "packing in a wet blanket" that night. Next day we found
another flooded valley about half a mile wide, with a small and now
deep rivulet in its middle, flowing rapidly to the S.S.E., or toward
the Kasai. The middle part of this flood, being the bed of what at other
times is the rivulet, was so rapid that we crossed by holding on to the
oxen, and the current soon dashed them to the opposite bank; we then
jumped off, and, the oxen being relieved of their burdens, we could pull
them on to the shallower part. The rest of the valley was thigh deep and
boggy, but holding on by the belt which fastened the blanket to the ox,
we each floundered through the nasty slough as well as we could. These
boggy parts, lying parallel to the stream, were the most extensive we
had come to: those mentioned already were mere circumscribed patches;
these extended for miles along each bank; but even here, though the
rapidity of the current was very considerable, the thick sward of grass
was "laid" flat along the sides of the stream, and the soil was not
abraded so much as to discolor the flood. When we came to the opposite
side of this valley, some pieces of the ferruginous conglomerate, which
forms the capping to all other rocks in a large district around and
north of this, cropped out, and the oxen bit at them as if surprised
by the appearance of stone as much as we were; or it may have contained
some mineral of which they stood in need. We had not met with a stone
since leaving Shinte's. The country is covered with deep alluvial soil
of a dark color and very fertile.

In the afternoon we came to another stream, nyuana Loke (or child of
Loke), with a bridge over it. The men had to swim off to each end of the
bridge, and when on it were breast deep; some preferred holding on by
the tails of the oxen the whole way across. I intended to do this too;
but, riding to the deep part, before I could dismount and seize the helm
the ox dashed off with his companions, and his body sank so deep that I
failed in my attempt even to catch the blanket belt, and if I pulled the
bridle the ox seemed as if he would come backward upon me, so I struck
out for the opposite bank alone. My poor fellows were dreadfully alarmed
when they saw me parted from the cattle, and about twenty of them made
a simultaneous rush into the water for my rescue, and just as I reached
the opposite bank one seized my arm, and another threw his around my
body. When I stood up, it was most gratifying to see them all struggling
toward me. Some had leaped off the bridge, and allowed their cloaks to
float down the stream. Part of my goods, abandoned in the hurry, were
brought up from the bottom after I was safe. Great was the pleasure
expressed when they found that I could swim, like themselves, without
the aid of a tail, and I did and do feel grateful to these poor heathens
for the promptitude with which they dashed in to save, as they thought,
my life. I found my clothes cumbersome in the water; they could swim
quicker from being naked. They swim like dogs, not frog-fashion, as we
do.

In the evening we crossed the small rivulet Lozeze, and came to some
villages of the Kasabi, from whom we got some manioc in exchange for
beads. They tried to frighten us by telling of the deep rivers we should
have to cross in our way. I was drying my clothes by turning myself
round and round before the fire. My men laughed at the idea of being
frightened by rivers. "We can all swim: who carried the white man across
the river but himself?" I felt proud of their praise.

SATURDAY, 4TH MARCH. Came to the outskirts of the territory of the
Chiboque. We crossed the Konde and Kaluze rivulets. The former is a
deep, small stream with a bridge, the latter insignificant; the valleys
in which these rivulets run are beautifully fertile. My companions
are continually lamenting over the uncultivated vales in such words as
these: "What a fine country for cattle! My heart is sore to see such
fruitful valleys for corn lying waste." At the time these words were
put down I had come to the belief that the reason why the inhabitants of
this fine country possess no herds of cattle was owing to the despotic
sway of their chiefs, and that the common people would not be allowed to
keep any domestic animals, even supposing they could acquire them; but
on musing on the subject since, I have been led to the conjecture that
the rich, fertile country of Londa must formerly have been infested by
the tsetse, but that, as the people killed off the game on which, in the
absence of man, the tsetse must subsist, the insect was starved out of
the country. It is now found only where wild animals abound, and the
Balonda, by the possession of guns, having cleared most of the country
of all the large game, we may have happened to come just when it was
possible to admit of cattle. Hence the success of Katema, Shinte, and
Matiamvo with their herds. It would not be surprising, though they
know nothing of the circumstance; a tribe on the Zambesi, which I
encountered, whose country was swarming with tsetse, believed that they
could not keep any cattle, because "no one loved them well enough to
give them the medicine of oxen;" and even the Portuguese at Loanda
accounted for the death of the cattle brought from the interior to the
sea-coast by the prejudicial influence of the sea air! One ox, which
I took down to the sea from the interior, died at Loanda, with all
the symptoms of the poison injected by tsetse, which I saw myself in a
district a hundred miles from the coast.

While at the villages of the Kasabi we saw no evidences of want of food
among the people. Our beads were very valuable, but cotton cloth would
have been still more so; as we traveled along, men, women, and children
came running after us, with meal and fowls for sale, which we would
gladly have purchased had we possessed any English manufactures. When
they heard that we had no cloth, they turned back much disappointed.

The amount of population in the central parts of the country may be
called large only as compared with the Cape Colony or the Bechuana
country. The cultivated land is as nothing compared with what might be
brought under the plow. There are flowing streams in abundance, which,
were it necessary, could be turned to the purpose of irrigation with but
little labor. Miles of fruitful country are now lying absolutely waste,
for there is not even game to eat off the fine pasturage, and to recline
under the evergreen, shady groves which we are ever passing in our
progress. The people who inhabit the central region are not all quite
black in color. Many incline to that of bronze, and others are as light
in hue as the Bushmen, who, it may be remembered, afford a proof that
heat alone does not cause blackness, but that heat and moisture combined
do very materially deepen the color. Wherever we find people who have
continued for ages in a hot, humid district, they are deep black, but to
this apparent law there are exceptions, caused by the migrations of both
tribes and individuals; the Makololo, for instance, among the tribes
of the humid central basin, appear of a sickly sallow hue when compared
with the aboriginal inhabitants; the Batoka also, who lived in an
elevated region, are, when seen in company with the Batoka of the
rivers, so much lighter in color, they might be taken for another tribe;
but their language, and the very marked custom of knocking out the upper
front teeth, leave no room for doubt that they are one people.

Apart from the influences of elevation, heat, humidity, and degradation,
I have imagined that the lighter and darker colors observed in the
native population run in five longitudinal bands along the southern
portion of the continent. Those on the seaboard of both the east and
west are very dark; then two bands of lighter color lie about three
hundred miles from each coast, of which the westerly one, bending
round, embraces the Kalahari Desert and Bechuana countries; and then
the central basin is very dark again. This opinion is not given with
any degree of positiveness. It is stated just as it struck my mind in
passing across the country, and if incorrect, it is singular that the
dialects spoken by the different tribes have arranged themselves in a
fashion which seems to indicate migration along the lines of color. The
dialects spoken in the extreme south, whether Hottentot or Caffre, bear
a close affinity to those of the tribes living immediately on their
northern borders; one glides into the other, and their affinities are so
easily detected that they are at once recognized to be cognate. If the
dialects of extreme points are compared, as that of the Caffres and the
tribes near the equator, it is more difficult to recognize the fact,
which is really the case, that all the dialects belong to but two
families of languages. Examination of the roots of the words of the
dialects, arranged in geographical order, shows that they merge into
each other, and there is not nearly so much difference between the
extremes of east and west as between those of north and south, the
dialect spoken at Tete resembling closely that in Angola.

Having, on the afore-mentioned date, reached the village of Njambi, one
of the chiefs of the Chiboque, we intended to pass a quiet Sunday; and
our provisions being quite spent, I ordered a tired riding-ox to be
slaughtered. As we wished to be on good terms with all, we sent the hump
and ribs to Njambi, with the explanation that this was the customary
tribute to chiefs in the part from which we had come, and that we always
honored men in his position. He returned thanks, and promised to send
food. Next morning he sent an impudent message, with a very small
present of meal; scorning the meat he had accepted, he demanded either
a man, an ox, a gun, powder, cloth, or a shell; and in the event of
refusal to comply with his demand, he intimated his intention to prevent
our further progress. We replied, we should have thought ourselves fools
if we had scorned his small present, and demanded other food instead;
and even supposing we had possessed the articles named, no black man
ought to impose a tribute on a party that did not trade in slaves. The
servants who brought the message said that, when sent to the Mambari,
they had always got a quantity of cloth from them for their master, and
now expected the same, or something else as an equivalent, from me.

We heard some of the Chiboque remark, "They have only five guns;"
and about midday, Njambi collected all his people, and surrounded our
encampment. Their object was evidently to plunder us of every thing. My
men seized their javelins, and stood on the defensive, while the young
Chiboque had drawn their swords and brandished them with great fury.
Some even pointed their guns at me, and nodded to each other, as much as
to say, "This is the way we shall do with him." I sat on my camp-stool,
with my double-barreled gun across my knees, and invited the chief to
be seated also. When he and his counselors had sat down on the ground in
front of me, I asked what crime we had committed that he had come armed
in that way. He replied that one of my men, Pitsane, while sitting at
the fire that morning, had, in spitting, allowed a small quantity of the
saliva to fall on the leg of one of his men, and this "guilt" he wanted
to be settled by the fine of a man, ox, or gun. Pitsane admitted the
fact of a little saliva having fallen on the Chiboque, and in proof of
its being a pure accident, mentioned that he had given the man a piece
of meat, by way of making friends, just before it happened, and wiped it
off with his hand as soon as it fell. In reference to a man being given,
I declared that we were all ready to die rather than give up one of our
number to be a slave; that my men might as well give me as I give one
of them, for we were all free men. "Then you can give the gun with which
the ox was shot." As we heard some of his people remarking even now that
we had only "five guns", we declined, on the ground that, as they were
intent on plundering us, giving a gun would be helping them to do so.

This they denied, saying they wanted the customary tribute only. I asked
what right they had to demand payment for leave to tread on the ground
of God, our common Father. If we trod on their gardens, we would pay,
but not for marching on land which was still God's, and not theirs. They
did not attempt to controvert this, because it is in accordance with
their own ideas, but reverted again to the pretended crime of the
saliva.

My men now entreated me to give something; and after asking the chief
if he really thought the affair of the spitting a matter of guilt, and
receiving an answer in the affirmative, I gave him one of my shirts.
The young Chiboque were dissatisfied, and began shouting and brandishing
their swords for a greater fine.

As Pitsane felt that he had been the cause of this disagreeable affair,
he asked me to add something else. I gave a bunch of beads, but the
counselors objected this time, so I added a large handkerchief. The
more I yielded, the more unreasonable their demands became, and at every
fresh demand a shout was raised by the armed party, and a rush made
around us with brandishing of arms. One young man made a charge at my
head from behind, but I quickly brought round the muzzle of my gun to
his mouth, and he retreated. I pointed him out to the chief, and he
ordered him to retire a little. I felt anxious to avoid the effusion
of blood; and though sure of being able, with my Makololo, who had been
drilled by Sebituane, to drive off twice the number of our assailants,
though now a large body, and well armed with spears, swords, arrows, and
guns, I strove to avoid actual collision. My men were quite unprepared
for this exhibition, but behaved with admirable coolness. The chief
and counselors, by accepting my invitation to be seated, had placed
themselves in a trap, for my men very quietly surrounded them, and made
them feel that there was no chance of escaping their spears. I then
said that, as one thing after another had failed to satisfy them, it
was evident that THEY wanted to fight, while WE only wanted to pass
peaceably through the country; that they must begin first, and bear
the guilt before God: we would not fight till they had struck the first
blow. I then sat silent for some time. It was rather trying for me,
because I knew that the Chiboque would aim at the white man first; but
I was careful not to appear flurried, and, having four barrels ready for
instant action, looked quietly at the savage scene around. The Chiboque
countenance, by no means handsome, is not improved by the practice
which they have adopted of filing the teeth to a point. The chief and
counselors, seeing that they were in more danger than I, did not choose
to follow our decision that they should begin by striking the first
blow, and then see what we could do, and were perhaps influenced by
seeing the air of cool preparation which some of my men displayed at the
prospect of a work of blood.

The Chiboque at last put the matter before us in this way: "You come
among us in a new way, and say you are quite friendly: how can we know
it unless you give us some of your food, and you take some of ours? If
you give us an ox, we will give you whatever you may wish, and then we
shall be friends." In accordance with the entreaties of my men, I gave
an ox; and when asked what I should like in return, mentioned food as
the thing which we most needed. In the evening Njambi sent us a very
small basket of meal, and two or three pounds of the flesh of our own
ox! with the apology that he had no fowls, and very little of any other
food. It was impossible to avoid a laugh at the coolness of the generous
creatures. I was truly thankful, nevertheless, that, though resolved to
die rather than deliver up one of our number to be a slave, we had so
far gained our point as to be allowed to pass on without having shed
human blood.

In the midst of the commotion, several Chiboque stole pieces of meat
out of the sheds of my people, and Mohorisi, one of the Makololo, went
boldly into the crowd and took back a marrow-bone from one of them.
A few of my Batoka seemed afraid, and would perhaps have fled had the
affray actually begun, but, upon the whole, I thought my men behaved
admirably. They lamented having left their shields at home by command
of Sekeletu, who feared that, if they carried these, they might be more
disposed to be overbearing in their demeanor to the tribes we should
meet. We had proceeded on the principles of peace and conciliation, and
the foregoing treatment shows in what light our conduct was viewed; in
fact, we were taken for interlopers trying to cheat the revenue of
the tribe. They had been accustomed to get a slave or two from every
slave-trader who passed them, and now that we disputed the right, they
viewed the infringement on what they considered lawfully due with most
virtuous indignation.

MARCH 6TH. We were informed that the people on the west of the Chiboque
of Njambi were familiar with the visits of slave-traders; and it was the
opinion of our guides from Kangenke that so many of my companions would
be demanded from me, in the same manner as the people of Njambi had
done, that I should reach the coast without a single attendant; I
therefore resolved to alter our course and strike away to the N.N.E.,
in the hope that at some point farther north I might find an exit to the
Portuguese settlement of Cassange. We proceeded at first due north, with
the Kasabi villages on our right, and the Kasau on our left. During
the first twenty miles we crossed many small, but now swollen streams,
having the usual boggy banks, and wherever the water had stood for any
length of time it was discolored with rust of iron. We saw a "nakong"
antelope one day, a rare sight in this quarter; and many new and pretty
flowers adorned the valleys. We could observe the difference in the
seasons in our northing in company with the sun. Summer was now nearly
over at Kuruman, and far advanced at Linyanti, but here we were in the
middle of it; fruits, which we had eaten ripe on the Leeambye, were here
quite green; but we were coming into the region where the inhabitants
are favored with two rainy seasons and two crops, i.e., when the sun is
going south, and when he comes back on his way to the north, as was the
case at present.

On the 8th, one of the men had left an ounce or two of powder at our
sleeping-place, and went back several miles for it. My clothing being
wet from crossing a stream, I was compelled to wait for him; had I been
moving in the sun I should have felt no harm, but the inaction led to
a violent fit of fever. The continuance of this attack was a source of
much regret, for we went on next day to a small rivulet called Chihune,
in a lovely valley, and had, for a wonder, a clear sky and a clear moon;
but such was the confusion produced in my mind by the state of my body,
that I could scarcely manage, after some hours' trial, to get a lunar
observation in which I could repose confidence. The Chihune flows into
the Longe, and that into the Chihombo, a feeder of the Kasai. Those who
know the difficulties of taking altitudes, times, and distances, and
committing all of them to paper, will sympathize with me in this and
many similar instances. While at Chihune, the men of a village brought
wax for sale, and, on finding that we wished honey, went off and soon
brought a hive. All the bees in the country are in possession of the
natives, for they place hives sufficient for them all. After having
ascertained this, we never attended the call of the honey-guide, for
we were sure it would only lead us to a hive which we had no right to
touch. The bird continues its habit of inviting attention to the honey,
though its services in this district are never actually needed. My
Makololo lamented that they never knew before that wax could be sold for
any thing of value.

As we traverse a succession of open lawns and deep forests, it is
interesting to observe something like instinct developed even in trees.
One which, when cut, emits a milky juice, if met with on the open lawns,
grows as an ordinary umbrageous tree, and shows no disposition to be
a climber; when planted in a forest it still takes the same form, then
sends out a climbing branch, which twines round another tree until it
rises thirty or forty feet, or to the level of the other trees, and
there spreads out a second crown where it can enjoy a fair share of
the sun's rays. In parts of the forest still more dense than this, it
assumes the form of a climber only, and at once avails itself of the
assistance of a tall neighbor by winding vigorously round it, without
attempting to form a lower head. It does not succeed so well as
parasites proper, but where forced to contend for space it may be
mistaken for one which is invariably a climber. The paths here were very
narrow and very much encumbered with gigantic creepers, often as thick
as a man's leg. There must be some reason why they prefer, in some
districts, to go up trees in the common form of the thread of a screw
rather than in any other. On the one bank of the Chihune they appeared
to a person standing opposite them to wind up from left to right, on
the other bank from right to left. I imagined this was owing to the sun
being at one season of the year on their north and at another on their
south. But on the Leeambye I observed creepers winding up on opposite
sides of the same reed, and making a figure like the lacings of a
sandal.

In passing through these narrow paths I had an opportunity of observing
the peculiarities of my ox "Sinbad". He had a softer back than the
others, but a much more intractable temper. His horns were bent downward
and hung loosely, so he could do no harm with them; but as we wended our
way slowly along the narrow path, he would suddenly dart aside. A string
tied to a stick put through the cartilage of the nose serves instead of
a bridle: if you jerk this back, it makes him run faster on; if you
pull it to one side, he allows the nose and head to go, but keeps the
opposite eye directed to the forbidden spot, and goes in spite of you.
The only way he can be brought to a stand is by a stroke with a wand
across the nose. When Sinbad ran in below a climber stretched over the
path so low that I could not stoop under it, I was dragged off and came
down on the crown of my head; and he never allowed an opportunity of the
kind to pass without trying to inflict a kick, as if I neither had nor
deserved his love.

A remarkable peculiarity in the forests of this country is the absence
of thorns: there are but two exceptions; one a tree bearing a species of
'nux vomica', and a small shrub very like the plant of the sarsaparilla,
bearing, in addition to its hooked thorns, bunches of yellow berries.
The thornlessness of the vegetation is especially noticeable to those
who have been in the south, where there is so great a variety of
thorn-bearing plants and trees. We have thorns of every size and shape;
thorns straight, thin and long, short and thick, or hooked, and so
strong as to be able to cut even leather like a knife. Seed-vessels are
scattered every where by these appendages. One lies flat as a shilling
with two thorns in its centre, ready to run into the foot of any animal
that treads upon it, and stick there for days together. Another (the
'Uncaria procumbens', or Grapple-plant) has so many hooked thorns as to
cling most tenaciously to any animal to which it may become attached;
when it happens to lay hold of the mouth of an ox, the animal stands and
roars with pain and a sense of helplessness.

Whenever a part of the forest has been cleared for a garden, and
afterward abandoned, a species of plant, with leaves like those of
ginger, springs up, and contends for the possession of the soil with a
great crop of ferns. This is the case all the way down to Angola, and
shows the great difference of climate between this and the Bechuana
country, where a fern, except one or two hardy species, is never seen.
The plants above mentioned bear a pretty pink flower close to the
ground, which is succeeded by a scarlet fruit full of seeds, yielding,
as so many fruits in this country do, a pleasant acid juice, which,
like the rest, is probably intended as a corrective to the fluids of the
system in the hot climate.

On leaving the Chihune we crossed the Longe, and, as the day was cloudy,
our guides wandered in a forest away to the west till we came to the
River Chihombo, flowing to the E.N.E. My men depended so much on the
sun for guidance that, having seen nothing of the luminary all day, they
thought we had wandered back to the Chiboque, and, as often happens when
bewildered, they disputed as to the point where the sun should rise next
morning. As soon as the rains would allow next day, we went off to the
N.E. It would have been better to have traveled by compass alone, for
the guides took advantage of any fears expressed by my people, and
threatened to return if presents were not made at once. But my men had
never left their own country before except for rapine and murder.
When they formerly came to a village they were in the habit of killing
numbers of the inhabitants, and then taking a few young men to serve as
guides to the next place. As this was their first attempt at an opposite
line of conduct, and as they were without their shields, they felt
defenseless among the greedy Chiboque, and some allowance must be made
for them on that account.

SATURDAY, 11TH. Reached a small village on the banks of a narrow stream.
I was too ill to go out of my little covering except to quell a mutiny
which began to show itself among some of the Batoka and Ambonda of our
party. They grumbled, as they often do against their chiefs, when they
think them partial in their gifts, because they supposed that I had
shown a preference in the distribution of the beads; but the beads I
had given to my principal men were only sufficient to purchase a scanty
meal, and I had hastened on to this village in order to slaughter a
tired ox, and give them all a feast as well as a rest on Sunday, as
preparation for the journey before us. I explained this to them, and
thought their grumbling was allayed. I soon sank into a state of stupor,
which the fever sometimes produced, and was oblivious to all their noise
in slaughtering. On Sunday the mutineers were making a terrible din in
preparing a skin they had procured. I requested them twice, by the man
who attended me, to be more quiet, as the noise pained me; but as
they paid no attention to this civil request, I put out my head, and,
repeating it myself, was answered by an impudent laugh. Knowing that
discipline would be at an end if this mutiny were not quelled, and
that our lives depended on vigorously upholding authority, I seized a
double-barreled pistol, and darted forth from the domicile, looking,
I suppose, so savage as to put them to a precipitate flight. As some
remained within hearing, I told them that I must maintain discipline,
though at the expense of some of their limbs; so long as we traveled
together they must remember that I was master, and not they. There being
but little room to doubt my determination, they immediately became very
obedient, and never afterward gave me any trouble, or imagined that they
had any right to my property.

13TH. We went forward some miles, but were brought to a stand by the
severity of my fever on the banks of a branch of the Loajima, another
tributary of the Kasai. I was in a state of partial coma until late at
night, when it became necessary for me to go out; and I was surprised
to find that my men had built a little stockade, and some of them took
their spears and acted as a guard. I found that we were surrounded by
enemies, and a party of Chiboque lay near the gateway, after having
preferred the demand of "a man, an ox, a gun, or a tusk." My men had
prepared for defense in case of a night attack, and when the Chiboque
wished to be shown where I lay sick, they very properly refused to point
me out. In the morning I went out to the Chiboque, and found that they
answered me civilly regarding my intentions in opening the country,
teaching them, etc., etc. They admitted that their chiefs would be
pleased with the prospect of friendship, and now only wished to exchange
tokens of good-will with me, and offered three pigs, which they hoped I
would accept. The people here are in the habit of making a present, and
then demanding whatever they choose in return. We had been forewarned of
this by our guides, so I tried to decline, by asking if they would eat
one of the pigs in company with us. To this proposition they said that
they durst not accede. I then accepted the present in the hope that
the blame of deficient friendly feeling might not rest with me, and
presented a razor, two bunches of beads, and twelve copper rings,
contributed by my men from their arms. They went off to report to their
chief; and as I was quite unable to move from excessive giddiness, we
continued in the same spot on Tuesday evening, when they returned with
a message couched in very plain terms, that a man, tusk, gun, or even
an ox, alone would be acceptable; that he had every thing else in his
possession but oxen, and that, whatever I should please to demand from
him, he would gladly give it. As this was all said civilly, and
there was no help for it if we refused but bloodshed, I gave a tired
riding-ox. My late chief mutineer, an Ambonda man, was now over-loyal,
for he armed himself and stood at the gateway. He would rather die than
see his father imposed on; but I ordered Mosantu to take him out of the
way, which he did promptly, and allowed the Chiboque to march off well
pleased with their booty. I told my men that I esteemed one of their
lives of more value than all the oxen we had, and that the only cause
which could induce me to fight would be to save the lives and liberties
of the majority. In the propriety of this they all agreed, and said
that, if the Chiboque molested us who behaved so peaceably, the
guilt would be on their heads. This is a favorite mode of expression
throughout the whole country. All are anxious to give explanation of any
acts they have performed, and conclude the narration with, "I have no
guilt or blame" ("molatu"). "They have the guilt." I never could be
positive whether the idea in their minds is guilt in the sight of the
Deity, or of mankind only.

Next morning the robber party came with about thirty yards of strong
striped English calico, an axe, and two hoes for our acceptance, and
returned the copper rings, as the chief was a great man, and did not
need the ornaments of my men, but we noticed that they were taken back
again. I divided the cloth among my men, and pleased them a little by
thus compensating for the loss of the ox. I advised the chief, whose
name we did not learn, as he did not deign to appear except under the
alias Matiamvo, to get cattle for his own use, and expressed sorrow
that I had none wherewith to enable him to make a commencement. Rains
prevented our proceeding till Thursday morning, and then messengers
appeared to tell us that their chief had learned that all the cloth sent
by him had not been presented; that the copper rings had been secreted
by the persons ordered to restore them to us, and that he had stripped
the thievish emissaries of their property as a punishment. Our guides
thought these were only spies of a larger party, concealed in the forest
through which we were now about to pass. We prepared for defense by
marching in a compact body, and allowing no one to straggle far behind
the others. We marched through many miles of gloomy forest in gloomier
silence, but nothing disturbed us. We came to a village, and found
all the men absent, the guides thought, in the forest, with their
countrymen. I was too ill to care much whether we were attacked or not.
Though a pouring rain came on, as we were all anxious to get away out
of a bad neighborhood, we proceeded. The thick atmosphere prevented my
seeing the creeping plants in time to avoid them; so Pitsane, Mohorisi,
and I, who alone were mounted, were often caught; and as there is no
stopping the oxen when they have the prospect of giving the rider a
tumble, we came frequently to the ground. In addition to these mishaps,
Sinbad went off at a plunging gallop, the bridle broke, and I came down
backward on the crown of my head. He gave me a kick on the thigh at the
same time. I felt none the worse for this rough treatment, but would
not recommend it to others as a palliative in cases of fever! This
last attack of fever was so obstinate that it reduced me almost to a
skeleton. The blanket which I used as a saddle on the back of the ox,
being frequently wet, remained so beneath me even in the hot sun, and,
aided by the heat of the ox, caused extensive abrasion of the
skin, which was continually healing and getting sore again. To this
inconvenience was now added the chafing of my projecting bones on the
hard bed.

On Friday we came to a village of civil people on the banks of the
Loajima itself, and we were wet all day in consequence of crossing it.
The bridges over it, and another stream which we crossed at midday, were
submerged, as we have hitherto invariably found, by a flood of perfectly
clear water. At the second ford we were met by a hostile party who
refused us further passage. I ordered my men to proceed in the same
direction we had been pursuing, but our enemies spread themselves out in
front of us with loud cries. Our numbers were about equal to theirs
this time, so I moved on at the head of my men. Some ran off to
other villages, or back to their own village, on pretense of getting
ammunition; others called out that all traders came to them, and that we
must do the same. As these people had plenty of iron-headed arrows and
some guns, when we came to the edge of the forest I ordered my men to
put the luggage in our centre; and, if our enemies did not fire, to cut
down some young trees and make a screen as quickly as possible, but do
nothing to them except in case of actual attack. I then dismounted, and,
advancing a little toward our principal opponent, showed him how easily
I could kill him, but pointed upward, saying, "I fear God." He did the
same, placing his hand on his heart, pointing upward, and saying, "I
fear to kill; but come to our village; come--do come." At this juncture,
the old head man, Ionga Panza, a venerable negro, came up, and I invited
him and all to be seated, that we might talk the matter over. Ionga
Panza soon let us know that he thought himself very ill treated in being
passed by. As most skirmishes arise from misunderstanding, this might
have been a serious one; for, like all the tribes near the Portuguese
settlements, people here imagine that they have a right to demand
payment from every one who passes through the country; and now, though
Ionga Panza was certainly no match for my men, yet they were determined
not to forego their right without a struggle. I removed with my men
to the vicinity of the village, thankful that no accident had as yet
brought us into actual collision.

The reason why the people have imbibed the idea so strongly that they
have a right to demand payment for leave to pass through the country is
probably this. They have seen no traders except those either engaged
in purchasing slaves, or who have slaves in their employment. These
slave-traders have always been very much at the mercy of the chiefs
through whose country they have passed; for if they afforded a ready
asylum for runaway slaves, the traders might be deserted at any moment,
and stripped of their property altogether. They are thus obliged to
curry favor with the chiefs, so as to get a safe conduct from them. The
same system is adopted to induce the chiefs to part with their people,
whom all feel to be the real source of their importance in the country.
On the return of the traders from the interior with chains of slaves,
it is so easy for a chief who may be so disposed to take away a chain of
eight or ten unresisting slaves, that the merchant is fain to give any
amount of presents in order to secure the good-will of the rulers. The
independent chiefs, not knowing why their favor is so eagerly sought,
become excessively proud and supercilious in their demands, and look
upon white men with the greatest contempt. To such lengths did the
Bangala, a tribe near to which we had now approached, proceed a few
years ago, that they compelled the Portuguese traders to pay for water,
wood, and even grass, and every possible pretext was invented for
levying fines; and these were patiently submitted to so long as the
slave-trade continued to flourish. We had unconsciously come in contact
with a system which was quite unknown in the country from which my men
had set out. An English trader may there hear a demand for payment of
guides, but never, so far as I am aware, is he asked to pay for leave
to traverse a country. The idea does not seem to have entered the native
mind, except through slave-traders, for the aborigines all acknowledge
that the untilled land, not needed for pasturage, belongs to God alone,
and that no harm is done by people passing through it. I rather believe
that, wherever the slave-trade has not penetrated, the visits of
strangers are esteemed a real privilege.

The village of old Ionga Panza (lat. 10d 25' S., long. 20d 15' E.) is
small, and embowered in lofty evergreen trees, which were hung around
with fine festoons of creepers. He sent us food immediately, and soon
afterward a goat, which was considered a handsome gift, there being but
few domestic animals, though the country is well adapted for them. I
suspect this, like the country of Shinte and Katema, must have been a
tsetse district, and only recently rendered capable of supporting
other domestic animals besides the goat, by the destruction of the game
through the extensive introduction of fire-arms. We might all have been
as ignorant of the existence of this insect plague as the Portuguese,
had it not been for the numerous migrations of pastoral tribes which
took place in the south in consequence of Zulu irruptions.

During these exciting scenes I always forgot my fever, but a terrible
sense of sinking came back with the feeling of safety. The same demand
of payment for leave to pass was made on the 20th by old Ionga Panza
as by the other Chiboque. I offered the shell presented by Shinte, but
Ionga Panza said he was too old for ornaments. We might have succeeded
very well with him, for he was by no means unreasonable, and had but
a very small village of supporters; but our two guides from Kangenke
complicated our difficulties by sending for a body of Bangala traders,
with a view to force us to sell the tusks of Sekeletu, and pay them with
the price. We offered to pay them handsomely if they would perform their
promise of guiding us to Cassange, but they knew no more of the paths
than we did; and my men had paid them repeatedly, and tried to get rid
of them, but could not. They now joined with our enemies, and so did the
traders. Two guns and some beads belonging to the latter were standing
in our encampment, and the guides seized them and ran off. As my men
knew that we should be called upon to replace them, they gave chase, and
when the guides saw that they would be caught, they threw down the guns,
directed their flight to the village, and rushed into a hut. The doorway
is not much higher than that of a dog's kennel. One of the guides was
reached by one of my men as he was in the act of stooping to get in, and
a cut was inflicted on a projecting part of the body which would have
made any one in that posture wince. The guns were restored, but the
beads were lost in the flight. All I had remaining of my stock of beads
could not replace those lost; and though we explained that we had no
part in the guilt of the act, the traders replied that we had brought
the thieves into the country; these were of the Bangala, who had been
accustomed to plague the Portuguese in the most vexatious way. We were
striving to get a passage through the country, and, feeling anxious that
no crime whatever should be laid to our charge, tried the conciliatory
plan here, though we were not, as in the other instances, likely to be
overpowered by numbers.

My men offered all their ornaments, and I offered all my beads and
shirts; but, though we had come to the village against our will, and the
guides had also followed us contrary to our desire, and had even sent
for the Bangala traders without our knowledge or consent, yet matters
could not be arranged without our giving an ox and one of the tusks.
We were all becoming disheartened, and could not wonder that native
expeditions from the interior to the coast had generally failed to reach
their destinations. My people were now so much discouraged that some
proposed to return home; the prospect of being obliged to return when
just on the threshold of the Portuguese settlements distressed me
exceedingly. After using all my powers of persuasion, I declared to them
that if they returned I would go on alone, and went into my little tent
with the mind directed to Him who hears the sighing of the soul, and was
soon followed by the head of Mohorisi, saying, "We will never leave you.
Do not be disheartened. Wherever you lead we will follow. Our remarks
were made only on account of the injustice of these people." Others
followed, and with the most artless simplicity of manner told me to be
comforted--"they were all my children; they knew no one but Sekeletu
and me, and they would die for me; they had not fought because I did
not wish it; they had just spoken in the bitterness of their spirit, and
when feeling that they could do nothing; but if these enemies begin you
will see what we can do." One of the oxen we offered to the Chiboque had
been rejected because he had lost part of his tail, as they thought that
it had been cut off and witchcraft medicine inserted; and some mirth was
excited by my proposing to raise a similar objection to all the oxen
we still had in our possession. The remaining four soon presented a
singular shortness of their caudal extremities, and though no one ever
asked whether they had medicine in the stumps or no, we were no more
troubled by the demand for an ox! We now slaughtered another ox, that
the spectacle might not be seen of the owners of the cattle fasting
while the Chiboque were feasting.




Chapter 19.

Guides prepaid--Bark Canoes--Deserted by Guides--Mistakes respecting
the Coanza--Feelings of freed Slaves--Gardens and Villages--Native
Traders--A Grave--Valley of the Quango--Bamboo--White Larvae used as
Food--Bashinje Insolence--A posing Question--The Chief Sansawe--His
Hostility--Pass him safely--The River Quango--Chief's mode of
dressing his Hair--Opposition--Opportune Aid by Cypriano--His generous
Hospitality--Ability of Half-castes to read and write--Books and
Images--Marauding Party burned in the Grass--Arrive at Cassange--A good
Supper--Kindness of Captain Neves--Portuguese Curiosity and Questions--
Anniversary of the Resurrection--No Prejudice against Color--Country
around Cassange--Sell Sekeletu's Ivory--Makololo's Surprise at the
high Price obtained--Proposal to return Home, and Reasons--
Soldier-guide--Hill Kasala--Tala Mungongo, Village of--Civility
of Basongo--True Negroes--A Field of Wheat--
Carriers--Sleeping-places--Fever--Enter District of Ambaca--Good Fruits
of Jesuit Teaching--The 'Tampan'; its Bite--Universal Hospitality of
the Portuguese--A Tale of the Mambari--Exhilarating Effects of
Highland Scenery--District of Golungo Alto--Want of good
Roads--Fertility--Forests of gigantic Timber--Native Carpenters--Coffee
Estate--Sterility of Country near the Coast--Mosquitoes--Fears of the
Makololo--Welcome by Mr. Gabriel to Loanda.



24TH. Ionga Panza's sons agreed to act as guides into the territory of
the Portuguese if I would give them the shell given by Shinte. I was
strongly averse to this, and especially to give it beforehand, but
yielded to the entreaty of my people to appear as if showing confidence
in these hopeful youths. They urged that they wished to leave the
shell with their wives, as a sort of payment to them for enduring their
husbands' absence so long. Having delivered the precious shell, we went
west-by-north to the River Chikapa, which here (lat. 10d 22' S.) is
forty or fifty yards wide, and at present was deep; it was seen flowing
over a rocky, broken cataract with great noise about half a mile above
our ford. We were ferried over in a canoe, made out of a single piece
of bark sewed together at the ends, and having sticks placed in it at
different parts to act as ribs. The word Chikapa means bark or skin; and
as this is the only river in which we saw this kind of canoe used, and
we heard that this stream is so low during most of the year as to be
easily fordable, it probably derives its name from the use made of the
bark canoes when it is in flood. We now felt the loss of our pontoon,
for the people to whom the canoe belonged made us pay once when we began
to cross, then a second time when half of us were over, and a third time
when all were over but my principal man Pitsane and myself. Loyanke took
off his cloth and paid my passage with it. The Makololo always ferried
their visitors over rivers without pay, and now began to remark that
they must in future fleece the Mambari as these Chiboque had done to us;
they had all been loud in condemnation of the meanness, and when I asked
if they could descend to be equally mean, I was answered that they
would only do it in revenge. They like to have a plausible excuse for
meanness.

Next morning our guides went only about a mile, and then told us they
would return home. I expected this when paying them beforehand, in
accordance with the entreaties of the Makololo, who are rather ignorant
of the world. Very energetic remonstrances were addressed to the guides,
but they slipped off one by one in the thick forest through which
we were passing, and I was glad to hear my companions coming to the
conclusion that, as we were now in parts visited by traders, we did not
require the guides, whose chief use had been to prevent misapprehension
of our objects in the minds of the villagers. The country was somewhat
more undulating now than it had been, and several fine small streams
flowed in deep woody dells. The trees are very tall and straight, and
the forests gloomy and damp; the ground in these solitudes is quite
covered with yellow and brown mosses, and light-colored lichens clothe
all the trees. The soil is extremely fertile, being generally a black
loam covered with a thick crop of tall grasses. We passed several
villages too. The head man of a large one scolded us well for passing,
when he intended to give us food. Where slave-traders have been in the
habit of coming, they present food, then demand three or four times its
value as a custom. We were now rather glad to get past villages without
intercourse with the inhabitants.

We were traveling W.N.W., and all the rivulets we here crossed had a
northerly course, and were reported to fall into the Kasai or Loke; most
of them had the peculiar boggy banks of the country. As we were now in
the alleged latitude of the Coanza, I was much astonished at the
entire absence of any knowledge of that river among the natives of
this quarter. But I was then ignorant of the fact that the Coanza rises
considerably to the west of this, and has a comparatively short course
from its source to the sea.

The famous Dr. Lacerda seems to have labored under the same mistake as
myself, for he recommended the government of Angola to establish a chain
of forts along the banks of that river, with a view to communication
with the opposite coast. As a chain of forts along its course would lead
southward instead of eastward, we may infer that the geographical data
within reach of that eminent man were no better than those according to
which I had directed my course to the Coanza where it does not exist.

26TH. We spent Sunday on the banks of the Quilo or Kweelo, here a stream
of about ten yards wide. It runs in a deep glen, the sides of which are
almost five hundred yards of slope, and rocky, the rocks being hardened
calcareous tufa lying on clay shale and sandstone below, with a capping
of ferruginous conglomerate. The scenery would have been very
pleasing, but fever took away much of the joy of life, and severe daily
intermittents rendered me very weak and always glad to recline.

As we were now in the slave-market, it struck me that the sense of
insecurity felt by the natives might account for the circumstance that
those who have been sold as slaves and freed again, when questioned,
profess to like the new state better than their primitive one. They
lived on rich, fertile plains, which seldom inspire that love of country
which the mountains do. If they had been mountaineers, they would have
pined for home. To one who has observed the hard toil of the poor in old
civilized countries, the state in which the inhabitants here live is one
of glorious ease. The country is full of little villages. Food abounds,
and very little labor is required for its cultivation; the soil is so
rich that no manure is required; when a garden becomes too poor for good
crops of maize, millet, etc., the owner removes a little farther into
the forest, applies fire round the roots of the larger trees to kill
them, cuts down the smaller, and a new, rich garden is ready for the
seed. The gardens usually present the appearance of a large number of
tall, dead trees standing without bark, and maize growing between them.
The old gardens continue to yield manioc for years after the owners
have removed to other spots for the sake of millet and maize. But, while
vegetable aliment is abundant, there is a want of salt and animal food,
so that numberless traps are seen, set for mice, in all the forests of
Londa. The vegetable diet leaves great craving for flesh, and I have no
doubt but that, when an ordinary quantity of mixed food is supplied to
freed slaves, they actually do feel more comfortable than they did at
home. Their assertions, however, mean but little, for they always try to
give an answer to please, and if one showed them a nugget of gold, they
would generally say that these abounded in their country.

One could detect, in passing, the variety of character found among
the owners of gardens and villages. Some villages were the pictures of
neatness. We entered others enveloped in a wilderness of weeds, so high
that, when sitting on ox-back in the middle of the village, we could
only see the tops of the huts. If we entered at midday, the owners
would come lazily forth, pipe in hand, and leisurely puff away in dreamy
indifference. In some villages weeds are not allowed to grow; cotton,
tobacco, and different plants used as relishes are planted round the
huts; fowls are kept in cages, and the gardens present the pleasant
spectacle of different kinds of grain and pulse at various periods of
their growth. I sometimes admired the one class, and at times wished I
could have taken the world easy for a time like the other. Every village
swarms with children, who turn out to see the white man pass, and run
along with strange cries and antics; some run up trees to get a good
view: all are agile climbers throughout Londa. At friendly villages they
have scampered alongside our party for miles at a time. We usually made
a little hedge around our sheds; crowds of women came to the entrance of
it, with children on their backs, and long pipes in their mouths, gazing
at us for hours. The men, rather than disturb them, crawled through a
hole in the hedge, and it was common to hear a man in running off say
to them, "I am going to tell my mamma to come and see the white man's
oxen."

In continuing our W.N.W. course, we met many parties of native traders,
each carrying some pieces of cloth and salt, with a few beads to
barter for bees'-wax. They are all armed with Portuguese guns, and have
cartridges with iron balls. When we meet we usually stand a few minutes.
They present a little salt, and we give a bit of ox-hide, or some other
trifle, and then part with mutual good wishes. The hide of the oxen we
slaughtered had been a valuable addition to our resources, for we found
it in so great repute for girdles all through Loanda that we cut up
every skin into strips about two inches broad, and sold them for meal
and manioc as we went along. As we came nearer Angola we found them of
less value, as the people there possess cattle themselves.

The village on the Kweelo, at which we spent Sunday, was that of a
civil, lively old man, called Sakandala, who offered no objections to
our progress. We found we should soon enter on the territory of the
Bashinje (Chinge of the Portuguese), who are mixed with another tribe,
named Bangala, which have been at war with the Babindele or Portuguese.
Rains and fever, as usual, helped to impede our progress until we were
put on the path which leads from Cassange and Bihe to Matiamvo, by a
head man named Kamboela. This was a well-beaten footpath, and soon after
entering upon it we met a party of half-caste traders from Bihe, who
confirmed the information we had already got of this path leading
straight to Cassange, through which they had come on their way from Bihe
to Cabango. They kindly presented my men with some tobacco, and marveled
greatly when they found that I had never been able to teach myself to
smoke. On parting with them we came to a trader's grave. This was marked
by a huge cone of sticks placed in the form of the roof of a hut, with
a palisade around it. At an opening on the western side an ugly idol was
placed: several strings of beads and bits of cloth were hung around. We
learned that he had been a half-caste, who had died on his way back from
Matiamvo.

As we were now alone, and sure of being on the way to the abodes of
civilization, we went on briskly.

On the 30th we came to a sudden descent from the high land, indented
by deep, narrow valleys, over which we had lately been traveling. It is
generally so steep that it can only be descended at particular points,
and even there I was obliged to dismount, though so weak that I had to
be led by my companions to prevent my toppling over in walking down. It
was annoying to feel myself so helpless, for I never liked to see a man,
either sick or well, giving in effeminately. Below us lay the valley of
the Quango. If you sit on the spot where Mary Queen of Scots viewed the
battle of Langside, and look down on the vale of Clyde, you may see
in miniature the glorious sight which a much greater and richer valley
presented to our view. It is about a hundred miles broad, clothed with
dark forest, except where the light green grass covers meadow-lands on
the Quango, which here and there glances out in the sun as it wends its
way to the north. The opposite side of this great valley appears like a
range of lofty mountains, and the descent into it about a mile, which,
measured perpendicularly, may be from a thousand to twelve hundred feet.
Emerging from the gloomy forests of Londa, this magnificent prospect
made us all feel as if a weight had been lifted off our eyelids. A cloud
was passing across the middle of the valley, from which rolling thunder
pealed, while above all was glorious sunlight; and when we went down
to the part where we saw it passing, we found that a very heavy
thunder-shower had fallen under the path of the cloud; and the bottom
of the valley, which from above seemed quite smooth, we discovered to be
intersected and furrowed by great numbers of deep-cut streams. Looking
back from below, the descent appears as the edge of a table-land, with
numerous indented dells and spurs jutting out all along, giving it a
serrated appearance. Both the top and sides of the sierra are covered
with trees, but large patches of the more perpendicular parts are bare,
and exhibit the red soil, which is general over the region we have now
entered.

The hollow affords a section of this part of the country; and we find
that the uppermost stratum is the ferruginous conglomerate already
mentioned. The matrix is rust of iron (or hydrous peroxide of iron and
hematite), and in it are imbedded water-worn pebbles of sandstone and
quartz. As this is the rock underlying the soil of a large part of
Londa, its formation must have preceded the work of denudation by an
arm of the sea, which washed away the enormous mass of matter required
before the valley of Cassange could assume its present form. The strata
under the conglomerate are all of red clay shale of different degrees of
hardness, the most indurated being at the bottom. This red clay shale
is named "keele" in Scotland, and has always been considered as an
indication of gold; but the only thing we discovered was that it had
given rise to a very slippery clay soil, so different from that which
we had just left that Mashauana, who always prided himself on being an
adept at balancing himself in the canoe on water, and so sure of foot on
land that he could afford to express contempt for any one less gifted,
came down in a very sudden and undignified manner, to the delight of all
whom he had previously scolded for falling.

Here we met with the bamboo as thick as a man's arm, and many new trees.
Others, which we had lost sight of since leaving Shinte, now reappeared;
but nothing struck us more than the comparative scragginess of the
trees in this hollow. Those on the high lands we had left were tall
and straight; here they were stunted, and not by any means so closely
planted together. The only way I could account for this was by
supposing, as the trees were of different species, that the greater
altitude suited the nature of those above better than the lower altitude
did the other species below.

SUNDAY, APRIL 2D. We rested beside a small stream, and our hunger being
now very severe, from having lived on manioc alone since leaving Ionza
Panza's, we slaughtered one of our four remaining oxen. The people of
this district seem to feel the craving for animal food as much as we
did, for they spend much energy in digging large white larvae out of the
damp soil adjacent to their streams, and use them as a relish to their
vegetable diet. The Bashinje refused to sell any food for the poor old
ornaments my men had now to offer. We could get neither meal nor manioc,
but should have been comfortable had not the Bashinje chief Sansawe
pestered us for the customary present. The native traders informed us
that a display of force was often necessary before they could pass this
man.

Sansawe, the chief of a portion of the Bashinje, having sent the usual
formal demand for a man, an ox, or a tusk, spoke very contemptuously of
the poor things we offered him instead. We told his messengers that the
tusks were Sekeletu's: every thing was gone except my instruments, which
could be of no use to them whatever. One of them begged some meat, and,
when it was refused, said to my men, "You may as well give it, for we
shall take all after we have killed you to-morrow." The more humbly we
spoke, the more insolent the Bashinje became, till at last we were all
feeling savage and sulky, but continued to speak as civilly as we could.
They are fond of argument, and when I denied their right to demand
tribute from a white man, who did not trade in slaves, an old
white-headed negro put rather a posing question: "You know that God has
placed chiefs among us whom we ought to support. How is it that you, who
have a book that tells you about him, do not come forward at once to pay
this chief tribute like every one else?" I replied by asking, "How could
I know that this was a chief, who had allowed me to remain a day and a
half near him without giving me any thing to eat?" This, which to the
uninitiated may seem sophistry, was to the Central Africans quite a
rational question, for he at once admitted that food ought to have been
sent, and added that probably his chief was only making it ready for me,
and that it would come soon.

After being wearied by talking all day to different parties sent by
Sansawe, we were honored by a visit from himself: he is quite a young
man, and of rather a pleasing countenance. There can not have been much
intercourse between real Portuguese and these people even here, so close
to the Quango, for Sansawe asked me to show him my hair, on the ground
that, though he had heard of it, and some white men had even passed
through his country, he had never seen straight hair before. This is
quite possible, as most of the slave-traders are not Portuguese, but
half-castes. The difference between their wool and our hair caused
him to burst into a laugh, and the contrast between the exposed and
unexposed parts of my skin, when exhibited in evidence of our all being
made of one stock originally, and the children of one Maker, seemed to
strike him with wonder. I then showed him my watch, and wished to win my
way into his confidence by conversation; but, when about to exhibit
my pocket compass, he desired me to desist, as he was afraid of my
wonderful things. I told him, if he knew my aims as the tribes in the
interior did, and as I hoped he would yet know them and me, he would be
glad to stay, and see also the pictures of the magic lantern; but, as
it was now getting dark, he had evidently got enough of my witchery,
and began to use some charms to dispel any kindly feelings he might have
found stealing round his heart. He asked leave to go, and when his party
moved off a little way, he sent for my spokesman, and told him that, "if
we did not add a red jacket and a man to our gift of a few copper rings
and a few pounds of meat, we must return by the way we had come." I
said in reply "that we should certainly go forward next day, and if he
commenced hostilities, the blame before God would be that of Sansawe;"
and my man added of his own accord, "How many white men have you killed
in this path?" which might be interpreted into, "You have never killed
any white man, and you will find ours more difficult to manage than you
imagine." It expressed a determination, which we had often repeated to
each other, to die rather than yield one of our party to be a slave.

Hunger has a powerful effect on the temper. When we had got a good meal
of meat, we could all bear the petty annoyances of these borderers on
the more civilized region in front with equanimity; but having suffered
considerably of late, we were all rather soured in our feelings, and not
unfrequently I overheard my companions remark in their own tongue, in
answer to threats of attack, "That's what we want: only begin then;" or
with clenched teeth they would exclaim to each other, "These things have
never traveled, and do not know what men are." The worrying, of which
I give only a slight sketch, had considerable influence on my own mind,
and more especially as it was impossible to make any allowance for the
Bashinje, such as I was willing to award to the Chiboque. They saw that
we had nothing to give, nor would they be benefited in the least by
enforcing the impudent order to return whence we had come. They were
adding insult to injury, and this put us all into a fighting spirit,
and, as nearly as we could judge, we expected to be obliged to cut our
way through the Bashinje next morning.

3D APRIL. As soon as day dawned we were astir, and, setting off in a
drizzling rain, passed close to the village. This rain probably damped
the ardor of the robbers. We, however, expected to be fired upon from
every clump of trees, or from some of the rocky hillocks among which we
were passing; and it was only after two hours' march that we began to
breathe freely, and my men remarked, in thankfulness, "We are children
of Jesus." We continued our course, notwithstanding the rain, across the
bottom of the Quango Valley, which we found broken by clay shale rocks
jutting out, though lying nearly horizontally. The grass in all the
hollows, at this time quite green, was about two feet higher than my
head while sitting on ox-back. This grass, wetted by the rain, acted as
a shower-bath on one side of our bodies; and some deep gullies, full of
DISCOLORED water, completed the cooling process. We passed many villages
during this drenching, one of which possessed a flock of sheep; and
after six hours we came to a stand near the River Quango (lat. 9d
53' S., long. 18d 37' E.), which may be called the boundary of the
Portuguese claims to territory on the west. As I had now no change of
clothing, I was glad to cower under the shelter of my blanket, thankful
to God for his goodness in bringing us so far without losing one of the
party.

4TH APRIL. We were now on the banks of the Quango, a river one hundred
and fifty yards wide, and very deep. The water was discolored--a
circumstance which we had observed in no river in Londa or in the
Makololo country. This fine river flows among extensive meadows clothed
with gigantic grass and reeds, and in a direction nearly north.

The Quango is said by the natives to contain many venomous water-snakes,
which congregate near the carcass of any hippopotamus that may be killed
in it. If this is true, it may account for all the villages we saw being
situated far from its banks. We were advised not to sleep near it; but,
as we were anxious to cross to the western side, we tried to induce some
of the Bashinje to lend us canoes for the purpose. This brought out the
chief of these parts, who informed us that all the canoe-men were his
children, and nothing could be done without his authority. He then made
the usual demand for a man, an ox, or a gun, adding that otherwise we
must return to the country from which we had come. As I did not believe
that this man had any power over the canoes of the other side, and
suspected that if I gave him my blanket--the only thing I now had in
reserve--he might leave us in the lurch after all, I tried to persuade
my men to go at once to the bank, about two miles off, and obtain
possession of the canoes before we gave up the blanket; but they thought
that this chief might attack us in the act of crossing, should we do so.
The chief came himself to our encampment and made his demand again. My
men stripped off the last of their copper rings and gave them; but he
was still intent on a man. He thought, as others did, that my men were
slaves. He was a young man, with his woolly hair elaborately dressed:
that behind was made up into a cone, about eight inches in diameter
at the base, carefully swathed round with red and black thread. As I
resisted the proposal to deliver up my blanket until they had placed us
on the western bank, this chief continued to worry us with his demands
till I was tired. My little tent was now in tatters, and having a wider
hole behind than the door in front, I tried in vain to lie down out of
sight of our persecutors. We were on a reedy flat, and could not follow
our usual plan of a small stockade, in which we had time to think over
and concoct our plans. As I was trying to persuade my men to move on
to the bank in spite of these people, a young half-caste Portuguese
sergeant of militia, Cypriano di Abreu, made his appearance, and gave
the same advice. He had come across the Quango in search of bees'-wax.
When we moved off from the chief who had been plaguing us, his people
opened a fire from our sheds, and continued to blaze away some time in
the direction we were going, but none of the bullets reached us. It
is probable that they expected a demonstration of the abundance of
ammunition they possessed would make us run; but when we continued
to move quietly to the ford, they proceeded no farther than our
sleeping-place. Cypriano assisted us in making a more satisfactory
arrangement with the ferrymen than parting with my blanket; and as soon
as we reached the opposite bank we were in the territory of the Bangala,
who are subjects of the Portuguese, and often spoken of as the Cassanges
or Cassantse; and happily all our difficulties with the border tribes
were at an end.

Passing with light hearts through the high grass by a narrow footpath
for about three miles to the west of the river, we came to several neat
square houses, with many cleanly-looking half-caste Portuguese standing
in front of them to salute us. They are all enrolled in the militia, and
our friend Cypriano is the commander of a division established here.
The Bangala were very troublesome to the Portuguese traders, and at last
proceeded so far as to kill one of them; the government of Angola then
sent an expedition against them, which being successful, the Bangala
were dispersed, and are now returning to their former abodes as
vassals. The militia are quartered among them, and engage in trade and
agriculture for their support, as no pay is given to this branch of the
service by the government.

We came to the dwelling of Cypriano after dark, and I pitched my little
tent in front of it for the night. We had the company of mosquitoes
here. We never found them troublesome on the banks of the pure streams
of Londa. On the morning of the 5th Cypriano generously supplied my
men with pumpkins and maize, and then invited me to breakfast, which
consisted of ground-nuts and roasted maize, then boiled manioc roots
and ground-nuts, with guavas and honey as a dessert. I felt sincerely
grateful for this magnificent breakfast.

At dinner Cypriano was equally bountiful, and several of his friends
joined us in doing justice to his hospitality. Before eating, all had
water poured on the hands by a female slave to wash them. One of the
guests cut up a fowl with a knife and fork. Neither forks nor spoons
were used in eating. The repast was partaken of with decency and good
manners, and concluded by washing the hands as at first.

All of them could read and write with ease. I examined the books they
possessed, and found a small work on medicine, a small cyclopaedia, and
a Portuguese dictionary, in which the definition of a "priest" seemed
strange to a Protestant, namely, "one who takes care of the conscience."
They had also a few tracts containing the Lives of the Saints, and
Cypriano had three small wax images of saints in his room. One of these
was St. Anthony, who, had he endured the privations he did in his cell
in looking after these lost sheep, would have lived to better purpose.
Neither Cypriano nor his companions knew what the Bible was, but they
had relics in German-silver cases hung round their necks, to act as
charms and save them from danger by land or by water, in the same way as
the heathen have medicines. It is a pity that the Church to which they
belong, when unable to attend to the wants of her children, does not
give them the sacred writings in their own tongue; it would surely be
better to see them good Protestants, if these would lead them to be so,
than entirely ignorant of God's message to man. For my part, I would
much prefer to see the Africans good Roman Catholics than idolatrous
heathen.

Much of the civility shown to us here was, no doubt, owing to the
flattering letters of recommendation I carried from the Chevalier Du
Prat, of Cape Town; but I am inclined to believe that my friend Cypriano
was influenced, too, by feelings of genuine kindness, for he quite bared
his garden in feeding us during the few days which I remained, anxiously
expecting the clouds to disperse, so far as to allow of my taking
observations for the determination of the position of the Quango. He
slaughtered an ox for us, and furnished his mother and her maids with
manioc roots, to prepare farina for the four or five days of our journey
to Cassange, and never even hinted at payment. My wretched appearance
must have excited his compassion. The farina is prepared by washing
the roots well, then rasping them down to a pulp. Next, this is roasted
slightly on a metal plate over a fire, and is then used with meat as
a vegetable. It closely resembles wood-sawings, and on that account
is named "wood-meal". It is insipid, and employed to lick up any gravy
remaining on one's plate. Those who have become accustomed to it relish
it even after they have returned to Europe.

The manioc cultivated here is of the sweet variety; the bitter, to which
we were accustomed in Londa, is not to be found very extensively in
this fertile valley. May is the beginning of winter, yet many of the
inhabitants were busy planting maize; that which we were now eating was
planted in the beginning of February. The soil is exceedingly fertile,
of a dark red color, and covered with such a dense, heavy crop of coarse
grass, that when a marauding party of Ambonda once came for plunder
while it was in a dried state, the Bangala encircled the common enemy
with a fire which completely destroyed them. This, which is related on
the authority of Portuguese who were then in the country, I can easily
believe to be true, for the stalks of the grass are generally as thick
as goose-quills, and no flight could be made through the mass of grass
in any direction where a footpath does not exist. Probably, in the case
mentioned, the direction of the wind was such as to drive the flames
across the paths, and prevent escape along them. On one occasion I
nearly lost my wagon by fire, in a valley where the grass was only about
three feet high. We were roused by the roar, as of a torrent, made by
the fire coming from the windward. I immediately set fire to that on our
leeward, and had just time to drag the wagon on to the bare space there
before the windward flames reached the place where it had stood.

We were detained by rains and a desire to ascertain our geographical
position till Monday, the 10th, and only got the latitude 9d 50' S.;
and, after three days' pretty hard traveling through the long grass,
reached Cassange, the farthest inland station of the Portuguese in
Western Africa. We crossed several fine little streams running into
the Quango; and as the grass continued to tower about two feet over our
heads, it generally obstructed our view of the adjacent country, and
sometimes hung over the path, making one side of the body wet with the
dew every morning, or, when it rained, kept me wet during the whole day.
I made my entrance in a somewhat forlorn state as to clothing among our
Portuguese allies. The first gentleman I met in the village asked if
I had a passport, and said it was necessary to take me before the
authorities. As I was in the same state of mind in which individuals are
who commit a petty depredation in order to obtain the shelter and food
of a prison, I gladly accompanied him to the house of the commandant or
Chefe, Senhor de Silva Rego. Having shown my passport to this gentleman,
he politely asked me to supper, and, as we had eaten nothing except
the farina of Cypriano from the Quango to this, I suspect I appeared
particularly ravenous to the other gentlemen around the table. They
seemed, however, to understand my position pretty well, from having all
traveled extensively themselves; had they not been present, I might have
put some in my pocket to eat by night; for, after fever, the appetite
is excessively keen, and manioc is one of the most unsatisfying kinds of
food. Captain Antonio Rodrigues Neves then kindly invited me to take
up my abode in his house. Next morning this generous man arrayed me in
decent clothing, and continued during the whole period of my stay to
treat me as if I had been his brother. I feel deeply grateful to him for
his disinterested kindness. He not only attended to my wants, but also
furnished food for my famishing party free of charge.

The village of Cassange (pronounced Kassanje) is composed of thirty or
forty traders' houses, scattered about without any regularity, on an
elevated flat spot in the great Quango or Cassange valley. They are
built of wattle and daub, and surrounded by plantations of manioc,
maize, etc. Behind them there are usually kitchen gardens, in which
the common European vegetables, as potatoes, peas, cabbages, onions,
tomatoes, etc., etc., grow. Guavas and bananas appear, from the size and
abundance of the trees, to have been introduced many years ago, while
the land was still in the possession of the natives; but pine-apples,
orange, fig, and cashew trees have but lately been tried. There are
about forty Portuguese traders in this district, all of whom are
officers in the militia, and many of them have become rich from adopting
the plan of sending out Pombeiros, or native traders, with large
quantities of goods, to trade in the more remote parts of the country.
Some of the governors of Loanda, the capital of this, the kingdom of
Angola, have insisted on the observance of a law which, from motives
of humanity, forbids the Portuguese themselves from passing beyond the
boundary. They seem to have taken it for granted that, in cases where
the white trader was killed, the aggression had been made by him, and
they wished to avoid the necessity of punishing those who had been
provoked to shed Portuguese blood. This indicates a much greater
impartiality than has obtained in our own dealings with the Caffres, for
we have engaged in most expensive wars with them without once inquiring
whether any of the fault lay with our frontier colonists. The Cassange
traders seem inclined to spread along the Quango, in spite of the desire
of their government to keep them on one spot, for mutual protection in
case of war. If I might judge from the week of feasting I passed among
them, they are generally prosperous.

As I always preferred to appear in my own proper character, I was an
object of curiosity to these hospitable Portuguese. They evidently
looked upon me as an agent of the English government, engaged in some
new movement for the suppression of slavery. They could not divine what
a "missionario" had to do with the latitudes and longitudes, which I was
intent on observing. When we became a little familiar, the questions put
were rather amusing: "Is it common for missionaries to be doctors?" "Are
you a doctor of medicine and a 'doutor mathematico' too? You must be
more than a missionary to know how to calculate the longitude! Come,
tell us at once what rank you hold in the English army." They may have
given credit to my reason for wearing the mustache, as that explains why
men have beards and women have none; but that which puzzled many besides
my Cassange friends was the anomaly of my being a "sacerdote", with
a wife and four children! I usually got rid of the last question by
putting another: "Is it not better to have children with a wife, than
to have children without a wife?" But all were most kind and hospitable;
and as one of their festivals was near, they invited me to partake of
the feast.

The anniversary of the Resurrection of our Savior was observed on the
16th of April as a day of rejoicing, though the Portuguese have no
priests at Cassange. The colored population dressed up a figure intended
to represent Judas Iscariot, and paraded him on a riding-ox about the
village; sneers and maledictions were freely bestowed on the poor wretch
thus represented. The slaves and free colored population, dressed in
their gayest clothing, made visits to all the principal merchants, and
wishing them "a good feast", expected a present in return. This, though
frequently granted in the shape of pieces of calico to make new dresses,
was occasionally refused, but the rebuff did not much affect the
petitioner.

At ten A.M. we went to the residence of the commandant, and on a signal
being given, two of the four brass guns belonging to the government
commenced firing, and continued some time, to the great admiration of
my men, whose ideas of the power of a cannon are very exalted. The
Portuguese flag was hoisted and trumpets sounded, as an expression
of joy at the resurrection of our Lord. Captain Neves invited all the
principal inhabitants of the place, and did what he could to feast them
in a princely style. All manner of foreign preserved fruits and wine
from Portugal, biscuits from America, butter from Cork, and beer
from England, were displayed, and no expense spared in rendering the
entertainment joyous. After the feast was over they sat down to the
common amusement of card-playing, which continued till eleven o'clock at
night. As far as a mere traveler could judge, they seemed to be polite
and willing to aid each other. They live in a febrile district, and
many of them had enlarged spleens. They have neither doctor, apothecary,
school, nor priest, and, when taken ill, trust to each other and to
Providence. As men left in such circumstances must think for themselves,
they have all a good idea of what ought to be done in the common
diseases of the country, and what they have of either medicine or skill
they freely impart to each other.

None of these gentlemen had Portuguese wives. They usually come to
Africa in order to make a little money, and return to Lisbon. Hence
they seldom bring their wives with them, and never can be successful
colonists in consequence. It is common for them to have families
by native women. It was particularly gratifying to me, who had been
familiar with the stupid prejudice against color, entertained only by
those who are themselves becoming tawny, to view the liberality with
which people of color were treated by the Portuguese. Instances, so
common in the South, in which half-caste children are abandoned, are
here extremely rare. They are acknowledged at table, and provided for by
their fathers as if European. The colored clerks of the merchants sit at
the same table with their employers without any embarrassment. The civil
manners of superiors to inferiors is probably the result of the position
they occupy--a few whites among thousands of blacks; but nowhere else in
Africa is there so much good-will between Europeans and natives as here.
If some border colonists had the absolute certainty of our government
declining to bear them out in their arrogance, we should probably hear
less of Caffre insolence. It is insolence which begets insolence.

From the village of Cassange we have a good view of the surrounding
country: it is a gently undulating plain, covered with grass and patches
of forest. The western edge of the Quango valley appears, about twenty
miles off, as if it were a range of lofty mountains, and passes by the
name of Tala Mungongo, "Behold the Range". In the old Portuguese map, to
which I had been trusting in planning my route, it is indicated as Talla
Mugongo, or "Castle of Rocks!" and the Coanza is put down as rising
therefrom; but here I was assured that the Coanza had its source near
Bihe, far to the southwest of this, and we should not see that river
till we came near Pungo Andonga. It is somewhat remarkable that more
accurate information about this country has not been published. Captain
Neves and others had a correct idea of the courses of the rivers, and
communicated their knowledge freely; yet about this time maps were sent
to Europe from Angola representing the Quango and Coanza as the same
river, and Cassange placed about one hundred miles from its true
position. The frequent recurrence of the same name has probably helped
to increase the confusion. I have crossed several Quangos, but all
insignificant, except that which drains this valley. The repetition of
the favorite names of chiefs, as Catende, is also perplexing, as one
Catende may be mistaken for another. To avoid this confusion as much
as possible, I have refrained from introducing many names. Numerous
villages are studded all over the valley; but these possess no
permanence, and many more existed previous to the Portuguese expedition
of 1850 to punish the Bangala.

This valley, as I have before remarked, is all fertile in the extreme.
My men could never cease admiring its capability for raising their corn
('Holcus sorghum'), and despising the comparatively limited cultivation
of the inhabitants. The Portuguese informed me that no manure is ever
needed, but that, the more the ground is tilled, the better it yields.
Virgin soil does not give such a heavy crop as an old garden, and,
judging from the size of the maize and manioc in the latter, I can
readily believe the statement. Cattle do well, too. Viewing the valley
as a whole, it may be said that its agricultural and pastoral riches
are lying waste. Both the Portuguese and their descendants turn their
attention almost exclusively to trade in wax and ivory, and though the
country would yield any amount of corn and dairy produce, the native
Portuguese live chiefly on manioc, and the Europeans purchase their
flour, bread, butter, and cheese from the Americans.

As the traders of Cassange were the first white men we had come to, we
sold the tusks belonging to Sekeletu, which had been brought to test the
difference of prices in the Makololo and white men's country. The result
was highly satisfactory to my companions, as the Portuguese give much
larger prices for ivory than traders from the Cape can possibly give,
who labor under the disadvantage of considerable overland expenses and
ruinous restrictions. Two muskets, three small barrels of gunpowder, and
English calico and baize sufficient to clothe my whole party, with large
bunches of beads, all for one tusk, were quite delightful for those who
had been accustomed to give two tusks for one gun. With another tusk we
procured calico, which here is the chief currency, to pay our way down
to the coast. The remaining two were sold for money to purchase a horse
for Sekeletu at Loanda.

The superiority of this new market was quite astounding to the Makololo,
and they began to abuse the traders by whom they had, while in their own
country, been visited, and, as they now declared, "cheated". They had
no idea of the value of time and carriage, and it was somewhat difficult
for me to convince them that the reason of the difference of prices lay
entirely in what they themselves had done in coming here, and that, if
the Portuguese should carry goods to their country, they would by no
means be so liberal in their prices. They imagined that, if the Cassange
traders came to Linyanti, they would continue to vend their goods at
Cassange prices. I believe I gave them at last a clear idea of the
manner in which prices were regulated by the expenses incurred; and when
we went to Loanda, and saw goods delivered at a still cheaper rate, they
concluded that it would be better for them to come to that city, than to
turn homeward at Cassange.

It was interesting for me to observe the effects of the restrictive
policy pursued by the Cape government toward the Bechuanas. Like all
other restrictions on trade, the law of preventing friendly tribes from
purchasing arms and ammunition only injures the men who enforce it. The
Cape government, as already observed, in order to gratify a company of
independent Boers, whose well-known predilection for the practice of
slavery caused them to stipulate that a number of peaceable, honest
tribes should be kept defenseless, agreed to allow free trade in
arms and ammunition to the Boers, and prevent the same trade to the
Bechuanas. The Cape government thereby unintentionally aided, and
continues to aid, the Boers to enslave the natives. But arms and
ammunition flow in on all sides by new channels, and where formerly the
price of a large tusk procured but one musket, one tusk of the same size
now brings ten. The profits are reaped by other nations, and the only
persons really the losers, in the long run, are our own Cape merchants,
and a few defenseless tribes of Bechuanas on our immediate frontier.

Mr. Rego, the commandant, very handsomely offered me a soldier as a
guard to Ambaca. My men told me that they had been thinking it would
be better to turn back here, as they had been informed by the people of
color at Cassange that I was leading them down to the sea-coast only to
sell them, and they would be taken on board ship, fattened, and eaten,
as the white men were cannibals. I asked if they had ever heard of an
Englishman buying or selling people; if I had not refused to take a
slave when she was offered to me by Shinte; but, as I had always behaved
as an English teacher, if they now doubted my intentions, they had
better not go to the coast; I, however, who expected to meet some of my
countrymen there, was determined to go on. They replied that they only
thought it right to tell me what had been told to them, but they did
not intend to leave me, and would follow wherever I should lead the way.
This affair being disposed of for the time, the commandant gave them
an ox, and me a friendly dinner before parting. All the merchants of
Cassange accompanied us, in their hammocks carried by slaves, to the
edge of the plateau on which their village stands, and we parted with
the feeling in my mind that I should never forget their disinterested
kindness. They not only did every thing they could to make my men and me
comfortable during our stay; but, there being no hotels in Loanda, they
furnished me with letters of recommendation to their friends in that
city, requesting them to receive me into their houses, for without these
a stranger might find himself a lodger in the streets. May God remember
them in their day of need!

The latitude and longitude of Cassange, the most easterly station of the
Portuguese in Western Africa, is lat. 9d 37' 30" S., and long. 17d 49'
E.; consequently we had still about 300 miles to traverse before we
could reach the coast. We had a black militia corporal as a guide. He
was a native of Ambaca, and, like nearly all the inhabitants of that
district, known by the name of Ambakistas, could both read and write.
He had three slaves with him, and was carried by them in a "tipoia", or
hammock slung to a pole. His slaves were young, and unable to convey him
far at a time, but he was considerate enough to walk except when we came
near to a village. He then mounted his tipoia and entered the village
in state; his departure was made in the same manner, and he continued
in the hammock till the village was out of sight. It was interesting
to observe the manners of our soldier-guide. Two slaves were always
employed in carrying his tipoia, and the third carried a wooden box,
about three feet long, containing his writing materials, dishes, and
clothing. He was cleanly in all his ways, and, though quite black
himself, when he scolded any one of his own color, abused him as a
"negro". When he wanted to purchase any article from a village, he would
sit down, mix a little gunpowder as ink, and write a note in a neat
hand to ask the price, addressing it to the shopkeeper with the rather
pompous title, "Illustrissimo Senhor" (Most Illustrious Sir). This is
the invariable mode of address throughout Angola. The answer returned
would be in the same style, and, if satisfactory, another note followed
to conclude the bargain. There is so much of this note correspondence
carried on in Angola, that a very large quantity of paper is annually
consumed. Some other peculiarities of our guide were not so pleasing.
A land of slaves is a bad school for even the free; and I was sorry to
find less truthfulness and honesty in him than in my own people. We were
often cheated through his connivance with the sellers of food, and could
perceive that he got a share of the plunder from them. The food is very
cheap, but it was generally made dear enough, until I refused to allow
him to come near the place where we were bargaining. But he took us
safely down to Ambaca, and I was glad to see, on my return to Cassange,
that he was promoted to be sergeant-major of a company of militia.

Having left Cassange on the 21st, we passed across the remaining portion
of this excessively fertile valley to the foot of Tala Mungongo. We
crossed a fine little stream called the Lui on the 22d, and another
named the Luare on the 24th, then slept at the bottom of the height,
which is from a thousand to fifteen hundred feet. The clouds came
floating along the valley, and broke against the sides of the ascent,
and the dripping rain on the tall grass made the slaps in the face it
gave, when the hand or a stick was not held up before it, any thing but
agreeable. This edge of the valley is exactly like the other; jutting
spurs and defiles give the red ascent the same serrated appearance as
that which we descended from the highlands of Londa. The whole of this
vast valley has been removed by denudation, for pieces of the plateau
which once filled the now vacant space stand in it, and present the same
structure of red horizontal strata of equal altitudes with those of
the acclivity which we are now about to ascend. One of these insulated
masses, named Kasala, bore E.S.E. from the place where we made our
exit from the valley, and about ten miles W.S.W. from the village of
Cassange. It is remarkable for its perpendicular sides; even the natives
find it extremely difficult, almost impossible, to reach its summit,
though there is the temptation of marabou-nests and feathers, which are
highly prized. There is a small lake reported to exist on its southern
end, and, during the rainy season, a sort of natural moat is formed
around the bottom. What an acquisition this would have been in feudal
times in England! There is land sufficient for considerable cultivation
on the top, with almost perpendicular sides more than a thousand feet in
height.

We had not yet got a clear idea of the nature of Tala Mungongo. A
gentleman of Cassange described it as a range of very high mountains,
which it would take four hours to climb; so, though the rain and grass
had wetted us miserably, and I was suffering from an attack of fever
got while observing by night for the position of Cassange, I eagerly
commenced the ascent. The path was steep and slippery; deep gorges
appear on each side of it, leaving but a narrow path along certain spurs
of the sierra for the traveler; but we accomplished the ascent in an
hour, and when there, found we had just got on to a table-land similar
to that we had left before we entered the great Quango valley. We had
come among lofty trees again. One of these, bearing a fruit about the
size of a thirty-two pounder, is named Mononga-zambi.

We took a glance back to this valley, which equals that of the
Mississippi in fertility, and thought of the vast mass of material which
had been scooped out and carried away in its formation. This naturally
led to reflection on the countless ages required for the previous
formation and deposition of that same material (clay shale), then of
the rocks, whose abrasion formed THAT, until the mind grew giddy in
attempting to ascend the steps which lead up through a portion of the
eternity before man. The different epochs of geology are like landmarks
in that otherwise shoreless sea. Our own epoch, or creation, is but
another added to the number of that wonderful series which presents a
grand display of the mighty power of God: every stage of progress in
the earth and its habitants is such a display. So far from this science
having any tendency to make men undervalue the power or love of God,
it leads to the probability that the exhibition of mercy we have in
the gift of his Son may possibly not be the only manifestation of
grace which has taken place in the countless ages during which works of
creation have been going on.

Situated a few miles from the edge of the descent, we found the village
of Tala Mungongo, and were kindly accommodated with a house to sleep in,
which was very welcome, as we were all both wet and cold. We found that
the greater altitude and the approach of winter lowered the temperature
so much that many of my men suffered severely from colds. At this, as
at several other Portuguese stations, they have been provident enough to
erect travelers' houses on the same principle as khans or caravanserais
of the East. They are built of the usual wattle and daub, and have
benches of rods for the wayfarer to make his bed on; also chairs, and
a table, and a large jar of water. These benches, though far from
luxurious couches, were better than the ground under the rotten
fragments of my gipsy-tent, for we had still showers occasionally, and
the dews were very heavy. I continued to use them for the sake of the
shelter they afforded, until I found that they were lodgings also for
certain inconvenient bedfellows.

27TH. Five hours' ride through a pleasant country of forest and meadow,
like those of Londa, brought us to a village of Basongo, a tribe living
in subjection to the Portuguese. We crossed several little streams,
which were flowing in the westerly direction in which we were marching,
and unite to form the Quize, a feeder of the Coanza. The Basongo were
very civil, as indeed all the tribes were who had been conquered by the
Portuguese. The Basongo and Bangala are yet only partially subdued. The
farther west we go from this, the less independent we find the black
population, until we reach the vicinity of Loanda, where the free
natives are nearly identical in their feelings toward the government
with the slaves. But the governors of Angola wisely accept the limited
allegiance and tribute rendered by the more distant tribes as better
than none.

All the inhabitants of this region, as well as those of Londa, may be
called true negroes, if the limitations formerly made be borne in mind.
The dark color, thick lips, heads elongated backward and upward and
covered with wool, flat noses, with other negro peculiarities, are
general; but, while these characteristics place them in the true negro
family, the reader would imbibe a wrong idea if he supposed that all
these features combined are often met with in one individual. All have a
certain thickness and prominence of lip, but many are met with in every
village in whom thickness and projection are not more marked than
in Europeans. All are dark, but the color is shaded off in different
individuals from deep black to light yellow. As we go westward, we
observe the light color predominating over the dark, and then again,
when we come within the influence of damp from the sea air, we find the
shade deepen into the general blackness of the coast population.
The shape of the head, with its woolly crop, though general, is not
universal. The tribes on the eastern side of the continent, as the
Caffres, have heads finely developed and strongly European. Instances of
this kind are frequently seen, and after I became so familiar with the
dark color as to forget it in viewing the countenance, I was struck
by the strong resemblance some natives bore to certain of our own
notabilities. The Bushmen and Hottentots are exceptions to these
remarks, for both the shape of their heads and growth of wool are
peculiar; the latter, for instance, springs from the scalp in tufts with
bare spaces between, and when the crop is short, resembles a number of
black pepper-corns stuck on the skin, and very unlike the thick frizzly
masses which cover the heads of the Balonda and Maravi. With every
disposition to pay due deference to the opinions of those who have made
ethnology their special study, I have felt myself unable to believe that
the exaggerated features usually put forth as those of the typical negro
characterize the majority of any nation of south Central Africa. The
monuments of the ancient Egyptians seem to me to embody the ideal of the
inhabitants of Londa better than the figures of any work of ethnology I
have met with.

Passing through a fine, fertile, and well-peopled country to Sanza,
we found the Quize River again touching our path, and here we had
the pleasure of seeing a field of wheat growing luxuriantly without
irrigation. The ears were upward of four inches long, an object of
great curiosity to my companions, because they had tasted my bread at
Linyanti, but had never before seen wheat growing. This small field was
cultivated by Mr. Miland, an agreeable Portuguese merchant. His garden
was interesting, as showing what the land at this elevation is capable
of yielding; for, besides wheat, we saw European vegetables in a
flourishing condition, and we afterward discovered that the coffee-plant
has propagated itself on certain spots of this same district. It may be
seen on the heights of Tala Mungongo, or nearly 300 miles from the west
coast, where it was first introduced by the Jesuit missionaries.

We spent Sunday, the 30th of April, at Ngio, close to the ford of
the Quize as it crosses our path to fall into the Coanza. The country
becomes more open, but is still abundantly fertile, with a thick crop
of grass between two and three feet high. It is also well wooded
and watered. Villages of Basongo are dotted over the landscape, and
frequently a square house of wattle and daub, belonging to native
Portuguese, is placed beside them for the purposes of trade. The people
here possess both cattle and pigs. The different sleeping-places on our
path, from eight to ten miles apart, are marked by a cluster of sheds
made of sticks and grass. There is a constant stream of people going and
returning to and from the coast. The goods are carried on the head, or
on one shoulder, in a sort of basket attached to the extremities of two
poles between five and six feet long, and called Motete. When the basket
is placed on the head, the poles project forward horizontally, and when
the carrier wishes to rest himself, he plants them on the ground and
the burden against a tree, so he is not obliged to lift it up from the
ground to the level of the head. It stands against the tree propped up
by the poles at that level. The carrier frequently plants the poles on
the ground, and stands holding the burden until he has taken breath,
thus avoiding the trouble of placing the burden on the ground and
lifting it up again.

When a company of these carriers, or our own party, arrives at one of
these sleeping-places, immediate possession is taken of the sheds.
Those who come late, and find all occupied, must then erect others for
themselves; but this is not difficult, for there is no lack of long
grass. No sooner do any strangers appear at the spot, than the women
may be seen emerging from their villages bearing baskets of manioc-meal,
roots, ground-nuts, yams, bird's-eye pepper, and garlic for sale.
Calico, of which we had brought some from Cassange, is the chief medium
of exchange. We found them all civil, and it was evident, from the
amount of talking and laughing in bargaining, that the ladies enjoyed
their occupation. They must cultivate largely, in order to be able to
supply the constant succession of strangers. Those, however, near to the
great line of road, purchase also much of the food from the more distant
villages for the sake of gain.

Pitsane and another of the men had violent attacks of fever, and it
was no wonder, for the dampness and evaporation from the ground was
excessive. When at any time I attempted to get an observation of a star,
if the trough of mercury were placed on the ground, so much moisture
was condensed on the inside of the glass roof over it that it was with
difficulty the reflection of the star could be seen. When the trough was
placed on a box to prevent the moisture entering from below, so much dew
was deposited on the outside of the roof that it was soon necessary, for
the sake of distinct vision, to wipe the glass. This would not have been
of great consequence, but a short exposure to this dew was so sure to
bring on a fresh fever, that I was obliged to give up observations by
night altogether. The inside of the only covering I now had was not much
better, but under the blanket one is not so liable to the chill which
the dew produces.

It would have afforded me pleasure to have cultivated a more intimate
acquaintance with the inhabitants of this part of the country, but the
vertigo produced by frequent fevers made it as much as I could do to
stick on the ox and crawl along in misery. In crossing the Lombe, my ox
Sinbad, in the indulgence of his propensity to strike out a new path for
himself, plunged overhead into a deep hole, and so soused me that I was
obliged to move on to dry my clothing, without calling on the Europeans
who live on the bank. This I regretted, for all the Portuguese were very
kind, and, like the Boers placed in similar circumstances, feel it a
slight to be passed without a word of salutation. But we went on to a
spot where orange-trees had been planted by the natives themselves, and
where abundance of that refreshing fruit was exposed for sale.

On entering the district of Ambaca, we found the landscape enlivened
by the appearance of lofty mountains in the distance, the grass
comparatively short, and the whole country at this time looking gay and
verdant. On our left we saw certain rocks of the same nature with those
of Pungo Andongo, and which closely resemble the Stonehenge group on
Salisbury Plain, only the stone pillars here are of gigantic size. This
region is all wonderfully fertile, famed for raising cattle, and all
kinds of agricultural produce, at a cheap rate. The soil contains
sufficient ferruginous matter, to impart a red tinge to nearly the whole
of it. It is supplied with a great number of little flowing streams
which unite in the Lucalla. This river drains Ambaca, then falls into
the Coanza to the southwest at Massangano. We crossed the Lucalla by
means of a large canoe kept there by a man who farms the ferry from the
government, and charges about a penny per head. A few miles beyond the
Lucalla we came to the village of Ambaca, an important place in former
times, but now a mere paltry village, beautifully situated on a little
elevation in a plain surrounded on all hands by lofty mountains. It
has a jail, and a good house for the commandant, but neither fort nor
church, though the ruins of a place of worship are still standing.

We were most kindly received by the commandant of Ambaca, Arsenio de
Carpo, who spoke a little English. He recommended wine for my debility,
and here I took the first glass of that beverage I had taken in Africa.
I felt much refreshed, and could then realize and meditate on the
weakening effects of the fever. They were curious even to myself;
for, though I had tried several times since we left Ngio to take lunar
observations, I could not avoid confusion of time and distance, neither
could I hold the instrument steady, nor perform a simple calculation;
hence many of the positions of this part of the route were left till
my return from Loanda. Often, on getting up in the mornings, I found my
clothing as wet from perspiration as if it had been dipped in water.
In vain had I tried to learn or collect words of the Bunda, or dialect
spoken in Angola. I forgot the days of the week and the names of my
companions, and, had I been asked, I probably could not have told
my own. The complaint itself occupied many of my thoughts. One day I
supposed that I had got the true theory of it, and would certainly cure
the next attack, whether in myself or companions; but some new symptoms
would appear, and scatter all the fine speculations which had sprung up,
with extraordinary fertility, in one department of my brain.

This district is said to contain upward of 40,000 souls. Some ten or
twelve miles to the north of the village of Ambaca there once stood
the missionary station of Cahenda, and it is now quite astonishing to
observe the great numbers who can read and write in this district. This
is the fruit of the labors of the Jesuit and Capuchin missionaries, for
they taught the people of Ambaca; and ever since the expulsion of the
teachers by the Marquis of Pombal, the natives have continued to
teach each other. These devoted men are still held in high estimation
throughout the country to this day. All speak well of them (os padres
Jesuitas); and, now that they are gone from this lower sphere, I could
not help wishing that these our Roman Catholic fellow-Christians had
felt it to be their duty to give the people the Bible, to be a light to
their feet when the good men themselves were gone.

When sleeping in the house of the commandant, an insect, well known in
the southern country by the name Tampan, bit my foot. It is a kind of
tick, and chooses by preference the parts between the fingers or toes
for inflicting its bite. It is seen from the size of a pin's head to
that of a pea, and is common in all the native huts in this country. It
sucks the blood until quite full, and is then of a dark blue color, and
its skin so tough and yielding that it is impossible to burst it by any
amount of squeezing with the fingers. I had felt the effects of its bite
in former years, and eschewed all native huts ever after; but as I was
here again assailed in a European house, I shall detail the effects of
the bite. These are a tingling sensation of mingled pain and itching,
which commences ascending the limb until the poison imbibed reaches the
abdomen, where it soon causes violent vomiting and purging. Where these
effects do not follow, as we found afterward at Tete, fever sets in; and
I was assured by intelligent Portuguese there that death has sometimes
been the result of this fever. The anxiety my friends at Tete manifested
to keep my men out of the reach of the tampans of the village made it
evident that they had seen cause to dread this insignificant insect.
The only inconvenience I afterward suffered from this bite was the
continuance of the tingling sensation in the point bitten for about a
week.

MAY 12TH. As we were about to start this morning, the commandant, Senhor
Arsenio, provided bread and meat most bountifully for my use on the way
to the next station, and sent two militia soldiers as guides, instead
of our Cassange corporal, who left us here. About midday we asked for
shelter from the sun in the house of Senhor Mellot, at Zangu, and,
though I was unable to sit and engage in conversation, I found, on
rising from his couch, that he had at once proceeded to cook a fowl for
my use; and at parting he gave me a glass of wine, which prevented
the violent fit of shivering I expected that afternoon. The universal
hospitality of the Portuguese was most gratifying, as it was quite
unexpected; and even now, as I copy my journal, I remember it all with a
glow of gratitude.

We spent Sunday, the 14th of May, at Cabinda, which is one of the
stations of the sub-commandants, who are placed at different points in
each district of Angola as assistants of the head-commandant, or chefe.
It is situated in a beautiful glen, and surrounded by plantations of
bananas and manioc. The country was gradually becoming more picturesque
the farther we proceeded west. The ranges of lofty blue mountains of
Libollo, which, in coming toward Ambaca, we had seen thirty or forty
miles to our south, were now shut from our view by others nearer at
hand, and the gray ranges of Cahenda and Kiwe, which, while we were in
Ambaca, stood clearly defined eight or ten miles off to the north, were
now close upon our right. As we looked back toward the open pastoral
country of Ambaca, the broad green gently undulating plains seemed in
a hollow surrounded on all sides by rugged mountains, and as we
went westward we were entering upon quite a wild-looking mountainous
district, called Golungo Alto.

We met numbers of Mambari on their way back to Bihe. Some of them had
belonged to the parties which had penetrated as far as Linyanti, and
foolishly showed their displeasure at the prospect of the Makololo
preferring to go to the coast markets themselves to intrusting them
with their ivory. The Mambari repeated the tale of the mode in which
the white men are said to trade. "The ivory is left on the shore in the
evening, and next morning the seller finds a quantity of goods placed
there in its stead by the white men who live in the sea." "Now," added
they to my men, "how can you Makololo trade with these 'Mermen'? Can you
enter into the sea, and tell them to come ashore?" It was remarkable to
hear this idea repeated so near the sea as we now were. My men replied
that they only wanted to see for themselves; and, as they were now
getting some light on the nature of the trade carried on by the Mambari,
they were highly amused on perceiving the reasons why the Mambari would
rather have met them on the Zambesi than so near the sea-coast.

There is something so exhilarating to one of Highland blood in being
near or on high mountains, that I forgot my fever as we wended our
way among the lofty tree-covered masses of mica schist which form the
highlands around the romantic residence of the chefe of Golungo Alto.
(Lat. 9d 8' 30" S., long. 15d 2' E.) The whole district is extremely
beautiful. The hills are all bedecked with trees of various hues of
foliage, and among them towers the graceful palm, which yields the
oil of commerce for making our soaps, and the intoxicating toddy. Some
clusters of hills look like the waves of the sea driven into a narrow
open bay, and have assumed the same form as if, when all were chopping
up perpendicularly, they had suddenly been congealed. The cottages of
the natives, perched on the tops of many of the hillocks, looked as if
the owners possessed an eye for the romantic, but they were probably
influenced more by the desire to overlook their gardens, and keep their
families out of the reach of the malaria, which is supposed to prevail
most on the banks of the numerous little streams which run among the
hills.

We were most kindly received by the commandant, Lieutenant Antonio Canto
e Castro, a young gentleman whose whole subsequent conduct will ever
make me regard him with great affection. Like every other person of
intelligence whom I had met, he lamented deeply the neglect with which
this fine country has been treated. This district contained by the last
census 26,000 hearths or fires; and if to each hearth we reckon four
souls, we have a population of 104,000. The number of carregadores
(carriers) who may be ordered out at the pleasure of government to
convey merchandise to the coast is in this district alone about 6000,
yet there is no good road in existence. This system of compulsory
carriage of merchandise was adopted in consequence of the increase in
numbers and activity of our cruisers, which took place in 1845. Each
trader who went, previous to that year, into the interior, in the
pursuit of his calling, proceeded on the plan of purchasing ivory and
beeswax, and a sufficient number of slaves to carry these commodities.
The whole were intended for exportation as soon as the trader reached
the coast. But when the more stringent measures of 1845 came into
operation, and rendered the exportation of slaves almost impossible,
there being no roads proper for the employment of wheel conveyances,
this new system of compulsory carriage of ivory and beeswax to the coast
was resorted to by the government of Loanda. A trader who requires two
or three hundred carriers to convey his merchandise to the coast now
applies to the general government for aid. An order is sent to the
commandant of a district to furnish the number required. Each head man
of the villages to whom the order is transmitted must furnish from five
to twenty or thirty men, according to the proportion that his people
bear to the entire population of the district. For this accommodation
the trader must pay a tax to the government of 1000 reis, or about three
shillings per load carried. The trader is obliged to pay the carrier
also the sum of 50 reis, or about twopence a day, for his sustenance.
And as a day's journey is never more than from eight to ten miles, the
expense which must be incurred for this compulsory labor is felt to be
heavy by those who were accustomed to employ slave labor alone. Yet no
effort has been made to form a great line of road for wheel carriages.
The first great want of a country has not been attended to, and no
development of its vast resources has taken place. The fact, however,
of a change from one system of carriage to another, taken in connection
with the great depreciation in the price of slaves near this coast,
proves the effectiveness of our efforts at repressing the slave-trade on
the ocean.

The latitude of Golungo Alto, as observed at the residence of the
commandant, was 9d 8' 30" S., longitude 15d 2' E. A few days' rest with
this excellent young man enabled me to regain much of my strength, and
I could look with pleasure on the luxuriant scenery before his door. We
were quite shut in among green hills, many of which were cultivated
up to their tops with manioc, coffee, cotton, ground-nuts, bananas,
pine-apples, guavas, papaws, custard-apples, pitangas, and jambos,
fruits brought from South America by the former missionaries. The high
hills all around, with towering palms on many points, made this spot
appear more like the Bay of Rio de Janeiro in miniature than any scene
I ever saw; and all who have seen that confess it to be unequaled in the
world beside. The fertility evident in every spot of this district was
quite marvelous to behold, but I shall reserve further notices of this
region till our return from Loanda.

We left Golungo Alto on the 24th of May, the winter in these parts.
Every evening clouds come rolling in great masses over the mountains in
the west, and pealing thunder accompanies the fall of rain during the
night or early in the morning. The clouds generally remain on the hills
till the morning is well spent, so that we become familiar with morning
mists, a thing we never once saw at Kolobeng. The thermometer stands at
80 Degrees by day, but sinks as low as 76 Degrees by night.

In going westward we crossed several fine little gushing streams which
never dry. They unite in the Luinha (pronounced Lueenya) and Lucalla. As
they flow over many little cascades, they might easily be turned to good
account, but they are all allowed to run on idly to the ocean. We passed
through forests of gigantic timber, and at an open space named Cambondo,
about eight miles from Golungo Alto, found numbers of carpenters
converting these lofty trees into planks, in exactly the same manner as
was followed by the illustrious Robinson Crusoe. A tree of three or four
feet in diameter, and forty or fifty feet up to the nearest branches,
was felled. It was then cut into lengths of a few feet, and split
into thick junks, which again were reduced to planks an inch thick by
persevering labor with the axe. The object of the carpenters was to make
little chests, and they drive a constant trade in them at Cambondo. When
finished with hinges, lock, and key, all of their own manufacture, one
costs only a shilling and eightpence. My men were so delighted with
them that they carried several of them on their heads all the way to
Linyanti.

At Trombeta we were pleased to observe a great deal of taste displayed
by the sub-commandant in the laying out of his ground and adornment of
his house with flowers. This trifling incident was the more pleasing,
as it was the first attempt at neatness I had seen since leaving the
establishment of Mozinkwa in Londa. Rows of trees had been planted
along each side of the road, with pine-apples and flowers between. This
arrangement I had an opportunity of seeing in several other districts of
this country, for there is no difficulty in raising any plant or tree if
it is only kept from being choked by weeds.

This gentleman had now a fine estate, which but a few years ago was
a forest, and cost him only 16 Pounds. He had planted about 900
coffee-trees upon it, and as these begin to yield in three years from
being planted, and in six attain their maximum, I have no doubt but that
ere now his 16 Pounds yields him sixty fold. All sorts of fruit-trees
and grape-vines yield their fruit twice in each year, without any labor
or irrigation being bestowed on them. All grains and vegetables, if only
sown, do the same; and if advantage is taken of the mists of winter,
even three crops of pulse may be raised. Cotton was now standing in the
pods in his fields, and he did not seem to care about it. I understood
him to say that this last plant flourishes, but the wet of one of the
two rainy seasons with which this country is favored sometimes proves
troublesome to the grower. I am not aware whether wheat has ever been
tried, but I saw both figs and grapes bearing well. The great complaint
of all cultivators is the want of a good road to carry their produce to
market. Here all kinds of food are remarkably cheap.

Farther on we left the mountainous country, and, as we descended toward
the west coast, saw the lands assuming a more sterile, uninviting
aspect. On our right ran the River Senza, which nearer the sea takes the
name of Bengo. It is about fifty yards broad, and navigable for canoes.
The low plains adjacent to its banks are protected from inundation by
embankments, and the population is entirely occupied in raising food
and fruits for exportation to Loanda by means of canoes. The banks are
infested by myriads of the most ferocious mosquitoes I ever met. Not one
of our party could get a snatch of sleep. I was taken into the house
of a Portuguese, but was soon glad to make my escape and lie across the
path on the lee side of the fire, where the smoke blew over my body. My
host wondered at my want of taste, and I at his want of feeling; for, to
our astonishment, he and the other inhabitants had actually become used
to what was at least equal to a nail through the heel of one's boot, or
the tooth-ache.

As we were now drawing near to the sea, my companions were looking at
every thing in a serious light. One of them asked me if we should all
have an opportunity of watching each other at Loanda. "Suppose one went
for water, would the others see if he were kidnapped?" I replied, "I see
what you are driving at; and if you suspect me, you may return, for I
am as ignorant of Loanda as you are; but nothing will happen to you but
what happens to myself. We have stood by each other hitherto, and will
do so to the last." The plains adjacent to Loanda are somewhat elevated
and comparatively sterile. On coming across these we first beheld
the sea: my companions looked upon the boundless ocean with awe. On
describing their feelings afterward, they remarked that "we marched
along with our father, believing that what the ancients had always told
us was true, that the world has no end; but all at once the world
said to us, 'I am finished; there is no more of me!'" They had always
imagined that the world was one extended plain without limit.

They were now somewhat apprehensive of suffering want, and I was unable
to allay their fears with any promise of supply, for my own mind was
depressed by disease and care. The fever had induced a state of chronic
dysentery, so troublesome that I could not remain on the ox more than
ten minutes at a time; and as we came down the declivity above the city
of Loanda on the 31st of May, I was laboring under great depression of
spirits, as I understood that, in a population of twelve thousand souls,
there was but one genuine English gentleman. I naturally felt anxious
to know whether he were possessed of good-nature, or was one of those
crusty mortals one would rather not meet at all.

This gentleman, Mr. Gabriel, our commissioner for the suppression of the
slave-trade, had kindly forwarded an invitation to meet me on the way
from Cassange, but, unfortunately, it crossed me on the road. When we
entered his porch, I was delighted to see a number of flowers cultivated
carefully, and inferred from this circumstance that he was, what I soon
discovered him to be, a real whole-hearted Englishman.

Seeing me ill, he benevolently offered me his bed. Never shall I forget
the luxurious pleasure I enjoyed in feeling myself again on a good
English couch, after six months' sleeping on the ground. I was soon
asleep; and Mr. Gabriel, coming in almost immediately, rejoiced at the
soundness of my repose.




Chapter 20.

Continued Sickness--Kindness of the Bishop of Angola and her Majesty's
Officers--Mr. Gabriel's unwearied Hospitality--Serious Deportment of
the Makololo--They visit Ships of War--Politeness of the Officers and
Men--The Makololo attend Mass in the Cathedral--Their Remarks--Find
Employment in collecting Firewood and unloading Coal--Their superior
Judgment respecting Goods--Beneficial Influence of the Bishop of
Angola--The City of St. Paul de Loanda--The Harbor--Custom-house--No
English Merchants--Sincerity of the Portuguese Government in suppressing
the Slave-trade--Convict Soldiers--Presents from Bishop and Merchants
for Sekeletu--Outfit--Leave Loanda 20th September, 1854--Accompanied
by Mr. Gabriel as far as Icollo i Bengo--Sugar Manufactory--Geology
of this part of the Country--Women spinning Cotton--Its Price--Native
Weavers--Market-places--Cazengo; its Coffee Plantations--South American
Trees--Ruins of Iron Foundry--Native Miners--The Banks of the Lucalla--
Cottages with Stages--Tobacco-plants--Town of Massangano--Sugar and
Rice--Superior District for Cotton--Portuguese Merchants and foreign
Enterprise--Ruins--The Fort and its ancient Guns--Former Importance
of Massangano--Fires--The Tribe Kisama--Peculiar Variety of Domestic
Fowl--Coffee Plantations--Return to Golungo Alto--Self-complacency of
the Makololo--Fever--Jaundice--Insanity.



In the hope that a short enjoyment of Mr. Gabriel's generous hospitality
would restore me to my wonted vigor, I continued under his roof; but my
complaint having been caused by long exposure to malarious influences,
I became much more reduced than ever, even while enjoying rest. Several
Portuguese gentlemen called on me shortly after my arrival; and the
Bishop of Angola, the Right Reverend Joaquim Moreira Reis, then the
acting governor of the province, sent his secretary to do the same, and
likewise to offer the services of the government physician.

Some of her majesty's cruisers soon came into the port, and, seeing the
emaciated condition to which I was reduced, offered to convey me to St.
Helena or homeward; but, though I had reached the coast, I had found
that, in consequence of the great amount of forest, rivers, and marsh,
there was no possibility of a highway for wagons, and I had brought
a party of Sekeletu's people with me, and found the tribes near the
Portuguese settlement so very unfriendly, that it would be altogether
impossible for my men to return alone. I therefore resolved to decline
the tempting offers of my naval friends, and take back my Makololo
companions to their chief, with a view of trying to make a path from
his country to the east coast by means of the great river Zambesi or
Leeambye.

I, however, gladly availed myself of the medical assistance of Mr.
Cockin, the surgeon of the "Polyphemus", at the suggestion of his
commander, Captain Phillips. Mr. Cockin's treatment, aided by the
exhilarating presence of the warm-hearted naval officers, and Mr.
Gabriel's unwearied hospitality and care, soon brought me round again.
On the 14th I was so far well as to call on the bishop, in company with
my party, who were arrayed in new robes of striped cotton cloth and red
caps, all presented to them by Mr. Gabriel. He received us, as head of
the provisional government, in the grand hall of the palace. He put many
intelligent questions respecting the Makololo, and then gave them free
permission to come to Loanda as often as they pleased. This interview
pleased the Makololo extremely.

Every one remarked the serious deportment of the Makololo. They viewed
the large stone houses and churches in the vicinity of the great
ocean with awe. A house with two stories was, until now, beyond their
comprehension. In explanation of this strange thing, I had always been
obliged to use the word for hut; and as huts are constructed by the
poles being let into the earth, they never could comprehend how the
poles of one hut could be founded upon the roof of another, or how men
could live in the upper story, with the conical roof of the lower one in
the middle. Some Makololo, who had visited my little house at Kolobeng,
in trying to describe it to their countrymen at Linyanti, said, "It is
not a hut; it is a mountain with several caves in it."

Commander Bedingfeld and Captain Skene invited them to visit their
vessels, the "Pluto" and "Philomel". Knowing their fears, I told them
that no one need go if he entertained the least suspicion of foul play.
Nearly the whole party went; and when on deck, I pointed to the sailors,
and said, "Now these are all my countrymen, sent by our queen for the
purpose of putting down the trade of those that buy and sell black
men." They replied, "Truly! they are just like you!" and all their fears
seemed to vanish at once, for they went forward among the men, and
the jolly tars, acting much as the Makololo would have done in similar
circumstances, handed them a share of the bread and beef which they had
for dinner. The commander allowed them to fire off a cannon; and, having
the most exalted ideas of its power, they were greatly pleased when I
told them, "That is what they put down the slave-trade with." The size
of the brig-of-war amazed them. "It is not a canoe at all; it is a
town!" The sailors' deck they named "the Kotla"; and then, as a climax
to their description of this great ark, added, "And what sort of a town
is it that you must climb up into with a rope?"

The effect of the politeness of the officers and men on their minds was
most beneficial. They had behaved with the greatest kindness to me all
the way from Linyanti, and I now rose rapidly in their estimation;
for, whatever they may have surmised before, they now saw that I was
respected among my own countrymen, and always afterward treated me with
the greatest deference.

On the 15th there was a procession and service of the mass in the
Cathedral; and, wishing to show my men a place of worship, I took them
to the church, which now serves as the chief one of the see of Angola
and Congo. There is an impression on some minds that a gorgeous ritual
is better calculated to inspire devotional feelings than the simple
forms of the Protestant worship. But here the frequent genuflexions,
changing of positions, burning of incense, with the priests' back turned
to the people, the laughing, talking, and manifest irreverence of the
singers, with firing of guns, etc., did not convey to the minds of my
men the idea of adoration. I overheard them, in talking to each other,
remark that "they had seen the white men charming their demons;" a
phrase identical with one they had used when seeing the Balonda beating
drums before their idols.

In the beginning of August I suffered a severe relapse, which reduced
me to a mere skeleton. I was then unable to attend to my men for a
considerable time; but when in convalescence from this last attack, I
was thankful to find that I was free from that lassitude which, in my
first recovery, showed the continuance of the malaria in the system. I
found that my men, without prompting, had established a brisk trade in
fire-wood. They sallied forth at cock-crowing in the mornings, and
by daylight reached the uncultivated parts of the adjacent country,
collected a bundle of fire-wood, and returned to the city. It was then
divided into smaller fagots, and sold to the inhabitants; and as they
gave larger quantities than the regular wood-carriers, they found no
difficulty in selling. A ship freighted with coal for the cruisers
having arrived from England, Mr. Gabriel procured them employment in
unloading her at sixpence a day. They continued at this work for upward
of a month, and nothing could exceed their astonishment at the vast
amount of cargo one ship contained. As they themselves always afterward
expressed it, they had labored every day from sunrise to sunset for
a moon and a half, unloading, as quickly as they could, "stones that
burn", and were tired out, still leaving plenty in her. With the money
so obtained they purchased clothing, beads, and other articles to take
back to their own country. Their ideas of the value of different kinds
of goods rather astonished those who had dealt only with natives on the
coast. Hearing it stated with confidence that the Africans preferred the
thinnest fabrics, provided they had gaudy colors and a large extent of
surface, the idea was so new to my experience in the interior that
I dissented, and, in order to show the superior good sense of the
Makololo, took them to the shop of Mr. Schut. When he showed them the
amount of general goods which they might procure at Loanda for a single
tusk, I requested them, without assigning any reason, to point out the
fabrics they prized most. They all at once selected the strongest pieces
of English calico and other cloths, showing that they had regard to
strength without reference to color. I believe that most of the Bechuana
nation would have done the same. But I was assured that the people
near the coast, with whom the Portuguese have to deal, have not so much
regard to durability. This probably arises from calico being the chief
circulating medium; quantity being then of more importance than quality.

During the period of my indisposition, the bishop sent frequently to
make inquiries, and, as soon as I was able to walk, I went to thank him
for his civilities. His whole conversation and conduct showed him to be
a man of great benevolence and kindness of heart. Alluding to my being a
Protestant, he stated that he was a Catholic from conviction; and though
sorry to see others, like myself, following another path, he entertained
no uncharitable feelings, nor would he ever sanction persecuting
measures. He compared the various sects of Christians, in their way to
heaven, to a number of individuals choosing to pass down the different
streets of Loanda to one of the churches--all would arrive at the same
point at last. His good influence, both in the city and the country, is
universally acknowledged: he was promoting the establishment of schools,
which, though formed more on the monastic principle than Protestants
might approve, will no doubt be a blessing. He was likewise successfully
attempting to abolish the non-marriage custom of the country; and
several marriages had taken place in Loanda among those who, but for his
teaching, would have been content with concubinage.

St. Paul de Loanda has been a very considerable city, but is now in a
state of decay. It contains about twelve thousand inhabitants, most of
whom are people of color.* There are various evidences of its former
magnificence, especially two cathedrals, one of which, once a Jesuit
college, is now converted into a workshop; and in passing the other, we
saw with sorrow a number of oxen feeding within its stately walls. Three
forts continue in a good state of repair. Many large stone houses are
to be found. The palace of the governor and government offices
are commodious structures, but nearly all the houses of the native
inhabitants are of wattle and daub. Trees are planted all over the town
for the sake of shade, and the city presents an imposing appearance from
the sea. It is provided with an effective police, and the custom-house
department is extremely well managed. All parties agree in representing
the Portuguese authorities as both polite and obliging; and if ever
any inconvenience is felt by strangers visiting the port, it must be
considered the fault of the system, and not of the men.

   * From the census of 1850-51 we find the population of this
   city arranged thus:  830 whites, only 160 of whom are females.
   This is the largest collection of whites in the country, for
   Angola itself contains only about 1000 whites. There are 2400
   half-castes in Loanda, and only 120 of them slaves; and there
   are 9000 blacks, more than 5000 of whom are slaves.

The harbor is formed by the low, sandy island of Loanda, which is
inhabited by about 1300 souls, upward of 600 of whom are industrious
native fishermen, who supply the city with abundance of good fish daily.
The space between it and the main land, on which the city is built, is
the station for ships. When a high southwest wind blows, the waves of
the ocean dash over part of the island, and, driving large quantities of
sand before them, gradually fill up the harbor. Great quantities of soil
are also washed in the rainy season from the heights above the city,
so that the port, which once contained water sufficient to float the
largest ships close to the custom-house, is now at low water dry. The
ships are compelled to anchor about a mile north of their old station.
Nearly all the water consumed in Loanda is brought from the River Bengo
by means of launches, the only supply that the city affords being from
some deep wells of slightly brackish water. Unsuccessful attempts have
been made by different governors to finish a canal, which the Dutch,
while in possession of Loanda during the seven years preceding 1648, had
begun, to bring water from the River Coanza to the city. There is not
a single English merchant at Loanda, and only two American. This is the
more remarkable, as nearly all the commerce is carried on by means
of English calico brought hither via Lisbon. Several English houses
attempted to establish a trade about 1845, and accepted bills on Rio de
Janeiro in payment for their goods, but the increased activity of our
cruisers had such an effect upon the mercantile houses of that city that
most of them failed. The English merchants lost all, and Loanda got a
bad name in the commercial world in consequence.

One of the arrangements of the custom-house may have had some influence
in preventing English trade. Ships coming here must be consigned to some
one on the spot; the consignee receives one hundred dollars per mast,
and he generally makes a great deal more for himself by putting a
percentage on boats and men hired for loading and unloading, and on
every item that passes through his hands. The port charges are also
rendered heavy by twenty dollars being charged as a perquisite of the
secretary of government, with a fee for the chief physician, something
for the hospital, custom-house officers, guards, etc., etc. But, with
all these drawbacks, the Americans carry on a brisk and profitable trade
in calico, biscuit, flour, butter, etc., etc.

The Portuguese home government has not generally received the credit for
sincerity in suppressing the slave-trade which I conceive to be its due.
In 1839, my friend Mr. Gabriel saw 37 slave-ships lying in this harbor,
waiting for their cargoes, under the protection of the guns of the
forts. At that time slavers had to wait many months at a time for a
human freight, and a certain sum per head was paid to the government
for all that were exported. The duties derived from the exportation of
slaves far exceeded those from other commerce, and, by agreeing to
the suppression of this profitable traffic, the government actually
sacrificed the chief part of the export revenue. Since that period,
however, the revenue from lawful commerce has very much exceeded that on
slaves. The intentions of the home Portuguese government, however good,
can not be fully carried out under the present system. The pay of the
officers is so very small that they are nearly all obliged to engage
in trade; and, owing to the lucrative nature of the slave-trade, the
temptation to engage in it is so powerful, that the philanthropic
statesmen of Lisbon need hardly expect to have their humane and
enlightened views carried out. The law, for instance, lately promulgated
for the abolition of the carrier system (carregadores) is but one of
several equally humane enactments against this mode of compulsory labor,
but there is very little probability of the benevolent intentions of the
Legislature being carried into effect.

Loanda is regarded somewhat as a penal settlement, and those who leave
their native land for this country do so with the hope of getting rich
in a few years, and then returning home. They have thus no motive
for seeking the permanent welfare of the country. The Portuguese law
preventing the subjects of any other nation from holding landed property
unless they become naturalized, the country has neither the advantage of
native nor foreign enterprise, and remains very much in the same state
as our allies found it in 1575. Nearly all the European soldiers sent
out are convicts, and, contrary to what might be expected from men in
their position, behave remarkably well. A few riots have occurred,
but nothing at all so serious as have taken place in our own penal
settlements. It is a remarkable fact that the whole of the arms of
Loanda are every night in the hands of those who have been convicts.
Various reasons for this mild behavior are assigned by the officers,
but none of these, when viewed in connection with our own experience in
Australia, appear to be valid. Religion seems to have no connection
with the change. Perhaps the climate may have some influence in subduing
their turbulent disposition, for the inhabitants generally are a timid
race; they are not half so brave as our Caffres. The people of Ambriz
ran away like a flock of sheep, and allowed the Portuguese to take
possession of their copper mines and country without striking a blow. If
we must have convict settlements, attention to the climate might be of
advantage in the selection. Here even bulls are much tamer than with us.
I never met with a ferocious one in this country, and the Portuguese use
them generally for riding; an ox is seldom seen.

The objects which I had in view in opening up the country, as stated
in a few notes of my journey, published in the newspapers of Angola, so
commended themselves to the general government and merchants of Loanda,
that, at the instance of his excellency the bishop, a handsome present
for Sekeletu was granted by the Board of Public Works (Junta da Fazenda
Publica). It consisted of a colonel's complete uniform and a horse for
the chief, and suits of clothing for all the men who accompanied me.
The merchants also made a present, by public subscription, of handsome
specimens of all their articles of trade, and two donkeys, for the
purpose of introducing the breed into his country, as tsetse can not
kill this beast of burden. These presents were accompanied by letters
from the bishop and merchants; and I was kindly favored with letters of
recommendation to the Portuguese authorities in Eastern Africa.

I took with me a good stock of cotton cloth, fresh supplies of
ammunition and beads, and gave each of my men a musket. As my companions
had amassed considerable quantities of goods, they were unable to carry
mine, but the bishop furnished me with twenty carriers, and sent forward
orders to all the commandants of the districts through which we were to
pass to render me every assistance in their power. Being now supplied
with a good new tent made by my friends on board the Philomel, we left
Loanda on the 20th of September, 1854, and passed round by sea to the
mouth of the River Bengo. Ascending this river, we went through the
district in which stand the ruins of the convent of St. Antonio; thence
into Icollo i Bengo, which contains a population of 6530 blacks, 172
mulattoes, and 11 whites, and is so named from having been the residence
of a former native king. The proportion of slaves is only 3.38 per cent.
of the inhabitants. The commandant of this place, Laurence Jose Marquis,
is a frank old soldier and a most hospitable man; he is one of the few
who secure the universal approbation of their fellow-men for stern,
unflinching honesty, and has risen from the ranks to be a major in the
army. We were accompanied thus far by our generous host, Edmund Gabriel,
Esq., who, by his unwearied attentions to myself, and liberality in
supporting my men, had become endeared to all our hearts. My men were
strongly impressed with a sense of his goodness, and often spoke of him
in terms of admiration all the way to Linyanti.

While here we visited a large sugar manufactory belonging to a lady,
Donna Anna da Sousa. The flat alluvial lands on the banks of the Senza
or Bengo are well adapted for raising sugar-cane, and this lady had a
surprising number of slaves, but somehow the establishment was far from
being in a flourishing condition. It presented such a contrast to the
free-labor establishments of the Mauritius, which I have since seen,
where, with not one tenth of the number of hands, or such good soil,
a man of color had, in one year, cleared 5000 Pounds by a single crop,
that I quote the fact, in hopes it may meet the eye of Donna Anna.

The water of the river is muddy, and it is observed that such rivers
have many more mosquitoes than those which have clear water. It was
remarked to us here that these insects are much more numerous at
the period of new moon than at other times; at any rate, we were all
thankful to get away from the Senza and its insect plagues.

The whole of this part of the country is composed of marly tufa,
containing the same kind of shells as those at present alive in the
seas. As we advanced eastward and ascended the higher lands, we found
eruptive trap, which had tilted up immense masses of mica and sandstone
schists. The mica schist almost always dipped toward the interior of the
country, forming those mountain ranges of which we have already spoken
as giving a highland character to the district of Golungo Alto. The trap
has frequently run through the gorges made in the upheaved rocks, and
at the points of junction between the igneous and older rocks there are
large quantities of strongly magnetic iron ore. The clayey soil formed
by the disintegration of the mica schist and trap is the favorite soil
for the coffee; and it is on these mountain sides, and others possessing
a similar red clay soil, that this plant has propagated itself so
widely. The meadow-lands adjacent to the Senza and Coanza being
underlaid by that marly tufa which abounds toward the coast, and
containing the same shells, show that, previous to the elevation of that
side of the country, this region possessed some deeply-indented bays.

28TH SEPTEMBER, KALUNGWEMBO.--We were still on the same path by which we
had come, and, there being no mosquitoes, we could now better enjoy the
scenery. Ranges of hills occupy both sides of our path, and the fine
level road is adorned with a beautiful red flower named Bolcamaria. The
markets or sleeping-places are well supplied with provisions by great
numbers of women, every one of whom is seen spinning cotton with a
spindle and distaff, exactly like those which were in use among the
ancient Egyptians. A woman is scarcely ever seen going to the fields,
though with a pot on her head, a child on her back, and the hoe over her
shoulder, but she is employed in this way. The cotton was brought to the
market for sale, and I bought a pound for a penny. This was the price
demanded, and probably double what they ask from each other. We saw
the cotton growing luxuriantly all around the market-places from seeds
dropped accidentally. It is seen also about the native huts, and, so far
as I could learn, it was the American cotton, so influenced by climate
as to be perennial. We met in the road natives passing with bundles of
cops, or spindles full of cotton thread, and these they were carrying to
other parts to be woven into cloth. The women are the spinners, and the
men perform the weaving. Each web is about 5 feet long, and 15 or 18
inches wide. The loom is of the simplest construction, being nothing but
two beams placed one over the other, the web standing perpendicularly.
The threads of the web are separated by means of a thin wooden lath,
and the woof passed through by means of the spindle on which it has been
wound in spinning.

The mode of spinning and weaving in Angola, and, indeed, throughout
South Central Africa, is so very like the same occupations in the
hands of the ancient Egyptians, that I introduce a woodcut from the
interesting work of Sir Gardner Wilkinson. The lower figures are engaged
in spinning in the real African method, and the weavers in the left-hand
corner have their web in the Angolese fashion.*

   * Unfortunately, this woodcut can not be represented in this