CHAPTER 16.

A HYPHEN.

When first the question of radium arose in this chronicle it will be
remembered that Barraclough, under considerable pressure, yielded the
secret of the map reference to his fiancée, and by this very act made a
present of it, through the pages of narrative, to whosoever might
chance to read.

It would seem a perfectly reasonable supposition that there must be
many avaricious persons to whom the possession of untold riches would
prove more attractive than a mere interest in the doings of another
man.  Let it be said at once that although Barraclough certainly
confided the correct map reference to Isabel, that reference, for the
purposes of caution and public safety, underwent several important
variations before passing into my hands.  The reason of this precaution
will be readily appreciated by the thoughtful however great may be the
disappointment it provides to the adventurous.  A memory of average
length will recall the high percentage of disaster, of wrecked hopes
and of ruin pursuant upon the gold rush to Klondyke at the close of the
last century.  Barely one man in a hundred made a living--barely one in
a thousand saw the yellow specks in his shovel that shone so bright
among the brown.  Those who had set forth, buoyed up with boundless
belief, dragged back to where they had started from broken in purse and
spirit, barren of hope and faith.

What then would be the result if the illimitable source of wealth upon
which by chance and a whisper Barraclough had stumbled should be
revealed to the world?  A panic--a mad headlong exodus of men and women
too.  Unequipped and unqualified they would pour from city and
country-side, leaving desk and furrow, in a wild race to be first upon
the scene--to stake a claim--any claim--to dig--to grovel--to tear up
the kindly earth with fingers like the claws of beasts.  Wealth, upon
which our civilisation has been built, is the surest destroyer of
civilisation.  What it has given it takes away.  Dangle a promise of
gold before the young man at the ribbon counter and behold he is become
a savage.  Whisper it never so gently--and it will sound as the roar of
torrents in our ears.

Brewster's Series 19.  Map 24.  Square F.  North 27.  West 33.  Look it
up for yourself.  It exists all right but there is no radium there, not
any within a thousand miles for aught I know to the contrary.  In that
location and over a large stretch of surrounding country-side the
earth's outer crust is mainly argillaceous with here and there an
outcrop of sandstone.  There is not the smallest indication of
pitch-blende anywhere in the neighbourhood, and radium, as even those
little versed in chemistry or geology are aware, is only to be found in
that particular ore.

It would be well, therefore, to think twice before embarking upon a
fruitless treasure hunt after reading what has here been set down.  It
was the knowledge of the inevitable consequences that would result from
incautious confidence that sealed Barraclough's lips and made his
movements on arriving at Southampton so secretive.  It is known there
was a fog over the Solent on the afternoon in question and that a small
brown-sailed boat with a man sitting in the stern put out from the
shore and was presently swallowed up in the white tasselled wreaths of
mist.  That same boat was discovered minus its passenger in the early
hours of the following day.  A coastal collier, racketing into port in
the quiet of evening, brought the tale of a seaplane that narrowly
missed crashing into her deck house.  Long after it was out of sight
the crew heard its engines droning overhead.  Then for a while there
was silence during which a curious pinkish glow appeared to the
starboard and died away.  This glow was repeated three times and at the
third repetition the waterplane engine was again audible, increasing in
volume every moment.  Presently it cut out and nothing was heard for
several minutes.  When it started again it must have been quite near at
hand for the sound of water cut by the floats was detectable.  The
engines howled and whined until the roar diminished to a sound no
greater than the buzzing of a bee fading into nothing over the wake of
the little steamer.

Whether or no these recorded circumstances have any bearing on the
mystery of Anthony Barraclough's disappearance it would be impossible
to say but the Harbour Authorities who were questioned as to whether
they had knowledge of the movements of this particular waterplane
replied with a regretful negative.  They neither knew where it came
from nor whither it went and there is a strong rumour that one or two
quite important persons got into severe trouble for their want of
information.

The one thing that is positively known is that Barraclough arrived in
and disappeared from Southampton in a single day, but whether he went
North, South, East or West is a matter for speculation.




PART II.


CHAPTER 17.

A DOUBTFUL ALLY.

"That guy," said Ezra P. Hipps, "that guy is some stayer."

Hugo Van Diest, from the deeps of a big arm chair, omitted a kind of
rumbling affirmative.  He was smoking a porcelain pipe enamelled with
roses and forget-me-nots.  His fat, short fingered hands were spread
across the waistcoat of Berlin wool, his chin was sunk and his bearing
that of a man who is out of humour.

Gracefully disposed upon the hearthrug stood Oliver Laurence, an
excellent advertisement for his tailor.

Ezra P. Hipps, hugging one knee, sat upon the centre table and he was
looking at Auriole Craven with much the same expression as might be
seen on the face of a slave buyer in an African market.  He had passed
her shoes, appreciated her stockings, nodded approval at her gown and
millinery and was now observing with satisfaction that the gloves which
she was peeling off revealed two arms of perfect proportion.

"That guy," he proceeded, "has got to be made to talk.  Looks like.
He's made fools of us too long.  Looks like," he threw a glance at
Laurence, "your durn psychology isn't worth a hill o' beans."

"We haven't given it a chance yet," said Laurence in defence of his
method.

"Seventeen days," grunted Van Diest.  "And no progress--nothing.  This
was not an ordinary man."

"Am I to see him today?" asked Auriole.

Hipps shook his head and the girl brightened perceptibly.

"Seems to please you."

"No, it doesn't.  I'll go up if you want me to--only----"

"Get on with it."

"I can't help thinking it's a mistake.  Can't help thinking that
somehow that minute I spend with him every day strengthens rather than
breaks him down."

"Guess you're right--it would me," Hipps agreed.  There was a shade of
gallantry in the tone.

"I take leave to doubt that," said Laurence.  "I'm positively sure that
if a man is feeling the pinch all day long and everybody he comes in
contact with is definitely against him, a momentary glimpse of someone
who is seemingly sympathetic is far more likely to weaken his resolve
than strengthen it.  It makes him relax and even though you relax only
a trifle it's the very deuce to get a grip on yourself again.  You can
see it when chaps are training--that extra cigarette--the whiskey and
soda that isn't allowed plays the devil with their constitution.  I
know when I was at----"  He stopped for Auriole's large eyes were
looking at him critically.

"What is it?" he asked.

"Nothing," she replied.  "Nothing."  Then to everyone's amazement burst
out: "What a mean rotter you are, though."

"Here----" he began.

"I honestly believe you enjoy all this beastliness."

"Enjoy?  My dear girl, do be sensible.  Damn it, no one enjoys having
to put on the screw.  It's a case of necessity."

"Yes, yes, I suppose it is," she acquiesced hurriedly in an effort to
regain her composure.  "Only it seemed to me--but never mind."

Ezra P. Hipps crossed the room and put a hand on her arm.

"Come on, dear.  What's the trouble?"

"I wouldn't mind," she returned, "if he weren't so--so desperately
plucky."

"Hm!" said Van Diest.  "I think it was a goot idea that you don't go to
see this young man any more."

"That's nonsense," she replied hotly.  "I'll see him.  Besides he's
used to my coming and if I didn't turn up he----"

"Disappointed," suggested Hipps.

"Exactly," said Laurence.  "Perhaps it 'ud be a good idea to vary the
programme for a day or two.  Use the siren a bit more freely at night
and cut down his water supply.  If he isn't ready to talk in another
forty-eight hours I'll be surprised."

"Had a word with him yet?" demanded Hipps.

"Not this morning."

"Then you and Van try a few sweet speeches."

The Dutchman rose heavily from his chair and nodded.

"It was a bad business all this," he said.  "You come with us--no?"

"I'll be right along in just a minute."

He tilted his head a fraction toward Auriole and laid a finger on his
lips.

Van Diest and Laurence went out.  He waited until he heard their
footsteps mounting the stairs before he spoke again.  Auriole was
looking through the window at the trees margining the little estate.
She presented a charming silhouette against the light.

"Say, you look very womanly in that fawn outfit," said Hipps.  "Where
did you get it built?"

She turned with a smile that was a shade cynical.

"I'm glad you like it, Mr. Hipps."

"I do--fine."

"I'll wear it again."

"You've passed down the wardrobe hooks pretty prodigal these last few
days.  What is it--a dress parade?"

"One changes," she replied.

"That's sure what I'm frightened of."

"If you'd rather I appeared in a blouse and skirt----"; but he
interrupted the sentence with an uplifted hand.

"I've a fancy we'll cut cross talking," he said, "and come to grips."

"About what?"

"This young fellow Barraclough has cut ice with you?"

"I thought you knew my feelings about him."

"To borrow from your vocabulary--'one changes,'" he replied.

"I haven't changed."

"Glad to hear it."

"I admire his pluck."

"It's a dangerous quality--admiration.  Sure the old 'pash' hasn't
looked up a bit?"

"Quite sure."

"Still it 'curred to me you were shaken some at the treatment we're
serving out to him."

"That's not surprising.  I merely wanted to get my own back,
not--not----"  She left the sentence unfinished.

Ezra P. Hipps took a cigar from his waistcoat pocket and chewed it
reflectively, his eyes never leaving the girl's face.

"Women are queer ships," he said, "and never too even on the keel.
You've an important hand to play and kind of to keep your mind from
revoking here's a proposition to think over."

"Revoking?"

"That's the word.  You're in this deal on a jealousy outfit and we're
not after any renunciation, splendid sacrifice and that gear.  We want
you dead hard and seemed to me to get that I might do well to tie you
up a bit closer to the cause."

"What do you suggest?"

"You're an ambitious woman."

"I suppose so."

"I suggest this child."  And he tapped his chest with the chewed butt
of the cigar.

"I don't see----"

"This child thrown in as a sweetener."

For a moment she flushed, then the colour died away and was replaced by
a smile distinctly crooked at the corners.

"Are you making a proposal of marriage?" she asked.

"I sure am."

"Oh!"

He stretched his legs and rattled the coins in his pockets.

"I've a hell of a lot of money and damn!  I've never asked a woman this
question up to yet."

"Have you not?"

"Mention that fact 'cos I know they fall for molasses."

"You're very wise about women, Mr. Hipps."

But the irony was wasted.

"I read a bit of heart stuff in the trains sometimes," he said.

Auriole began to draw on her gloves.

"Isn't this rather a queer place to settle one's future?" she said.

"Donno--is it?  Struck me it 'ud keep you from side-stepping having me
on the horizon."

"I see.  And do you always mix love making with business?"

"Sure.  Marriage is a business and bank books talk sweeter than the
long haired boys."

She flashed a glance up at him and there was a definite appeal in her
eyes.

"Are you in love with me?"

The question seemed slightly to take him off balance.

"Damn!  I think you're fine," he said.

"That is--splendid," she replied and turned her head.

"Feeling good about it?"

"Who wouldn't be?"

"Thought you took it quiet."

"I'm sorry."

"Maybe you had some hopes along this street?"

"I guessed there was something doing," she answered in an echo of his
tone.

"It's all fixed then."

"I suppose so."

"Say I don't want you to think I'm only doing this out of expediency."

"You're not?"

"Not altogether."

"Better and better," said Auriole.

"I must scrape half an hour for lunch one of these days and we'll talk
over settlements."

"That will be--jolly."

"I'll get right upstairs now."

"Goodbye."

He made no effort to take her hand or to kiss her and she offered no
encouragement.  At the room door he turned.

"Paris for the honeymoon?" he asked.

"Wherever you like."

He looked at her critically and she met his eyes without flinching.

"And you feel kind of strong--soft spots eradicated?"

"Naturally."

"I'm a hell of a tonic," said Ezra P. Hipps and closed the door behind
him.

Auriole stood where he had left her.  Presently she raised her hands
and they were clenched so tightly that the knuckles were white as ivory.

"How utterly, utterly awful," she said to herself.  "How unspeakable."

She picked up her bag and the other odds and ends a woman will carry
and passed out of the house with flaming cheeks.

The chauffeur of the little two seater car that stood by the gates
asked where he should drive.

"I don't care," she replied.  "Anywhere you like.  Get on a hill--some
place where I can breathe."

The little Wolseley Ten wound through the green lanes and presently
mounted a pine fringed slope.  Away to the west hung the smoke of
London with the pleasant countryside in between.

Auriole touched the chauffeur on the arm and he stopped.  Alighting
from the car she scrambled over uneven ground and presently threw
herself down under the shade of a tree.  Somewhere overhead a lark was
singing and the air vibrated to the drone of summer insects.  The day
was blue, peaceful, sweet.  A thin breeze rustled the foliage, and
golden sun spots dappled the brown carpet of pine needles upon which
she lay.  A single cloud travelled in the sky and its shadow fell
across the house and grounds in which Richard Frencham Altar was
imprisoned.  Auriole clenched her hands tightly and bit her lip.
Somewhere behind those shuttered windows on the second floor the
inquisition was going forward.  Three men to one.  The relentless
interrogation.  The same question repeated in a hundred ways and the
same unshakable refusal to give an answer.  It was fitting indeed that
nature should cast a shadow over such doings.

"And I'm part of it," said Auriole.

Her thoughts flew back to her first meeting with Barraclough during the
war.  She was nursing then at a hospital in Eastbourne.  He had had a
bullet through the foot and was sent to the sea to recuperate.  Strange
how instantly they had liked each other.  His good nature, pluck,
generosity, were splendid assets in a friendship which went floundering
loveward after the fashion of those crazy days.  There was the
fortnight they spent together in Town--perfectly respectable if a
little unorthodox.  He had money to burn and she helped him burn it.
He had never asked more of her than companionship.  Of course they
kissed each other--everyone did during the war--that was understood;
and he bought her presents too--ripping presents--and took her
everywhere--theatres, undreamed-of restaurants, dances.  A glorious
time they had.  He had denied her nothing except the offer of his name.
After all there was no particular reason why he should have asked her
to marry him--theirs was a mere partnership of gaiety added to which
she knew well enough that it would not have been practicable.  They
were of a different mould.  His blood was of the Counties and
hers--Lord knows where she came from--"the people" is the best covering
phrase to employ.  She had been a mannequin in a Bond Street shop
before the war.  But was it fair--was it just to engender a love of
luxury--to introduce her to all that her nature--vulgarised by
unfamiliarity--coveted most!  If he had proposed likely enough she
would have been generous and refused him.  But he didn't propose--he
took it for granted that they were no more to each other than the
moment dictated.  There was a kind of long headed caution in his
diffidence with regard to the future.  He was exigent too in his
demands and would not tolerate her being pleasant to anyone else.  It
was her nature to be pleasant to all men and restraints were odious and
insulting.  That was how the row came about.  It took place on the
night before his return to Prance.  It was her fault no doubt because
really he had been a ripping friend and loyal and trustworthy but the
little climber felt that for once she had failed to climb.  She was
left, so to speak, in mid air, inoculated with the germs of all manner
of new ambitions no longer realisable.  Wherefore she forgot her
affection for him and forgot all the lessons of politeness so
studiously acquired in the years of climbing and let him have her
opinions hot and strong as a simple uncultivated child of the people.
The expression on Anthony Barraclough's face read plainly enough relief
at his escape.  He packed his valise and departed wondering greatly at
the intricacy and unreasonableness of women.  It did not occur to him
that he was greatly to blame for having given her such a good time.
Such a consideration was as remote as the thought of congratulating
himself on his generosity.  He was only awfully sorry she should have
turned out as she did and rather perplexed at the apparent want of
reason.  And Auriole with the disposition to like him better than any
man of her acquaintance suffered an entire reversal of feeling and went
headlong to the other extreme in a spirit of unbecoming revengefulness.

And in the valley below, under the shadow of a cloud, this man was
being tortured.

"I never meant that," Auriole cried.  "I never meant that--did I--did
I?  I just wanted to pay him back.  I just wanted----"  She bit her
lower lip and choked.  "What a fool I am," she gasped.  "Haven't I won
a millionaire out of it?  What's it matter if he does suffer a bit--he
wouldn't be the only one.  A millionaire," she repeated, "a
millionaire--the wife of a railroad king.  That's worth something
surely."

A couple of unruly tears trickled out of her eyes and fell on her lap.
It is really too absurd that even the thought of a million pounds
cannot prevent a girl from crying.




CHAPTER 18.

HOLDING OUT.

Richard Frencham Altar had a sense of humour but never before in his
hitherto easy going life had he so earnestly needed it.  A sense of
humour in a queer abstract way provides a quality of companionship--it
gives a man the power to be a pal to himself--to talk to himself
aloud--to laugh at adversity--to spot the comic side in the most
pathetic predicament.  Each day provided something new in the matter of
discomfort or alarm.  The calls he was obliged to make upon his
resources of humour were therefore severe and exacting.  Over and over
again he had need to remind himself that there was something
classically funny in three financial giants demanding from him
information of which he was entirely ignorant and, technically
speaking, putting him on the rack in order to obtain it.  The fun was
grim but it existed.  No one ever thought of mentioning what it was
they wanted to find out--doubtless assuming that to do so was waste of
time.  For his own satisfaction Richard would dearly have loved to ask
point blank what it was all about, but to indulge curiosity to that
extent would be to imperil the safety of the cause he represented.

To keep a record of days he made a scratch on the wall paper each
morning with his finger nail.  There were seventeen scratches in all
and he was as proud of them as an old campaigner of his medals for they
stood for seventeen successful engagements.  Whoever it was had charge
of arranging his persecution lacked nothing in the way of imagination.
Methods of destroying his repose and a course of rigorous fasting were
prominent features but these were varied with details of a terrifying
and sometimes abominable kind.  On one occasion thirty or forty rats
were introduced into his apartment where they fought and squeaked and
scurried all night long.  But Richard's experiences in France had
robbed him of any particular fear of rats.  If anything he welcomed
their appearance and devoted the short periods when the light was on to
shooting at them with a catapult fashioned from the elastic of a sock
suspender and a piece of angle iron detached from the underside of a
broken armchair.  For ammunition he used a few bits of anthracite coal
which he found in the sitting room grate.  Altogether he accounted for
seventeen before the servants arrived and deprived him of his weapon.
The remainder of the rats were corralled and carried away rejoicing.
This little entertainment took place during the first week of his
imprisonment and served the unhappy purpose of convincing his captors
that Richard's nerves were not susceptible to frivolous attacks.
Thereafter they concentrated on sterner measures.  Food was reduced to
a minimum and frequently doped with chemicals that caused him acute
internal suffering.  When the pain was at its height either Van Diest,
Laurence or Hipps would pay him a visit and over and over again the
question would be asked.

Times out of number sheer desperation and want of sleep almost induced
him to give away the secret but something inside his nature--some
fourth dimensional endurance over which he appeared to have the most
astounding control--checked the impulse.  Often he wondered at himself
and questioned how he contrived to face the pressure put upon him, but
the only motive he could trace beyond the stalwart desire of every
decent man to take his gruel without squealing was an ambition to be
able to meet Auriole Craven's eyes squarely when she came to see him
and say "I'm afraid your friends haven't got my strength just yet."
She would shake her head at that and reply cynically--"It's only a
matter of time, Anthony."  But at the back of her eyes was a light that
seemed to read "Well done you."

He was in a sad enough plight on the morning of the seventeenth day
when the door opened and Van Diest followed by Laurence entered the
room.

Van Diest was chanting a German hymn, a habit greatly affected by him
in moments of perplexity.  With thumbs tucked in his waistcoat and
fingers drumming upon the resonant rotundity of his waist line he
marched slowly up and down moaning the guttural words in a melancholy
and tuneless voice.  Richard had learned to hate that song as cordially
as its performer.

"Take it down another street," he implored.

Van Diest stopped singing long enough to shake his head and Laurence
who had seated himself with crossed legs on one of the hard upright
chairs said "Barraclough" with a note of pseudo-friendly warning.

"Why not have a shot at 'Avalon,'" Richard suggested sleepily.  "Suit
you, that would, and make a nice change for me."  His throat was
burning and talking was painful.

"Hm!  A change," said Van Diest.  "I wass thinking you would want a
change very soon.  It is tired you look this morning."

"That's queer, for I had a splendid night."  Richard's hollow, dark
rimmed eyes gave a lie to his words.

"Hm!  Laurence, they use the siren--yes?"

Laurence nodded.

"Had it going every ten minutes.  Didn't give him much of a chance last
night."

"So!  But to these young boys sleep comes very easily--I think--think
it wass a goot idea to take away his bed--yes."

Richard rolled his eyes threateningly toward the speaker and checked a
sudden torrent of abuse that sprang to his lips.

"It iss bad for these boys to have too much comforts--s'very bad; with
the sleep fogged brain a man loses so much the intelligence.  You will
arrange--yes?"

"Of course I will if he insists," said Laurence.

"Oh, you swine," said Richard staggering to his feet.  "You rotten
blasted swine.  Aren't you satisfied with what you've done--isn't it
enough that you make the nights into a hell for me--a screaming hell.
Sleep?  How can I sleep?  How can I sleep when----"

A violent, paroxysm of coughing seized and shook him this way and that.

"Tut, tut, tut!  You haf a very bad cold there," said Tan Diest
sweetly.  "You must eat one of these lozenges."

Richard struck the box out of the hand that proffered it and fell
heaped up into a chair beside the table.

"No pleasure to us you stay awake, eh, Laurence, eh?"

"'Course not.  Now don't look at me like that, old fellar, I was
thundering decent to you when first you arrived.  Barring smoke,
literature and alcohol it was a home from home.  It's your own pigeon
things have got a bit tight.  Doesn't pay striking out against the
odds."

"You little rat," said Richard turning a bit in his chair.  "I'd
like----" and he closed his fist.

"Silly talk, old chap, waste of time."

"I could waste a lot of time that way."

Laurence humped his shoulders.

"What are you to do with a fellar like this?"

Van Diest drew up a chair and smiled over the rims of his glasses.

"Of course we let you go to sleep if you waas sensible.  Consider now
the small shareholders that look to us for their little incomes.  All
these widows from the war.  You speak and you wass a rich man all at
once.  Very soon forget the discomforts of these three weeks.  S'no
goot--no goot to make a fuss."

"I have nothing to say."

"Ach!" said Van Diest and rose.  "I'm afraid, Laurence, we must take
away this bed."

But Richard raised no further protest and somewhere below stairs a gong
rumbled for lunch.  It was part of the programme to emphasise the
arrival of meals and in spite of himself he could not resist starting
hungrily.  Such signs and tokens were watched for.  Laurence laid a
hand on his shoulder and whispered:

"There's a fourth place laid, old friend."

"Why not join us to the lunch," said Van Diest coaxingly, "just a word
spoken and--oh, it's goot the lunch."

"Thanks, but I'm rather particular who I sit with," said Richard and
moved unsteadily toward the fireplace.

"It's rather a special menu," Laurence remarked.  "There's a lobster
Americaine--that was in Hipps' honour.  But perhaps you don't care for
shellfish, Barraclough."

"No, no, thank you.  Prefer a Spartan diet.  Glass of water and a piece
of bread."

"Bread?  Yes.  I hope the baker remembered to call.  Be awkward if----
Well, come along, Chief, no good letting things get cold."

They passed out of the room and the bolt slammed home.

With a crazy impulse Richard staggered across the floor, seized the
door handle and shook it violently.  One of those violent paroxysms of
hunger suddenly possessed him which while they endure are acute agony.
The longing for food gripped at his vitals like an eagle's claw and
drove reasoned action from his head.  He knew well enough that there
was no escape to be made through the shuttered windows but ignoring the
knowledge he leapt toward them and seized the iron cross-bar.  As he
lifted it from its slot the alarm bell above the frame rang out a fiery
summons.

He fell back a pace beating the air impotently and whining.  The door
opened and Blayney and Parker, the two men servants, entered.  Parker
placed a tray on the table, then returned to stand in the open doorway.
Blayney, ignoring Richard's presence, replaced the shutter bar in its
old position and the bell stopped ringing.  Then he turned and said:

"I shouldn't advise you, to try the window, sir.  There's a strong
electric current passes through the catch."

"Thank you," said Richard and slouched despondently toward the table
where his glance fell upon the tray.  Whatever victuals had been
provided were concealed beneath a small silver cover but there was a
napkin, a knife and fork and a cruet.  On the whole it looked rather
promising.  Then suddenly he noticed that the glass beside the plate
contained barely an inch of water.

"I say," he exclaimed, "look!  Can't I have a jog of water?  There
isn't----"

"Not today, sir," said Blayney.

The very courtesy of the man was an incentive to fury.

"Yes, but----"

"Not today, sir."

Parker in the doorway grinned.

"Don't smirk at me, blast you," said Richard.

Blayney nodded toward the bedroom and changed places with his
companion.  When Parker came out he was carrying a great pile of
bedclothes.

"Here, what are you doing?  Put 'em down.  D'you hear me?"

"My orders were to take them away, sir."

As Laurence had said it was useless to fight against present odds.
Richard shut his teeth tight.

"Obey your orders," he said, but as the door was closing the craving
for drink mastered his pride.  "For God's sake," he cried, "for God's
sake give me some more water.  I'll give you twenty for a jug of
water--honest I will--twenty----"

Blayney laid a finger to his lips and went out.  The gesture might have
meant anything.  With trembling hand Richard seized the glass of water
and drained it at a gulp.  There was miserably little--it barely cooled
the heat of his throat.  Whimpering he set the glass down and lifted
the cover from the plate.  Underneath was a cube of bread the size of a
lump of sugar.  With a savage cry he picked it up and flung it across
the room but a moment later was on all fours gathering up the broken
bits and pieces and eating them wolfishly.

Blayney found him searching pathetically for the last crumb when he
came stealthily into the room and put a tin mug on the table.

"I'll collect that twenty later," he said and vanished.

Almost like a miser Richard took the mug in his hands and purred over
it possessively.  With a sigh of absolute content he raised it to his
lips.  Then a scream broke from him--harsh, strident, savage.  There
were no soft spots in the walls of Hugo Van Diest's fortress.  The
water was salt.




CHAPTER 19.

AT THE CHESTNUTS.

Mrs. Barraclough was one of those old ladies who are constantly being
surprised.  She courted surprise.  She never forestalled a climax and
of the hundreds of sensational novels which she so greedily devoured
never once was she guilty of taking a premature peep at the last
chapter to ensure herself that right would triumph.  "I shall find out
all about it in good time" was the motto she affected.  This being so
she made no effort to secure Isabel's confidence but simply waited for
Isabel to speak.  The same reticence possessed her in the matter of the
four mysterious serving girls.  She hadn't the smallest idea why
Anthony had suddenly transformed himself into a domestic agency
although, at the back of her head, she guessed at a deep underlying
motive.  It gratified her beyond measure to be surrounded by unfathomed
waters and frequently as a corollary to her prayers she would thank God
for the little excitements and mysteries He sent to flavour her
declining years.

After the uncontrollable rush of tears on her arrival Isabel pulled
herself together and made a show of gaiety and preserved it nobly for
nearly three weeks.  Anthony had gone and gloomy forebodings were of no
service.  Accordingly she helped Mrs. Barraclough in the garden and
made the very best friends of the four girls.  Perhaps she was the
least bit resentful on finding out that they knew almost as much of
Anthony's plans as she herself.

"But did he tell you?" she asked in surprise.

"It's like this," said Flora who generally spoke for the company.
"Jane and myself were with him in the Secret Service during the last
year of the war."

"He got us the job," Jane interpolated.  She was a big, bonny girl with
broad shoulders, steady blue eyes and a complexion that would have
advertised any health resort.  "Cook kicks herself that she wasn't in
that show."

It was at this point Mrs. Barraclough came into the room.

"Kicks herself!  What a very unbecoming expression, Jane."

"Sorry, madam," said Jane and she and Flora sniggered uncontrollably.

"You girls perplex me greatly," said Mrs. Barraclough.  "You do not
laugh in the least like ordinary servants."

"How do ordinary servants laugh?" Jane asked.

"Generally speaking, in a high note that echoes distressingly
throughout the house, whereas you laugh like young ladies."

"Oh, you old darling," exclaimed Flora with sudden impulsiveness.  "I
suppose if a decent education and upbringing counts for anything that's
just what we are."

Mrs. Barraclough sat down rather abruptly on a small upright sofa in
the centre of the room.

"Then for goodness sake tell me what you are doing in my kitchen."

There was no escaping the explanation especially when Isabel
contributed:

"Come on, Flora, out with it."

"It's this way, madam.  Lots of us went broke after the war--lots of us
who'd only fifty quid a year to live on."

"Quid?" said Mrs. Barraclough.  "Isn't that something to do with
sailors and tobacco?"

"Pounds, then.  We ran across Mr. Anthony out in France."

"Picked him out of a ditch near Arras with a bullet through his foot,"
Jane contributed.

"And after that got most awfully friendly and kept knocking up against
each other."

Mrs. Barraclough shook her head.

"It must have been very painful for him with a bullet through his foot."

"When he heard we'd gone broke he said--just like him--'my mother's a
sport, go and look after her.'"

"So I'm a sport," said Mrs. Barraclough with a smile.  "But even so,
why should I want looking after?"

"That's what puzzles me," said Isabel.

Jane and Flora exchanged glances.

"I don't know whether we ought to," said Jane.

"He's my fiancé," said Isabel, "and you're jolly well not going to keep
me in the dark."

"And quite incidentally," Mrs. Barraclough remarked, "he's my son."

"Oh, very well," said Flora.  "It seems he was all over some great big,
get rich quick scheme--and there was a chance anyone connected with him
might be got at."

"Got at!"  Mrs. Barraclough's dark eyes opened a little wider.

"Um!  A tough crowd was up against him you see."

"I see."  The old lady nodded gravely but there was a sparkle of
excitement in her expression.  "So you and Jane and Cynthia and Agnes
are here to protect me against the assaults of--of a 'tough crowd.'"

"We're here if we're wanted," said Jane robustly.

"And somehow," said Flora, "I think we shall be wanted."

Mrs. Barraclough's hands went out and she drew the two girls a little
closer.

"My dears," she said, "I don't know why but lately I've had a pringly
sort of feeling--as if something were going to happen.  It's a sense of
adventure perhaps.  I used to be a very wild girl myself."

"But you mustn't worry," said Isabel.  "It's sure to turn out all
right, you know."

"I'm not worrying.  I'm only hoping that if anything does happen I
shall be in it."

"But look here," exclaimed Flora, "that's the very thing he wants to
prevent."

"Yes, yes, but I know my Anthony, bless him.  It would be so beautiful
to help him again after all these years." She smiled retrospectively.
"When he was a little boy he was always coming into conflict with his
father.  Poor Mr. Barraclough, he was a very austere man and Anthony's
scrapes inspired from him the severest judgments.  Tony had a little
signal--he was much too proud to speak--he used to take out his pocket
handkerchief and quite carelessly tie a knot in the centre.  Whenever
he did that I used to come to his aid.  Dear Tony, I was always the one
to rescue him from difficulty."

"He gets his pluck from you," said Flora.

"His father was a brave man too, until he had a little misfortune with
a mule which rather upset his balance."

"Generally does," Isabel laughed.

"Mental balance," Mrs. Barraclough corrected.  "For the last few years
of his life he thought he was Archbishop of Canterbury and if dead
people think I'm sure he believes he is buried in Westminster Abbey.
There, run along, my dears, and leave me to collect my thoughts."

But she kissed Flora and Jane before letting them go.  Isabel stayed in
the room.

"So my boy is in danger," said Mrs. Barraclough with the least touch of
tragedy in her voice.  Isabel came forward and put an arm around her
neck.  "You knew, my dear?"

Isabel nodded.

"They oughtn't to have told you."

Mrs. Barraclough snorted defiantly.

"Stuff and nonsense.  Think I hadn't guessed?  After all, a proper man
ought to be in danger.  Besides," she added, "he's a good enough
reason, hasn't he?"

"What reason?"

"Doesn't he want to marry you?"

"I know," said Isabel forlornly, "but that would have happened in any
case."

"Don't you be too sure, my dear.  Now I'm going to let you into my
confidence--mind I'm only putting two and two together but I'm pretty
sure I've got the total right.  Did you know that Tony had put every
penny he possessed into this enterprise?"

Isabel started.

"No.  What makes you believe that?"

"Because all I've got is in it too, and he would never ask of me what
he feared to do himself."

"Then you know all about it?"

"Hardly anything."

"But he oughtn't----"

"I think the risks and dangers came afterward."

"Even so," said Isabel, "it's just for money.  That's what I hate so."

"Isn't it just for you," said Mrs. Barraclough gently.  "Just because
if he failed he wouldn't be able to make you his wife."

"He never told me."

"Of course he didn't.  How could he?"

"Are you sure of all this?"

"Practically certain.  You see his Uncle Arthur is executor of Tony's
affairs.  Executors are not supposed to speak but Uncle Arthur was an
exception who proves the rule."

"For me," said Isabel slowly.  "For our marriage--for us.  Oh, I'm so
glad it wasn't for cash."  A cloud came over her brow.  "But it makes
it frightfully difficult for me supposing I had to----"

"What?"

"I mustn't say--even to you."

Mrs. Barraclough didn't press for an answer.  She was pleased there was
a little bit of mystery left over.

Isabel kissed the old lady very tenderly and walked out into the rose
garden by herself.  There was a glow on her cheeks almost as pink as
the roses themselves.  It was a sweet relief that Anthony had gone into
these dangers more for her sake than any other reason and that their
happiness and future rested on his success.  In her twenty-one years of
life she had come too much into contact with men whose ruling passion
was the dollar to the exclusion of all else.  At the back of her head
the fear had haunted her that Anthony had been bitten by the money
bug--the hateful contagion that straightened and thinned the lips,
chilled the emotions and case-hardened the kindliest natures.  But now
that fear was gone to be replaced with glad assurance.

On a semi-circular stone bench that backed the roadside hedge Isabel
sat and hugged her knees and here a few moments later she was joined by
Flora.

"He's a topper, your man," said Flora.  "A downright first rater."

Isabel grinned an acknowledgment.

"Did he have any trouble in getting away?"

"Awful, I believe, but--but they had a plan which he said would make it
easy."

On the road side of the hedge, barely three feet away, a clergyman, who
apparently was seeking protection from the sun, moved sharply and
cocked a listening ear.

"What plan?"

"He didn't tell me that and anyhow I shouldn't be allowed to repeat it."

The listening clergyman looked disappointed.

"Do you know what he was going after?"

"Yes, I know."

"Wouldn't care to tell anyone, I s'pose.  I'm as safe as a house."

"I'm certain you are, only----"

"Oh, well, it doesn't matter so long as he got away all right.  He did
get away all right, didn't he?"

"Yes, I--I think so--he must have or his servant, Doran, would have
told me."

Harrison Smith, on the far side of the hedge, pushed back his clerical
hat and frowned deeply.

"And you had no message?"

Isabel shook her head.

"None.  So I just tell myself everything is all right."

"Oh, I'm sure it is--certain," said Flora ecstatically.  "It's bound to
be.  Mr. Anthony'd never let himself be beaten by any crowd."  She
paused.  "If only one could be in it--but nothing ever happens down
here.  Are you staying much longer?"

"Going back tomorrow or the next day.  I must be in Town on the night
of the 18th."

"That the day he's expected?"

"Yes, at eleven o'clock."

"Wish I could be there to give him a cheer when he comes in."

Isabel slipped an arm through Flora's.

"It's great of you to be so keen," she said.

"Think so," Flora replied.  "Jolly sporting of you not to mind.  We've
got a bit of a 'pash' on Mr. Anthony, you know."

"I thought you had," said Isabel sympathetically.

"Kind of hero worship it is.  Nothing to bother about 'cos as matter of
fact we're all engaged--'cept Cook who hates men.  But even Cook can't
help admiring him.  Be a sport and let us know if he gets through all
right.  You could 'phone."

"I will."

"Any notion which port he'll arrive at?"

"Couldn't say.  I've a sort of idea that it might be one of the little
Cornish fishing villages."

"What makes you think so?"

"No particular reason only----"

"Yes, go on--be a pal."

"You won't repeat it?"

"No fear."

"There was a West Country guide book on his table one day and I
happened to glance at it."

"Um."

"Ever heard of Polperro?"

"Yes."

"On one of the maps Polperro had a pencil line ringed round it and a
couple of very small dots marked in certain places."

"That might have been years old."

"It wasn't.  I had lent him a blue pencil a few days before--rather a
funny colour it was.  He'd used that pencil."

"You're a bit of a Sherlock."

"I oughtn't to have said anything about it."

"It's safe enough with me," said Flora.  "You can bet your boots I
shan't blab."

A silvery toned bell sounded from the house.

"There's tea," said Isabel.

The two girls rose and moved away arm in arm.

Mr. Harrison Smith pulled out his watch and looked at the dial.

"With luck I can catch it," said he.

And through the drawing room window Mrs. Barraclough saw the unusual
spectacle of a clergyman running like fury in the direction of the
railway station.  As she remarked a few moments later:

"This is indeed an age of speed.  Even the delivery of the Gospel is
conducted by express service."




CHAPTER 20.

A LITTLE HOUSEBREAKING.

The train which conveyed Mr. Harrison Smith back to London stopped at
every intermediate station and did not arrive until after ten o'clock.
He, therefore, was given leisure for thought and the result of his
thinking was to bring him perilously near the truth.

He began with the premise that somehow Anthony Barraclough had
succeeded in making good his escape--that he was even now obtaining the
concession--that he would return to London on the night of the 18th
instant at eleven o'clock in all probability carrying the document upon
his person.  All this was plain sailing but against it was the
established fact that Anthony Barraclough was imprisoned in Laurence's
house.  If this were indeed the case further investigation was useless.
But was it the case?

The girl Isabel Irish had said there was a plan to make his exit from
London easy but no evidence had been given to suggest that this plan,
whatever it was, had been put into operation.  Torrington's syndicate
was not composed of fools and yet the kidnapping of Barraclough had
been mere child's play without a speck of opposition.  His own side had
been guilty of an act of crass stupidity in failing to carry off the
servant Doran as well as his master.  It was one of those tragic
oversights which occur in the most carefully laid plans.
Unquestionably Doran would have told his employers what happened on the
night of the 27th and they could hardly have failed to guess the truth.
And yet, as private information assured him, not the smallest effort
had been made to rescue the man in whose brain was a secret worth
millions.  And quite suddenly the truth, or a guess at the truth,
dawned upon him.  Torrington's crowd must have been aware of the
intention to kidnap Barraclough and for a reason known only to
themselves had deliberately allowed it to take place.  Why?  Had
another man been sent in Barraclough's place?  He dismissed that theory
without dissection.  The shape of Barraclough's jaw and the line of his
mouth belonged to the type that does not unduly trust his fellow men.
Why?  Was another man occupying Barraclough's place--deputising for him
in his absence?

Harrison Smith struck one hand against the other.  "By God," he
exclaimed.  "It's the most unlikely thing in the world but I'm going to
believe it.  I'm going to believe that the chap with the humorous lines
round his eyes is no more Barraclough than I am."

He alighted at Waterloo Station aglow with excitement.  His first
thought was to proceed post haste to Laurence's house and lay before
them the result of his deductions, but a second and more personal
consideration dissuaded him.  There had been little enough
encouragement when last he interfered.  He had been rudely ordered to
leave things alone.  No, he would work out this deal himself and if
anything came of it approach Van Diest and Hipps for a lion's share of
the plunder.  Weeks ago it had been arranged; if by any means
Barraclough succeeded in slipping through the outposts and obtaining
the concession, he was to be quietly thugged on his return and the
paper destroyed.  As Ezra Hipps had said, "If we fail to get it for
ourselves it's damn sure no one else is going to profit."  Wherefore
all he had to do was to intercept the returning treasure seeker, put
him securely away and then talk business to his own employers.

Harrison Smith hailed a taxi and told the driver to go down the
Commercial Road as far as the Poplar Town Hall.  This was not a job
that could be tackled single handed--on the other hand it would be
unwise to admit more people to his confidence than were absolutely
necessary.  He dismissed the taxi and proceeded on foot down one of the
narrow crooked byways abounding in that region.  The place was quiet
and deserted save for a few Orientals--Lascars and Chinamen--who leaned
against the walls of their dwellings in silent contemplation of the
stars.

At the side door of a small and disreputable public house he paused and
knocked thrice with the handle of his cane and presently the door was
opened by a girl.  She was a Jewess and lovely to look at, with the
fresh, shameless beauty peculiar to very young girls of that faith.
Recognising Harrison Smith she smiled a welcome and said:

"You're in luck--he's sober!  Upstairs, in the front room."

She smiled again, revealing a perfect row of little white teeth which
mocked the string of cheap pearls at her throat.  As he climbed the
stairs Harrison Smith speculated on the odd contrast this girl
presented to her surroundings.  The silk of her stockings, the bangles
and gewgaws, the ultra patent leather of her shoes, bore so little
relation to the squalor of the narrow passage with its damp stained
walls, carpetless floor and hissing gas jet.  Probably nowhere in the
world do greater incongruities exist than in the East End of London.

Mr. Alfred Bolt, minus coat, collar, tie and shoes, was seated in an
arm chair, his feet reposing upon the mantel-piece.  At his elbow was a
glass of whiskey and water with a slice of lemon floating on the
surface.  His waistcoat was undone and the white of his shirt
emphasised the enormous girth of his corporation.  His legs were short,
his hands fat, his face round and margined with a half circle of hair
beneath the chin.  At the first glance you would have taken him for the
model from which Will Owen must have illustrated the stories of W. W.
Jacobs.  One would have expected him to remind the passer-by that it
was "a nice day for a sail" or alternatively to demand "Any more for
the Skylark?"  But a closer inspection would have shaken the foundation
of so simple a belief for Mr. Alfred Bolt's eyes were not of the honest
kind worn by men who go down to the sea in ships.  They were close set,
narrow lidded, cunning, piggy little eyes that caused unrest to look
upon.

At the sight of Harrison Smith he removed his feet from the mantelpiece
and extended an open armed welcome.

"Welcome and thrice welcome, my dear brother," he intoned in an
admirable imitation of the accepted ecclesiastical method.  "I rejoice
indeed to observe that you are now in Holy Orders."  Then with a drop
into the vernacular.  "Blind me, Smith, what the hell are you doing
with your collar back to front?"

Harrison Smith gave a hurried explanation.

"But I thought that job was cleared up," said Bolt.

"Maybe it is, but there's a chance of a big coup that no one expected.
Now, if you care to take a hand."

Mr. Bolt fancied himself as a mimic, indeed he harboured the opinion
that he was a peer even to the late Sir Henry Irving in the matter of
"take offs."  He could imitate a cat or a Chinaman, while his thumb
nail impressions of sundry Hebraic neighbours were only rivalled by his
flawless caricatures of natives of Germany or the New Hebrides.  But
best of all he loved to assume the inflexion, guise and bearing of a
member of the clergy--a circumstance very possibly explained by the
fact that his own private life was as far removed from the office of
virtue as could be imagined.

"Be unafraid, my son," quoth he.  "If your heart is full speak into my
listening ear and may a blessing fall on your confession."  Then
fashioning a trumpet with his two hands he bellowed like a fog horn:
"Becky!  A drop of whiskey hot for the gent."  And while the
refreshment was being procured he observed parenthetically: "A nice
little piece, ain't she?  Very smart and dossy.  Come on, Smith, my
boy--my jolly old beau--dear old cracker, soak up the juice of the
barley and expound the tale of woe."

Harrison Smith wasted no time in explaining the case while Bolt
listened with great concentration, nodding approval at this point or
that.

"Hm!  Worth trying anyway," he agreed.  "What do you want me to do?"

"Take over my place at Clyst St. Mary.  Can't explain why but I've a
sort of notion things may happen there.  It's a queer household--lot of
smart girls looking after an old woman--Barraclough's mother."

"What's she like?"

"Never got near enough to find out.  Decent enough old thing.  Goes to
church a lot."

"Shrewd?"

"Never struck me so at a distance.  Might be anything--bit of a
fool--mostly are--that old country sort."

Mr. Bolt mused.

"Goes to church, does she."  His eyes travelled over Harrison Smith's
black garments.  "Why didn't you call?"

"Didn't strike me.  Fancy she knows very little."

"'Curs to me," said Bolt, "I might do the clergyman stunt myself in
those parts.  I've got some stuff.  A bit of the old Wesley--'Quiet
harbourage from the turmoil of city life, my dear lady.  An occasional
hour in your beautiful garden.'  That's the ticket."

"Then get off straight away.  There's a train at five a.m. from
Waterloo.  You can have my room at the pub.  I'll give you a note to
the proprietor."

"And assuming I meet brother Barraclough?"

"Get him," responded Harrison Smith laconically.  "Make as little fuss
as possible but get him."

Mr. Bolt nodded and the piggy little eyes twinkled greedily.

"Trust me," he said.  "Anything else you want?"

Harrison Smith thought for a moment.

"That chap Dirk," he said.  "Could you find him for me?"

"Sure."

"Then tell him to meet me at Paddington tomorrow morning 9.50."

"Right."

"And you might lend me that bunch of spring-lock keys."

"Going to have a squint at that guide book?" queried Bolt shrewdly as
he turned over the contents of a table drawer in search of the keys.

"Going to have a try," came the answer.

Bolt rippled out a fat, greasy chuckle.

"Pleasure to work with you, Smith," said he.  "Yes indeed.  Though it's
a bit risky putting one over on the Dutchman."  He fell into a thick,
guttural "S'bad--s'bad pizness.  Dese servants wass ver' insubordinate.
S'bad.  Well, good luck, ole boy."

They shook hands cordially.

The Commercial Road was deserted when Harrison Smith came out of the
narrow byway.  The chance of finding a conveyance was small but his
practical sense suggested turning into the West India Dock Road where,
at the gates of the dock, he had the good fortune to secure a
dilapidated four-wheeler.  Progress was painfully slow and hours seemed
to pass before they finally turned out of the broad cobbled highway and
passed through the silent empty city.  Two o'clock was striking when he
dismissed the cab in Piccadilly.  At his own rooms in Crown Court, St.
James's, he changed into ordinary clothes and proceeded on foot to
Albemarle Street.  Before the entrance to Crest Chambers Harrison Smith
stopped and broke into a torrent of imprecation.  He had forgotten that
the downstairs door would be shut.  It was of heavy mahogany and
secured by an ordinary variety of lock against which the bunch of keys
in his pocket were of no service whatsoever.  He was shaking his fist
angrily when the sound of footsteps accompanied by a snatch of song
attracted his attention.  A young man in evening dress, wearing an
opera hat at a raffish angle and carrying his hands in his trousers
pockets turned out of the adjoining side street and approached the spot
where he was standing.  A single glance was enough to convince Harrison
Smith that the young man was in a state of spiritual exaltation
bordering on ecstasy.  The words of a song he sang sounded unnaturally
clear--like music from another planet.

"I'm one of the ruins that Cromwell knocked about a bit," he sang over
and over again as though the words contained relish enough to justify
any limit of repetition.  Coming abreast of Harrison Smith he halted
abruptly and, rocking on his heels, broke into a cherubic smile.

"Goo' man," he said.  "Les-see, it's ol' Petersh, ishn't it?"

"That's it," said Harrison Smith, "old Peters."

With startling suddenness the young man produced a latch key and thrust
it into Harrison Smith's palm.

"Ope' th' door, ol' top.  Ope' door an' we'll have a quick lil' spot
together."

Here was unlooked for good fortune of which Harrison Smith lost no time
in availing himself.  Lending a trifling support to his impromptu host
they entered the building and ascended in the electric lift to the
fourth floor.  There was a brass plate on the front door which informed
the curious that the owner of the flat was called Royston.

"Just a quick one," said Smith as they entered a comfortable sitting
room adorned by photographs of lovely ladies.  "I've had a trying day
and want to turn in."

"T'hell with that," said Royston.  "Wha's matter with seein' in the
dawn?"

He produced a bottle of whiskey and two glasses--not without casualties
among their fellows--set them on a coffin stool and fell into a deep
arm chair.

"Help 'self and help me--'cos I'm ver' tired--ov' tired."

Harrison Smith embraced the opportunity of pouring out a perfect
deadener for his host into which he discreetly added a pinch of cigar
ash from a convenient stump (a concoction which in the absence of more
potent drugs will produce very gratifying results).

While he was so employed Mr. Royston descanted freely on the subject of
lovely women in the choice of which he declared himself to be an
epicure.

"See that one--pho' frame--piano.  Tho'bred--perfect tho'bred--a
darling--love 'er--love 'em all."

"That's the talk," said Harrison Smith who was cursing the enforced
delay.  "Drink her health, old man, and no heel taps."

Mr. Royston rose nobly to the occasion and swallowed the contents of
his glass at a single gulp.

"Blesh 'em!" he said.  "Blesh 'em."

He seized the arm of his chair while the room spun round him in a dizzy
whirl.

"Blast you, Petersh," he cried.  "Thash pre-war whiskey.   Sh-shot me
clean through the brain pan.  C-caught in the brewersh web."

He swayed a little and settled down on the floor by sections.  Harrison
Smith stooped and put a cushion beneath his head.

"All ri' soon--qui' all ri'.  Fac' is I'm one of the ruins Crom'll
knocked about a bit."  The voice tailed away into a deep, slumberous
groan.

A minute later Harrison Smith was at the door of Barraclough's flat on
the landing below.  The fourth key on the bunch turned the latch and
silently as a cat he slipped into the hall.  A quick observation of the
chambers above had given him a fair idea of which room was which and he
had no trouble in locating the study door in the dark.  Before turning
on a light he assured himself that the window curtains were drawn.  He
realised the need to be very silent in all his actions since
Barraclough's servant was in all probability sleeping on the premises
and ex-service men of the regular army have an awkward knack of
sleeping lightly.  He closed the door without even a click from the
latch, then turned up a standard lamp that stood on the writing table.
In the pen tray beneath the lamp was a blue pencil--a new one--since
obviously it had never been sharpened and the chalk point was scarcely
worn at all.  The other end of the pencil had been deeply bitten in a
dozen places, a circumstance which Harrison Smith noted with
satisfaction.  The other pencils and pens in the tray bore no teeth
marks.  It was reasonable, therefore, to surmise that its owner had
been engaged in some knotty and puzzling problem at the time of use.

"I believe the girl was on the right track," he muttered to himself and
turned his attention to the bookshelves.  One of the cases was given
over entirely to a collection of local guide books surprisingly
complete in map and detail.  There were four volumes dealing with
Cornwall and it was only the matter of a moment to find the one to
which Isabel had referred.  Bringing it to the light Harrison Smith
hastily turned over the pages until he came to the squared map that
showed the village of Polperro.  But here disappointment awaited
him--for not a sign of the blue pencil mark showed upon the page.  He
was on the point of closing the book when he made a discovery.

The light striking across the paper revealed the fact that the surface
in places bore a polished appearance.  The reason was significant.
Barraclough, leaving nothing to chance, had erased the pencil marks
with indiarubber.  If anything could emphasise the value of his
discovery surely it was this and Harrison Smith fairly tingled with
excitement.  He picked up a magnifying glass and closely examined the
erasement.  There had been a line drawn round the village and on the
outskirts, where three cottages clustered together, was the impression
of a single dot.  At roughly a mile inland from the village where a
footpath converged with the road was another dot, seemingly situated in
the middle of a clump of trees.

Harrison Smith was satisfied.  He hastily dropped the book into his
pocket, restored its fellows to their former position on the shelves
and tiptoed across the room to extinguish the light.  Thus far Fortune
had favoured him, but she is a capricious lady wont to change her
allegiance with startling suddenness.  If there had been a length of
yellow flex to the electric standard the accident would never have
happened.  It is simply asking for trouble to use red flex on a red
carpet.  Harrison Smith's foot tangled in the wire and down came the
table lamp with a crash.  Simultaneously there came a shout from
another part of the flat.  For a second Harrison Smith stood spellbound
at the disaster he had caused--robbed of the power of action.

It was the sound of bare feet pattering on the parquet of the hall that
restored his senses and as the door of the room flew open he stamped on
the still burning electric bulb lying at his feet.  The detonation as
it flew into fragments came simultaneously with the sharp, stinging
report of a small calibre pistol.  The room was plunged into utter
darkness in which could be heard the sound of two men breathing and the
zinging of the mantelpiece brasses from the double explosion.  Then
silence--no movement--and the mind of Harrison Smith worked like a
streak of lightning.  His hand was on the back of a heavy arm chair and
the touch of it suggested an idea.

He gave a thin, whispering sigh and cried out in a high pitched voice.

"My God!  You've killed me!"

Then he tilted back the arm chair and allowed it to fall with a soft
thud to the floor.

Another silence, then the sound of a man moving forward.  Harrison
Smith side stepped and, keeping in touch with the wall, navigated
through the darkness toward the door.

"Serve you damn well right," said Doran in a voice that was startlingly
near.

Harrison Smith's luck had returned.  He found the door and passed
through it and down the hall as quietly as a draught.  He heard a click
as Doran switched up the lights, followed by an oath.  Then he streaked
down the main stairway with a flight and a half start.  A second was
lost at the hall door fumbling for the latch and in that second Doran
fired again but missed.  As Harrison Smith shot out into Albemarle
Street he collided heavily with a constable, attracted to the scene by
the noise of the shots, but him he overturned to such good effect that
he was crossing Piccadilly before the blast of the inevitable whistle
screeched through the night.  There was no further opposition to his
progress and in St. James's Street he fell into a walk and finally
entered his own apartment unobserved.

A little breathless but entirely satisfied he flung himself on the bed
for a couple of hours' sleep.




CHAPTER 21.

THE CORNISH RIVIERA.

In the summer time all the best people, and many who fall short of
perfection, go westward to the Cornish Riviera.  It is the thing to do.
The taxi, the station 'bus, the private automobile, and even the almost
extinct four-wheeler, high laden with luggage, by common consent roll
down the slope into Paddington and deliver up their cargoes.  Long are
the queues at the booking offices, thronged the platforms, and loud the
voices of those who command.  Each little party of voyagers would seem
to have its own alarums as an inevitable adjunct to excursion.  The
genius for organising is manifest on all sides with resultant chaos.
Orders and injunctions are flung broadcast--misinterpreted and
sometimes abused.  The germ of panic infects the multitude.

There was nothing Freddie Dirk liked better than a holiday crowd.  They
inspired in him a sense of profound gratitude.  Their generosity was
boundless.  To a gentleman of his skill in the matter of property
exchange they represented a fortune.  Whatsoever the imagination might
picture and the heart of man covet could be had at the mere turn of a
hand.

His appointment with Harrison Smith was for 9.50, but Freddie Dirk
arrived half an hour ahead of time and this grace he put to excellent
account.  He had learnt from Bolt that Cornwall was their destination,
wherefore his first care was to procure two first-class tickets for
Plymouth from the cuff of a gentleman's raincoat--a feat in strict
accordance with the laws of economy.  The high cost of living had of
late reduced his supply of ready cash, on which account he could hardly
be blamed for taking possession of a wad of notes carelessly entrusted
to a side pocket by another passenger who was seeking to economise by
carrying his own bag.  Being an essentially practical man Freddie Dirk
resisted the temptation to acquire a suitcase in crocodile by Pound.
Reticence in the matter did him credit and he rewarded himself with a
single stone diamond scarf pin that greatly enhanced the appearance of
his own cravat.  He was debating with himself the question of a string
of pearls of no very great value when Harrison Smith's hand fell upon
his shoulder.

"That's a blame silly thing to do," said Dirk when he had recovered
from his initial surprise.  "Blame silly.  Might 'ave a bit more
respec' for a man's nerves."

Harrison Smith cursed him fluently as he led the way to a Ford car
standing in the yard.

"Lot of use to me you'd have been if the splits had got you.  It's a
big job we're tackling and I don't want it spoilt by dam-fool sneak
thief tricks."

Freddie Dirk apologised and explained his distaste for idleness.

"Ain't we going by train--'cos I got the tickets."

"No."

"Well, 'ang on a minute while I gets the money back."

But even this business coup was denied and with a sense of opportunity
lost he entered the car.

There was nothing prepossessing in Freddie Dirk's appearance.  He was
of the low brow, heavy jaw, bruiser type.  The term a "tough" fits him
closely.  He had a punch like a kick from a dray horse but when called
upon to use his hands he preferred to rely upon his mascot to ensure
success.  Freddie's mascot was a few lengths of whalebone bound with
twine and socketed into a pear-shaped lump of lead.  Scientifically
wielded it would go through the helmet of a City policeman like a hot
knife through butter.  He had a healthy dislike for firearms which was
perhaps the primary cause of his failure to serve King and Country in
the late war.  His skill as a draft dodger had earned him a great
reputation among many of his fellows equally diffident in their will to
serve.

"I've got you into this," said Harrison Smith as they chugged up the
station incline, "because I want a man who'll stick at nothing."

Dirk nodded.

"There's a chance we may have to----"

"That's orl rite--least said soonest mended."

"Barraclough is a bit of a bear cat and if he's got the concession on
him you can lay odds he'll fight."

"If he's got the blinking thing don't see 'ow we're going to make much
aht of it."

"Wouldn't his own side pay a goodish cheque?  And wouldn't old Van cash
in to have it destroyed."

Dirk grinned very prettily revealing his broken front teeth in all the
glory of the morning sun.

"I get you.  A private deal, like, favouring whichever market pays
best."

"That's the idea.  There's a fortune in it if we get him tucked away in
some quiet place."

"It's a treat to work with you," said Dirk enthusiastically.  "I'll lay
a quart there ain't a finer 'ead piece than yours from 'Oxton to
'Ammersmith."

"Thank you," said Harrison Smith.  "Try and remember that and obey
orders quick as you get 'em."

"That's rite, captain, that's the talk.  Give me a man wot talks
strite."

A Ford is a marvellous eater up of miles and Harrison Smith did not
spare his engine nor linger upon the way.  Evening was falling when at
last they descended the hill into the little fishing village of
Polperro.  They ran into the inn yard and tried to bespeak a lodging
for the night but in this they were unlucky for there was no
accommodation to be had.  The best obtainable was a shake down in the
stable loft, granted on a promise to refrain from smoking.  Having
refilled the petrol tank and assured themselves that the Ford was in
sound running order against the morrow's needs they entered the inn.

"We'll get a snack now," said Harrison Smith, "and after that take a
look round and make a few enquiries."

The schooners of ale provided by mine host to wash down the simple
country fare were entirely agreeable to Freddie Dirk's parched palate.
It had been a long day and, as he pointed out, refreshment had been all
too scarce.  Harrison Smith might be, and undoubtedly was, an excellent
fellow but he did not understand the urgent need for beer without which
no good man was at his best.  It was all very well going out and asking
questions and poking one's nose into this, that and the other but far
greater advantage was to be won by poking one's nose into deep foaming
tankards of beer.  Closing hour came all too soon and it would be time
enough to seek fresh diversion after that unhappy event.

Wishing to remain in the good graces of his companion Harrison Smith
shrugged his shoulders and sallied forth alone in the direction of the
quay.  The tide was out and from the mud and sand came the pungent
ozonous smell of rotting sea vegetation.  Dazzling white gulls wheeled
and hovered in the air or noisily disputed the possession of fragments
of fish and the offal of the market.  In the pool a dozen trawlers,
green striped and numbered, with furled brown sails and slackened
rigging rode sweetly at anchor.  A knot of seamen leaned against the
outer stone wall of the pier smoking pipes and gazing idly across the
opal coloured sea.  A couple of artists were wrestling valiantly with
the thousand subtle difficulties of the scene--trying to transmit to
canvas the changing lights upon the water, the pink blush on the
white-washed houses and the dull grey shadows on the mud.  It was a
scene calm and sweet enough to awaken gentleness and set romance astir
but in Harrison Smith's mind it inspired no more than a sense of doubt
and disappointment.  Surely this tiny harbour was an unlikely landing
for a man to choose who carried in his pocket the key to millions.  No
decent sized vessel would ever put into such a port.  The place was
asleep--dead almost.

A blasting conviction that the marks in the guide book had no
connection whatever with the business in hand came over him.
Barraclough might have put them there expressly to deceive the girl.
He was subtle enough to employ such a device.  What if after all the
others were right and it was indeed Barraclough they had kidnapped?  A
pretty fool he would look then.

Shaking himself out of these melancholy forebodings Harrison Smith
approached an old seaman with the offer of a "good evening" and a fill
of tobacco.

"Pretty quiet hereabouts," he remarked.

The old man nodded.

"Still I dare say you get steamers and such like popping in every day
to liven things up."

"Bearn't draught enuff for steamers.  They doan't bother us much,
steamers doan't."

The reply was not encouraging.

"I see the fishing fleet is at anchor.  Weather too calm?"

"Couldn't say thaat."

"Going out tonight?"

"Med-do."

"And how do you get rid of your fish?"

"Us sells 'er."

"I mean do you send it up by road?"

"Naw!"

"Steam trawler comes in to collect it?"

"Doan't come in--not very often it doan't."

Harrison Smith turned away with a sigh, leaving the old man sucking at
his pipe and spitting reflectively.  There was no illumination to be
found in that quarter.

More than ever doubtful of success he passed slowly through the village
to its inland outskirts and there he paused to study the map.  It might
be worth while taking a casual glance at the group of three cottages
marked by Barraclough with the pencil point.  They were easily located
but their outward appearance suggested little enough connection with
the mystery.  They were fashioned of grey Cornish granite with slate
roofs and the inevitable fuchsia bushes in the front gardens.  One of
them boasted a small stock yard roughly cobbled, an open cowshed and
alongside a stable with a heavy double door.  As a mere matter of form
Harrison Smith determined to take a glance inside but on approaching
the door he found it was fastened by an iron crossbar secured to an
eyelet by a large and well made padlock.  The door fitted closely into
its architrave and there was no crack through which a man might see
into the stable.  Once more his excitement revived.  With a quick
glance over his shoulder to satisfy himself no one was about he
scrambled over the shale wall of the stock yard and passed to the rear
of the building.  High up under the gable a few pieces of stone had
been removed for ventilation.  A broken horse trough placed against the
wall served him as a ladder and a moment later he was peering through
the gap into the inky darkness of the stable.  Nothing could be seen
so, with some difficulty, he struck a match and dropped it into the
space beyond.  It went out in the fall but in the brief space while
still alight it revealed the bright parts of a long, low racing car.

Harrison Smith dropped silently to the ground and his breath came short
and sharp.

"I was right--I was right," he gasped.  "Hispano Suisa by the look of
it--and fast too.  Shouldn't have much chance against that outfit."

Naturally enough he resolved that it would never do to allow
Barraclough to get as far as the stable.  On the other hand it would be
a wise precaution to disable the big automobile in case of accident.
But between him and the carrying out of this resolve was an iron bar
and a padlock.  To attempt violence against the door would surely
attract attention from the house.  And all at once a simple and
effective alternative suggested itself.  If he himself were unable to
enter the stable he would take measures to prevent the entrance of any
other person.  There was no difficulty about that and when five minutes
later he strolled down the road toward the inn it was with the
comforting reflection that the keyhole of the padlock was entirely
filled up with clay and grit in such a manner that no key could ever
again force its way in.

He found Dirk already settling himself down for the night and Harrison
Smith smote him boisterously on the back.

"A red hot scent, my son," said he.  "We're on the winning side.
Success, my boy--success."

Freddie Dirk smiled beatifically through a fog of beer.

"Goo' ni'," he murmured.

"It's up with the dawn for you and me--and then success."

Curious how success reacts even on the best balanced brain and
obliterates the most obvious considerations.  Harrison Smith entirely
forgot the second blue dot on the map--the one situated a mile outside
the village where a little footpath converged with the high road.




CHAPTER 22.

PLAIN SAILING.

The steam trawler "Felice" out of Cherbourg was not much to look at,
but none the less she was a lady of virtue and of good intention.  Her
engines had lost the sweet voice of youth through long argument and
bitter contest with the stern affronts of life.  Where once they had
hummed and purred now they racketed and nagged, but they got through
the work none the less well on that account.  The life of a fish wife
hardens the temperament and loosens the tongue and the "Felice" was no
exception to the rule.  A plain, strident, powerful old woman bucketing
through calm and trouble with the same reproach for either.  The
"Felice" wore rusty black--coarse and patched.  She had long ago
forsaken her girlish waist band of royal blue esteeming such fallals
better suited to the children of the fleet.  She was a no-nonsense
lady, one of the "up and doing and you be damned" sort, but she boasted
at least one unusual feature, the pride and envy of her fellows.  She
was fitted with an aerial, the relic of an age when small vessels went
forth to sweep up big mines very often to be swept up themselves while
so engaged and to mention the fact by wireless in the short interval
between being struck and sinking.

Anthony Barraclough, wrapped in a suit of borrowed oilskins, leaned
against the deck-house and grinned at the breaking day.  Like a fire
opal the sun rose out of the sea, its first rays dissipating the
ghostlike wisps of fog that drifted over the water.  The "Felice" was
shouldering her way up channel against the slap of a running tide and
the greeny-black waves, as yet undyed by the morning blue, spumed and
spattered over the bows and wetted her decks with a sharp salt rain.

"Oh, Lord!" said Barraclough, dashing the spray out of his eyes.  "Oh,
Lord! it's good to be alive."

His hand travelled to an inside breast pocket and stayed there, his
fingers lovingly caressing a case of morocco leather.

"And it's good to have brought it off.  Damned good."  His eyes looked
aloft to the sagging wires of the aerial.

"Wonder if I dare send 'em a message.  Better not perhaps.  Besides, I
want the fun of springing it on 'em myself.  Still, I might give 'em a
hint--something to set 'em thinking."

He puzzled for a moment then broke into a fresh grin for a dainty
little code had suggested itself.  It would be rather amusing to talk
to a group of financiers in the language of flowers.  A memory of
Isabel's last words put the idea into his head when she had given him
the dog rose on the evening of his departure.

"It means hope, Tony," and "Hope it is," he had replied.

He turned to the little companion ladder and shouted into the dark
beneath.

"Ohe, Jean Prevost, half a minute."

And in answer appeared the head and shoulders of a short, thick-set,
twinkly eyed, unshaven man who gruffly demanded "Quoi?"

Jean Prevost, skipper of the "Felice," was not an "oil painting" to
look at but he was just as reliable as the craft he commanded.  He and
Barraclough had had dealings together during the war and they respected
each other.  If Jean Prevost were proud of anything it was of his
acquaintance with Barraclough and the knowledge he esteemed himself to
possess of the English tongue.

"Fizz me off a message on the wireless, there's a good soul."

"Hah!"

"Gerard, Regent Street, W.  Deliver immediately single dog rose to Lord
Almont Frayne, Park Lane Mansions."

Jean Prevost nodded and repeated the message verbatim.

"That's it.  Quick as you can."

"I send 'im now, I blerdy will.  We find ze trawlers blerdy soon."

Jean Prevost showed a regrettable liberality in the use of this popular
adjective which he firmly believed lent vitality and refinement to any
sentence.

"That'll set them thinking," said Barraclough, as he turned away with a
smile.  "Ha, the Eddystone!"

In direct line with their course rising like a thin twig out of the sea
showed the silhouette of the lighthouse, while between it and the now
faintly discernible mainland tiny dots of brown showed upon the water.

Your true Englishman is an absurd creation for he cannot return to his
native land even after the shortest absence, he cannot see the faint
familiar landmarks, the nestling villages, the rolling downs, the white
chalk or grey granite of her battlements, without a throb of honest
grateful pride.  An imperial singing sounds in his ears--tuned to the
measure of breaking surf--such a song as lovers sing whose single words
are no more than this, "I am yours and you are mine."

"Tonight," he said.  "Tonight I shall see her again."

There was the appointment at his rooms at 11 o'clock when he would
place the concession in Mr. Torrington's hands.  That would be a big
moment.  He could imagine Cranbourne's unbridled enthusiasm, Lord
Almont's congratulations in the style of P. G. Wodehouse, and Cassis,
that person of dry ashes and parchment, unbending to the greatness of
the occasion.  He, Barraclough, was a made man, every newspaper in the
country would send its reporters to clamour at his doors, every charity
seek his aid when the story and the magnitude of his find became known.
From an ordinary commonplace individual, he would be transformed into a
figure of the age, the observed of all eyes, the target of every
tongue.  And yet, the world at his feet, the wealth, the prominence,
the power, the achievement, faded and dwindled into nothing at all
beside one absurd but adorable longing.  It was the thought of Isabel
sitting on the floor, hugging her knees, resting her chin upon them,
looking at him with great wide open eyes, smiling at him with moist
trembling lips.

Over head the aerial fizzed and crackled as his message voyaged forth
into space.  The tiny dots between the Eddystone and the land took form
and detail and became the brown sails of a fishing fleet lolling idly
in the bay.

A hand on his shoulder aroused him from his reverie and he turned to
find Jean Prevost standing beside him.

Barraclough pointed to the North East.

"Number fifty-seven," he said.

The old skipper focussed a pair of binoculars and steadied them against
a stay of the funnel.

"Zere," he said, and pointed at a solitary sail to the West of its
fellows.  "Heem!  You see?"

Barraclough nodded.

"Diamond's a reliable chap.  Always as good as his word.  How long
shall we be?"

"Quarter hour--ten minit."

Nothing more was said until the "Felice" came alongside the solitary
fishing boat from the bows of which a tall bronzed seaman gave them a
welcoming hail.

"Good-bye and good luck, Jean Prevost," said Barraclough.  "You'll hear
from me in a day or two."

"And blerdy good luck to you," said the Frenchman gripping the extended
hand.

Barraclough dropped over the side and landed on the stern sheets of
Number 57.  A bell clanked and the "Felice" lurched away ruffing the
glassy water with her screw.

"Be ye right?" demanded Diamond, drawing up the cable of his anchor.

"Sure thing," said Barraclough.  "Let her go."

The anchor came out of the water with a plop, the brown sail was
twisted and a little auxiliary oil engine began to snort.

"Wind's settin' just right," said Diamond, the sheet in one hand and
the tiller in the other.  "Ye 'ad a good time?"

"First rate.  Tell you all about it one of these days."

A friendly puff of wind from the South East filled the canvas and drove
them shoreward at a slant, the water lapping gently against the bows.
It seemed a very little while before they rounded the headland and
entered the narrow funnel of cliffs leading into Polperro.  Not a soul
was to be seen at the breakwater, a circumstance Barraclough noted with
satisfaction, although he had no reason to expect opposition.  They
lowered sail at the harbour mouth and came alongside a slippery wooden
ladder stapled into the stone wall of the pier.

"Ye'll take a bite o' breakwus?"

"Not this journey, Jack.  I'm getting off as fast as I can.  Here,
you'd better freeze on to these oil skins.  No good to me."  He
stripped off the coat he was wearing, shook hands, and mounted the
ladder.

"Thanks awfully.  I'll be down this way for my honeymoon.  Good-bye."

With a cheery wave and a smile he started down the jetty at a brisk
walk.




CHAPTER 23.

AN ENCOUNTER.

Anyone who is acquainted with the village of Polperro knows the stone
jetty which runs parallel with the horizon line of the sea.  In length
it is perhaps eighty or a hundred yards.  At its Western end it turns
at right angles past a terrace of old houses whose foundations are
washed by the tide.  Barraclough had almost arrived at this point when
two men turned the corner and came toward him.  One was a presentable
enough fellow, but his companion was a person of low class.  They were
obviously in the heart of an altercation for the words, "You fill
yourself up with beer like a blasted barrel," preceded their appearance.

Now there was one thing Barraclough never forgot--a man's voice--and as
the words came to his ears he stopped dead.  The moment of mutual
recognition was almost instantaneous, but Barraclough had precisely one
second's start to recover from his surprise.  Behind him was the jetty
surrounded by the sea, and the narrow passage in front was blocked by
enemies.

Harrison Smith wasted a fraction of time crying out the name
"Barraclough!"  Dirk fell back a pace fumbling for the pocket in which
he kept his "Mascot."  It was a fatal mistake.  Running down the length
of the jetty between the two men was a fisherman's net, and as Harrison
Smith sprang toward him pistol in hand, Barraclough ducked, seized the
net and raised it in the air.

It was the barest fluke that the manoeuvre should have worked so well.
Harrison Smith stumbled heavily, grabbed at Dirk and missed him.
Barraclough's foot just above his waist line destroyed the last of his
equilibrium and over the edge he went into the shallow water below.
Unquestionably the beer was responsible for Dirk's failure to win the
engagement.  His quarry was before him in an open position.  He should
have used his Mascot and used it hard.  It was sheer criminal stupidity
to have looked over the edge at his fallen commander.  Maybe the angry
scarlet of Dirk's complexion provoked Barraclough's attack and before
the poor man had recovered from his surprise a heavy lobster pot came
smashing down over his face with agonising force, the splintering
basket-work playing havoc with his features.  Then he, too, experienced
the unique sensation of gliding downward through space, a delight
somewhat marred by the rudeness of its finish.

Barraclough did not stay to behold the result of his offensive, but
picked up his heels and ran.  Just beyond the open fish market he saw a
neglected Ford car and hesitated an instant to debate whether or no he
should appropriate it.  At the time he did not connect it with the two
men wallowing in harbour waters.  Had he done so he would certainly
have driven it over the edge of the quay into the mud.  His own car was
waiting less than a quarter of a mile away--an Hispano Suisa built for
speed--and the sense of speed ran through his own veins.  As he raced
up the narrow, twisting street the good wives of the village turned on
their doorsteps, open mouthed, to watch him pass.  He scarcely bothered
to glance over his shoulder satisfied that he had gained an easy five
minutes' start.  Coming abreast of the three cottages he vaulted the
stock yard wall, threw open a gate and made for the stable door
fumbling in his pocket for the key of the padlock.

And suddenly an oath broke from his lips crisp, concise, and covering.
The first trick had been scored by him but undoubtedly Harrison Smith
had won the second.  The blocked up keyhole told its own tale.  He knew
the door very well and it would be half an hour's work to break it
down, also he knew the padlock having bought it himself.  The Hispano
Suisa would have to be abandoned.

He did not waste time cursing, but instead leapt the shale wall and
took to the fields.  A little footpath lay among the trees at the
meadow end and Anthony Barraclough made for it with all possible
dispatch jumping a brook and forcing his way through a fringe of thorn
and bramble.  There had been no rain for some weeks and the going was
dry, a circumstance he noted with satisfaction, for your average
Cornish footpath is as much a waterway as a thoroughfare for
pedestrians.  It was half a mile to his destination, a spot where the
path converged with the high road and as he ran, Barraclough covered
his face with his hand to avoid the swinging branches.  A gap in the
trees gave a view of the village and as he flashed across it increasing
speed to avoid the risk of being seen he had a momentary glimpse of a
Ford car with two men in it stopping at the gate he had recently opened.

"How in blazes they found out beats me," he gasped.

A sickening fear assailed him that his second line of escape might also
have been blocked and, at the thought, he put out every ounce of speed
he possessed.  It was better to know the worst at once.  The path
widened out into a cart track and through an aisle of trees the white
patch of the high road came into view.

A casual passer-by would never have noticed the low built pigsty that
butted on to the hedge, its roof and sides being almost completely
masked with brushwood and bramble vine.

Barraclough could not resist an exclamation of joy as he noted that the
big piles of carelessly thrown kindlings were apparently untouched.  He
kicked away great bundles of them with his foot, produced a key and
opened a small solid door.  The relief was almost unbearable, but he
did not linger to offer up prayers of thanksgiving.

The motor bicycle flashed bravely as he dragged it out into the sun,
turned on the petrol and set the controls.  He shoved the gear lever
into second, lifted the exhaust and pushed, and the willing little twin
fired its first spluttering salvo as he bumped out of the rutted lane
into the main road.

Concentration on the single object of getting away had dulled his ears
to other sounds, for normally he could not have failed to hear the
chuff-chuff of the approaching Ford.  As he swung into the saddle he
saw it out of the corner of his eye and ducked.  The vision of two
men--an excited yell and an oath--they were almost on top of him when
the twin took a healthy dose of the mixture and got away.  Another
second and they would have ridden him down.  Barraclough swerved to the
left to cut a corner and opened up.  Harrison Smith did likewise,
choking his engine with too wide a throttle and losing a dozen yards in
half that number of seconds.

"Shoot, blast you!  Shoot, you blasted fool!" he roared at Dirk.

Barraclough heard the order and swept over to the right to disturb the
aim as a couple of leaden hornets buzzed angrily past his ear striking
the macadam a hundred yards ahead and whining away into the distance.

Freddie Dirk's execution with an automatic was below the quality of his
Mascot work.  He cursed fluently as the shots flew wide and tried to
steady his aim by resting the Colt on the iron crosspiece of the wind
screen.

"Take the wheel--take the wheel, damn you," cried Harrison Smith,
snatching at the pistol with his left hand.  "You can't shoot that way."

Somehow they contrived to change places.  A sharp rise in the ground
had perceptibly slackened the speed of Barraclough's mount and he
reduced his lead still further by hanging on to the top gear a couple
of seconds too long.  The Ford, on the other hand, was beginning to
improve and leapt at the hill eagerly.  No more than fifty yards
separated pursued from pursuer.

Harrison Smith sat on the back of the driving seat and bided his time.
A glance ahead showed him the road winding up interminably at the very
incline at which a Ford car develops its greatest efficiency and goes
sailing past nearly everything else on the road.

"Got him," he said, "got him cold."

This comforting reflection awoke in his breast a sporting fancy.  After
all it was more fun to shoot a man than to ride him down.

The little twin in front was labouring bravely at the hill, but its
muffled exhaust was pleading unmistakably for still another change
down.  Barraclough knew very well that were he to accept this
invitation he would be lost.  The only hope was to keep in second and
pray hard that the engine wouldn't conk out.  A glance over his
shoulder revealed the Ford bounding up the hill toward him.  Then it
was Harrison Smith fired.  Barraclough saw the flash out of the tail of
his eye and simultaneously his motor cycle seemed to leap forward with
a noisy roar.  The bullet had struck the exhaust pipe cutting it clear
of the silencer and making him a gift of five miles an hour.  A new
life seemed to run through the veins of the machine and the hill
flattened out before him like a level track.  As he realised the
charity of Fate, Barraclough lifted a gladsome "Yoicks" and waved his
right arm above his head.  Again the pistol cracked and a red hot
knitting needle seemed to pass through the palm of his hand.  As he
brought it back to the handle bar he saw a pale blue circle between his
first and second finger bubble into scarlet and black.

"You scum, you dirty scum," he cried, "but it'll take more than a
bullet through the hand to bring down my flag."

He jerked the gear lever back into top and shot full bore at the down
grade before him.  As the Ford car breasted the top of the hill its
passengers were rewarded by the sight of a tiny speck of dust tearing
along a ribbon of white in the valley below.




CHAPTER 24.

RIVAL FACTIONS.

Everyone agreed it was a difficult morning on the Stock Exchange,
although for that matter a great many mornings during the past three
weeks had been the same.  The bottom had fallen out of innumerable
cans.  Persons with scarlet or greenish white faces were waving their
hands and calling on the Deity to explain the collapse of cast iron
securities.  If there had been a threat of war things could hardly have
been worse.  The worst of it was that none of the big sellers seemed
disposed to give their reasons for unloading.  Mr. Hilbert Torrington,
when asked why he had sold huge quantities of oil shares, courteously
replied to all and various that he had no observations to make.  The
oil market, particularly that controlled by Hugo Van Diest, had slumped
fifteen points in three days and the others had fallen sympathetically.
And now, as though the oil collapse were not enough, appeared Ezra P.
Hipps unloading Estuary Rails at a price that would hardly pay for
printing the scrip.  Ten days earlier the Estuary had looked like a
cinch and Nugent Cassis, who had a reputation for sanity, had been
buying it by the yard.  Here was stock at nineteen shillings being
offered at fivepence, and no rush to take it up even at that price.
Everyone knew that Hipps was the moving spirit in the Estuary.  His
holdings were enormous.

"In Heaven's name, man, what's the idea?" was shouted at him from every
side.

"I'm getting out," was the only answer he condescended.

Nugent Cassis was beginning to lose his nerve as emphasised by the fact
that he was continually winding his watch or pulling at his precise
grey beard.  His usual air of calm ill-humour had deserted him and, as
Lord Almont laconically remarked, "Poor old Cassis is flapping in the
wind."

"Can't understand their motive," he repeated over and over again.  "If
they believe they've got Barraclough tucked safely away, what can they
gain by this stock juggling?"

"They are laying a false scent presumably," said Mr. Torrington.

"They must be aware that we know about the kidnapping."

"I imagine so.  At any rate Cranbourne intends to put them wise."

"Then where's the object?"

"Our friend Frencham Altar has disappointed 'em perhaps, so they turn
their attentions once more to our humble selves."

"Makes me almost wish we'd left the whole thing alone.  Seventy
thousand pounds in three weeks.  Appalling!  Appalling!"

"But consider how we shall be requited when Barraclough turns up with
the concession."

"_If_ he turns up."

"We shall know at eleven o'clock tonight."

"That's purely hypothetical."

"My dear Cassis, the world is made up of hypotheses--dreams that
sometimes come true.  What are you doing with your holdings in Estuary?"

"I'm selling."

The old man's eyes blazed.

"On the contrary, my friend.  This is a fight and we fight to a finish,
please.  By your leave we do not take the count until tomorrow morning."

"I'm not made of money," Cassis complained.

"Very well then, if you are determined to sell--sell to me."

"Are you crazy?"

"Possibly.  Come over here."

Mr. Torrington took Cassis by the arm and led him to the excited group
surrounding Ezra P. Hipps.  The American's head and shoulders appeared
above the crowd.  He was offering Estuary Rails at fourpence three
farthings.  Catching sight of Nugent Cassis he broke into a grin, shook
his head sadly and asked:

"Coming to join the party?"

"We are," replied Mr. Torrington, "in the form of purchasers.  I'll buy
at four-three."

The American frowned.

"Say, you serious, Mr. Wise Man?"

"Perfectly."

"What'll you take?"

"All you've got."

The news went round like wild fire and half an hour later the price of
Estuaries was running up like quicksilver dipped in hot water.

"What in hell do you make of that?" Hipps demanded of his chief.

Hugo Van Diest shrugged his shoulders.

"He wass a doughty adversary, dis Mr. Torrington," he replied.  "Must
egshpect dis sort of ting."

"Guess there's more behind it than that.  What are they hoping on,
anyway?"

"Donno--donno."

But the sudden appearance of Sydney Cranbourne did something to
enlighten them.

"Forgive my intrusion, gentlemen," he said, "but could you give me a
possible date on which we might expect the return of our mutual friend?"

Neither Hipps nor Van Diest betrayed the smallest surprise.

"Our mutual friend, Mister Cranbourne?"

"I was referring to a gentleman whose initials are A. B."

"A. B.!  Wasn't that the guy who went out to look for a radium field
three weeks ago today?"

"The same," said Cranbourne sweetly.  "But we had reason to believe he
changed his plans and accepted another invitation."

"You've been dreaming, dear," said Hipps.

"Perhaps I have, Mr. Hipps.  The matter is of no great importance but I
dreamt of the Old Bailey among other things and of three gentlemen,
prominent in financial circles, who were charged with unlawfully
detaining someone against his will and endeavouring to induce him to
confide certain information."

"And then, I suppose," remarked Hipps, "you woke up and knocked over
your cup of early tea."

"Why, no," replied Cranbourne.  "I sat up in bed and worked out details
for the flotation of the Radium Company in which I have an interest."

Hipps looked at Van Diest, shook his head and tapped his brow.

"Sure it's the heat," he said.  "There ain't going to be any flotation
that I've heard of."

"Think not?  It would be a pity if you gentlemen gave way to overmuch
expression of optimism.  It hardly accords with your actions of the
last few days."

Van Diest smiled expansively.

"Ver' distressing dis uneven market."

"I imagine you must have found it so."

"Poor Mister Cassis--he was ver' green dis morning."

"Our dear Cassis is a born actor.  Well, gentlemen, I won't keep you
any longer except to offer my sympathy that you have found A. B. so
indifferent a confidant.  Good day."

And with a polite bow he turned and mingled with the crowd.

"Can't quite get the strength of all that," observed Hipps as he and
Van Diest passed out of the main door, "but one thing sticks out a
mile.  We can't hold our prisoner indefinitely.  He must be made to
talk right away."

"Dis evening we make the big effort."

"And assumin' it fails?"

"Dat would be a peety--such a peety."

Hipps stood thinking for a moment.

"I've half a mind to turn on the girl again.  Let her vamp the secret
out of him.  We don't progress, you know.  Say, you don't think they've
a line on where we've got him hid?"

Van Diest waved away the suggestion.

"No, no, no.  S'all right.  S'arranged too well."

"Then I'll trot up West and buy Auriole a lunch.  What time tonight?"

"At nine o'clock."

"I'll be along."

He jumped into a taxi, drove round and collected Auriole and carried
her off to the Carlton Hotel.  She seemed tired and lacklustre, a
circumstance he noted with some small annoyance.

"See here, kid," he said.  "We've a big set piece scheduled for tonight
and you're a participant."

"I am."

"Sure.  Our friend has proved a disappointment in the talking line."

For a moment a flash of enthusiasm burned in her eyes.

"The persecution has failed then?"

"It's early to say so but we've a notion it 'ud do no harm to
accelerate a trifle."

"You'd hardly dare torture him more than you've done already."

"We thought of trying out one or two new effects but supposing they
fail then it's up to you to take a hand."

"No," said Auriole, "no.  You found me a failure before--let's leave it
at that.  My part's ended."

"Haven't you kind o' forgotten something?"

"What?"

"My offer to you was made providing we pull off this deal.  Failing
that it's cancelled."

Auriole's expression, seemed to go very flat indeed.  There was a look
of disgust in her eyes.

"What do you want?"

"Maybe we shall call on you for the 'whisper and I shall hear' act.
It'd make a nice variety for Anthony after the shouting."

"You want me to make love to him?"

"Sure.  And I'll try and govern my jealousy for a short stretch."

She was silent for a longish while, then she nodded.

"But only as a last resort," she insisted.

"That's a bet.  Me and Van'll be trundling along in the Rolls about
ninish--care to join us?"

"No, I'll use the two seater."

"Back your fancy.  But see here--no back sliding, mind.  A hell of a
lot hangs on his being made to talk--a hell of a lot," he repeated
seriously.

"What do you mean?"

"Never do for a fine chap like him to die young."

"Die?  You wouldn't dare."

"It's certain sure we wouldn't dare turn him out in the world again
after what's happened."

"Do you mean you'd----"

"Think it over."

And she thought it over while Ezra P. Hipps addressed himself to a
liberal helping of saddle of mutton smeared with great dollops of red
currant jelly that looked to her like blood.




CHAPTER 25.

MR. BOLT DROPS IN.

An undercurrent of suppressed excitement pulsed through Mrs.
Barraclough's household on the day of the seventeenth.  You could feel
it throbbing like the beat of a distant drum.  Voices sounded
different, eyes shone strangely, feet touched the ground as though it
lacked solidity.  A sense of electricity was in the air, like the
unnatural calm that is herald to a storm.  Mrs. Barraclough herself was
the one person outwardly unaffected by the general mood and set about
her daily duties as though nothing were happening.  She never even
mentioned Anthony's name but instead freely discussed the imminent
confinement of Mrs. Brassbound, the wife of the village policeman.  She
loved babies and it struck her as a happy omen that the little arrival
was expected on the very day that should mark her son's return from
excursions and alarums.

Isabel rang her up during the morning--a trunk call--with the brave
intention of expressing firm and unshakable optimism but the effort was
pathetically tremulous and finally petered out with inarticulate sobs
and chokings.

"Oh, dear, dear!  That will never do," said Mrs. Barraclough, mastering
a powerful desire to kiss the microphone into which she spoke.  "You
mustn't even imagine anything could go wrong.  Now, what are you going
to do this afternoon?"

Sniff!  "I donno--nuffin'," came over the wire moistly.

"Then I'll tell you.  You'll go round to your dressmaker's and try on
your wedding dress and pretend you're walking down the aisle with your
hand on Tony's arm."

"I c-couldn't--b-but it's a l-lovely idea."

"Of course you could and you've got to.  After all, it's what you'll be
doing in real earnest next Thursday."

Mrs. Barraclough could almost swear to having seen the smile that dried
up those tears that fell a hundred and fifty miles away.

"I'll t-try," said a tiny voice.  "You are a d-darling."  And later in
the afternoon the telephone bell rang again sad the same voice, with a
brave ring to it, announced "I've got it on."

After that Mrs. Barraclough was perfectly sure everything would be all
right and walked down to the village to enquire about the prospective
mother.

Shortly after she had gone Jane, who was entering the drawing room with
a silver tea tray, had a real adventure.  On pushing open the door she
had an impression of two black coat tails disappearing through the
French windows into the garden.  With perilous despatch she set down
the tray and rushed out to the gravel path, calling loudly to Flora.
Flora, arrayed in a greasy blue overall, came hurrying from the garage
where she had been spending the day tinkering with the car.

"Yes, what is it?" she cried.

Jane was pointing down a grove of Dorothy Perkins at the end of which a
stout figure in black was retreating.

"That old clergyman!"

"What about him?"

"I'll swear he was in this room when I brought in the tea."

"You sure?"

"Positive.  I saw him pass the house two or three times this morning
and yesterday too."

"Half a mo," said Flora and hurried over to the writing table.  "I say,
haven't these papers been moved?"

"Yes, they have.  My eye! it's exciting.  What do you make of it?"

"Something fishy."

"Do you think--do you possibly think it's anything to do with Mr.
Anthony?"

Jane's eyes sparkled like jewels at the very thought of anything so
adorable.

"I bet it has," said Flora.  "What else could it be?"

"Might be just a rotten burglary."

"Chuck it," said Flora.  "Don't spoil a decent show."

"I don't want to.  But didn't she tell you Mr. Anthony had spoofed the
crowd that were against him?"

"Um!  But they were a downey lot and p'raps after all they didn't buy
the spoof."

"Wouldn't it be terrific," exclaimed Jane, clasping her hands,
"wouldn't it be terrific if there was a dust up down here and we were
in it."

"Shut up," Flora implored, "it's a jolly sight too good to be true.
Better light the spirit lamp, the old lady'll be in to tea directly."

The words were scarcely spoken before a shadow was cast across the
floor and Mrs. Barraclough appeared at the window carrying a basket of
roses.

"Conybeare," she said, addressing the old Devonian gardener who was
trimming the borders a few yards away.  "Conybeare, I am going down to
Mrs. Brassbound later in the evening.  I want you to cut me a nice
bunch of grapes and some vegetables--nice ones."

The old fellow touched his cap and moved away.  Mrs. Barraclough
entered smilingly.

"And I shall want the car, Flora."

"It's all ready.  I'll bring it round, madam."

"There's no hurry.  Aren't these roses delicious?"  She buried her face
in the orgy of pink, crimson and yellowy-white blooms.  "Give me that
bowl, my dear."

And while she took a few from the basket and arranged them in the big
silver bowl she continued pleasantly--

"I always wish I were a girl again when I pick roses.  There's a
sentiment about them--and perhaps a danger--a nice sort of danger.  You
know, it's very sad to reach an age at which danger no longer exists.
By the way, a very singular thing happened to me on my way to the
village.  I was followed, Flora!"

"Followed!  But who'd dare?" said Jane.

Mrs. Barraclough pouted pathetically.

"Please don't say that," she begged.  "It makes one feel so old.  After
all, there is no law to prevent one being followed unless it is the law
of selection."

"Who followed you?" asked Flora.

"A man," replied Mrs. Barraclough with ceremony.  "A very respectable
man.  He revived a sense of youth in me by wearing elastic sided boots."

"What was his face like?"

"In the circumstances, Jane, I kept my eyes discreetly downcast, but I
had a fleeting impression of clerical broadcloth."

"That man!" exclaimed Flora with sudden emphasis.

"My dear, it is most unbecoming to speak disparagingly of a member of
the clergy.  As a girl the word curate inspired in me feelings of
respect and sentiment."

"There's not much to get sentimental over in that old beast," said
Jane.  "He's been hanging around since yesterday evening and what's
more, I'll bet he's up to no good."

Mrs. Barraclough had her own opinion of the mysterious parson who had
addressed her in the lane but she preferred to arrive at the opinions
of others by her own method.

"I am sure it is very wrong to bet on clergymen as though they were
race horses," she replied.

"But honestly," said Flora, "I believe he is a bad hat."

"Well, well, well," Mrs. Barraclough acceded, "if he isn't he certainly
wore one--a black and white straw of a shape and pattern which I
believe you moderns call 'boaters.'  There, the kettle is boiling.  Run
along and leave me to myself."

After the two girls had departed Mrs. Barraclough stroked the end of
her chin with a sensitive forefinger and murmured:

"I wonder what that man is here for?  It's queer--I wish I didn't
think--Oh, well!"

She leaned forward and poured herself out a cup of tea.  A discreet
cough caused her to start and rise quickly.

In the centre of the room stood Mr. Alfred Bolt, looking for all the
world like the comic paper idea of a parson.  A huge, black frock coat
hung in festoons over his globular form, his scarlet face was wreathed
in smiles.  In his hand he carried a black and white straw hat and a
pair of black kid gloves.  He placed the hat in the middle of his waist
line and bowed apologetically.

"I beg your pardon--I do indeed beg your pardon."

Mrs. Barraclough was equal to the occasion and presented a perfect
example of mid-Victorian austerity.

"May I ask, sir, why you enter my house other than by the front door?
And also what persuaded you to address me in the lane this afternoon?"

"My dear lady," protested Mr. Bolt with a world of unction.  "I come
from a part of the country where formality is unknown and where a
minister--a minister of the gospel--enters into the hearts and the
homes of men and of women by the shortest possible route."

"Fiddlesticks," said Mrs. Barraclough uncompromisingly.

At which her visitor expressed himself as greatly shocked and turned
his eyes heavenward.

"I remark with sorrow," he observed, "that you are not a true believer.
Your faith is not of the simple kind."

He could hardly have chosen an unhappier argument.  Mrs. Barraclough's
devotion was a byword in the parish.  To be treated thus by a totally
unknown clergyman was not to be tolerated.  Her doubt as to the probity
of this person fostered by Jane and Flora took definite shape.  She
decided to interrogate and, if necessary, expose him without further
preamble.

"It is customary for visitors to be announced," she said.  "I would be
obliged if you would tell me your name."

Mr. Bolt sighed and seated himself heavily on the sofa, his little
pig-like eyes roving round the room.

"My name, madam, is the Reverend Prometheus Bolt."

"And why have you called upon me?"

Mr. Bolt faltered.  He did not like this lady who pointed every
question.

"An act of civility, my dear madam.  I am staying a few days in this
enchanting vicinity and hearing of your benevolent character was
persuaded to pay my best respects."

"My benevolent character!  You are collecting for a charity?  You are
proposing to hand me a tract?"

"No, indeed no.  My visit is connected with this world and not the
next.  I was informed in the village that this house was to let."

"You were misinformed."

"Furnished--to let furnished.  Yes."  This was a happy thought and he
followed it up closely.  "I should consider myself indeed fortunate if
you, dear lady, would conduct me round its various apartments."

"The house is not to let under any consideration."

"Dear, dear!  How disappointing."

"So if that is your only object in calling----"  Her hand went out
toward the bell.

"I pray you will allow me to remain a moment and recover my breath.
The heat of the walk, you know.  I am not as young as I was."

"No one is," replied Mrs. Barraclough uncompromisingly.

"How very, very true," said Mr. Bolt with outward benevolence but
inwardly with a powerful inclination toward violence.  "Yes, very true,
although it is bitter indeed to be taunted with lack of youth.  In the
words of the Gospel 'do unto others as you would be done by.'"

"In what particular part of the Gospel does that phrase occur?"
demanded Mrs. Barraclough shrewdly.

But Alfred Bolt was not a man to be caught out in the first over.

"I can only recommend you a closer attention to the Book," he replied.
"Search its pages yourself, dear lady, and treasures of gladness shall
be yours."

It was a nimble evasion and he could not resist a smile of
self-satisfaction, but to avoid further interrogation on Biblical
derivations he hastened to lead the conversation into safer alleys and
ones more relative to the object of his visit.

"I am informed in the village that you are the fortunate possessor of a
son."

"I have a son," Mrs. Barraclough admitted.

"A priceless gift, dear lady.  I should like to shake him by the hand."

"Why?"

Really this woman was too trying and the directness of the question for
an instant deprived Mr. Bolt of his sense of character.  Before he had
time to collect his thoughts he had rapped out the reply:

"Needn't jump down a man's throat like that."

His effort to recover and mask this piece of startled irritability with
a vague platitude did not deceive his audience in the smallest degree.
Doubt became conviction in Mrs. Barraclough's mind.  She did not know
in what way this man was connected with her son's affairs but none the
less she was certain he represented a positive barrier between Anthony
and success.  To denounce him as a spy might, however, do more harm
than good, accordingly she took up the bell and rang it, with the words:

"My son is away and has been away for several weeks, nor is there any
likelihood you will meet him when ultimately he returns."  Then to the
glowering Jane who had answered the summons of the bell; "Kindly show
this gentleman out."

"Pray do not disturb yourself," said Mr. Bolt with dignity.  "I can
find my own way."

And with astonishing speed for a man of his build he seized the handle
and threw open the door of Mrs. Barraclough's bedroom.  The action was
deliberate since he desired to find out who might possibly be concealed
in the inner room and its advantages were immeasurable for at the very
moment his back was turned Anthony Barraclough, dusty and spent,
stumbled in through the French window.

Jane gave a short, stifled squeak and pointed and he was out again and
ducking behind a rose bush before Bolt had time to turn and apologise
for his mistake.

"Show this gentleman through the gate and down the road," said Mrs.
Barraclough in a voice that did not betray her excitement by a single
tremor.

"I thank you for your hospitality, dear lady," said the Reverend
Prometheus, "and I trust I may have the pleasure of bettering our
acquaintance."

As he bowed himself out he discreetly dropped his gloves behind a
cushion on the sofa.

"This way, please," said Jane.  "This way."




CHAPTER 26.

AMONG ALLIES.

The door had scarcely closed upon the retreating masquerader when once
again Barraclough slipped into the room.  His clothes were white with
dust, his eyes hollow and deep set, but around the corners of his mouth
was just such a smile as any mother might hope to see.

"Bless your sweet bobbed head," he whispered, throwing an arm
affectionately about her shoulders.  "Though why in blazes you
entertain well known crooks to tea gets me wondering."

"Oh, my dear, dear boy, wherever did you come from?" she cried, patting
him all over to convince herself of his reality.

"Down the chimney, mother, like Santa Claus."

"But why and without a word?"

"Hadn't a notion I was coming," he replied dropping on to the sofa and
spreading out his legs.  "I was whacked to the wide and had to stop
somewhere and get me breath."

The door was flung open and Flora and Jane burst in.

"I say, that was a near shave," gasped the latter.  "Where did you
spring from?"

"Somewhere t'other side of Plymouth.  Keep your eye on the window,
Flora.  Don't want that old blackbird to get a view of me.  Thanks!
Fine.  See him down the road, Jane?"

"You bet."

"It's damn bad luck him being here at all.  When did he first show up?"

"Last night."

"There's been a mess-up somewhere and I was looking for a clean run
home."

"Home, dear?"

"Um!  Back to London.  How's mother's old car going, Flora?"

"Tiptop."

"Good, I shall need it.  I say, I apologise for not saying how-de-do
but things have been moving today.  Everyone feeling good?  Fine.
Lord, I'm tired."  And he passed a hand tied with a bloodstained
handkerchief across his brow.

Mrs. Barraclough was first to notice it and called for an explanation.

"Oh, that's all right--a scratch--bled a bit.  Nothing to bother about.
Flora, if you leave that window unguarded you're sacked.  Jane, if you
love me, a large and a small."

"But what is it all about?" Mrs. Barraclough implored after shaking her
head at the thought of whiskey.

"Money, dear--money and a bit of paper I carry in this note case that
is earnestly coveted by quite a number of people it doesn't belong to.
When I asked for a large and a small, Jane, I was endeavouring to
convey the idea that I was thirsty."

But Jane was reluctant to go and only consented to do so on a promise
that no secrets should be revealed in her absence.

"Be a darling, mother dear, and fill me a pipe."

It was characteristic of Anthony Barraclough that the entire household
revolved round him from the instant of appearance.

"Then there is something wrong with your hand," said the old lady
filling the pipe and putting it in the corner of his mouth, while Flora
risked a month's notice by rushing forward with a lighted match.  "I
shall tie it up while you have your smoke."

Anthony's protests were unavailing when the ministering angel mood
descended upon his mother.  At such a time she was inexorable.  She
called upon Flora to fill the slop basin with warm water and provide
scissors (always so elusive when needed) and naturally Flora, who was
entirely absorbed in the adventurous side of the proceedings, could
only find the rose cutters which were entirely useless.

"It's a bullet wound," Mrs. Barraclough declared.  "You can't deceive
me--it's a bullet wound."

"Well, p'raps it is, mother, but since it was never intended for my
hand we needn't bother about it."

"You must have it bandaged and go to bed straight away."

"Bed!"  He threw back his head and laughed.  "It's likely."

"And you'll want a sling."

"Not for this David, mother.  A sling would be a fat lot of use against
the Goliaths I'm dealing with.  Mother, I'm within a hundred and fifty
miles of being one of the richest men in the world and, as far as I can
see, they'll be the toughest miles I've ever covered in my life."

And suddenly from the window came Flora's cry of "Look out!"

Anthony did not waste time looking out but instead flung himself behind
the upright piano which stood out from the wall.  Nor was he a moment
too soon for the massive form of Mr. Bolt was framed in the French
windows.  Mrs. Barraclough took three steps toward him as also did
Flora, thus preventing a definite intrusion into the room.

"I beg your pardon--I do indeed beg your pardon," said Bolt in tones as
rich as the fat of pork, "but I fancy--I rather imagine--I--yes, to be
sure, left a pair of gloves on your sofa."

"If you had rung the bell, sir, your property would have been restored
to you in the usual manner.  I cannot----"

She stopped as her uninvited guest was sniffing the air suspiciously.

"Mrs. Barraclough," he observed, shaking his head sadly, "I fear I have
caught you smoking."

Behind the piano Anthony was feverishly extinguishing his pipe with the
ball of his thumb.

"I smoke all day," replied Mrs. Barraclough.

The door opened and Jane came in with an abnormally large whiskey and
soda which she nearly dropped at the sight of the visitor.

"Oh!  Mrs. Barraclough!" said Bolt, pointing an accusing finger.

But the old lady was equal to the moment.

"And drink," she said, seizing the glass and swallowing an immense gulp
that almost paralysed the muscles of her throat.

Mr. Bolt smiled cynically and took his gloves from Flora's outstretched
hand.

"Gloves are so expensive nowadays, are they not?" he asked.

"To be frank, Mr. Bolt, I do not wish to discuss with you either gloves
or Christianity," said Mrs. Barraclough.  "I would be glad if you would
kindly leave by the way you came."

"I was about to do so, madam, after first thanking you for your
hospitality."

Maybe it was appreciation of his mother's inflexible bearing that
caused Anthony to relax, but whatever the reason the result was
disastrous.  There was a small table alongside of where he stood hidden
upon which was a vase of sweet peas.  Anthony's elbow struck and
overset it.  There was a splash of water and a tinkle of glass.

The three women held their breath and Mr. Bolt's eyebrows went up and
down twice very quickly.  Then he smiled.

"Once again allow me to thank you for your hospitality," he said.

"Show this person out," said Mrs. Barraclough.

And under the escort of Jane and Flora he was peremptorily bustled off
the premises.

"H'm," said Anthony, coming out from behind the piano.  "That was a
pity."

Mrs. Barraclough was almost in tears.

"Do you think he realised you were hidden there?"

"Vases don't tumble over by themselves, mother dear, and our friend is
not a fool."  He tapped his teeth with a thumb nail reflectively.
"Yes--yes--yes.  We must curtail his activities.  Can't have the old
viper sending messages.  Settle down at the telephone, best of mothers."

"I do wish you would not address me as though I were a sitting hen,"
said Mrs. Barraclough, drawing up a chair to the writing table.

"The telephone, mother, and ask for the police station."

"But the policeman is sure to be out."

"Then talk to his missus."

"That would be impossible, dear, Mrs. Brassbound----"

But Anthony did not listen to the objection.

"Tell old Brassbound," said he, "to run in friend Skypilot if he
gravitates near the post office."

Mrs. Barraclough picked up the receiver and asked for the police
station and while waiting to be connected remarked weakly:

"There is no law to prevent people sending telegrams, dear."

"Then we must make a few to fit the occasion."

"Is that you, Mr. Brassbound?" said the old lady in answer to a voice
on the wire.  "It's Mrs. Barraclough speaking.  I wonder if you would
very kindly arrest a clergyman for me."

"Put a bit more sting in it, mother--ginger."

"Ginger," repeated Mrs. Barraclough into the mouthpiece.  "No, no, I
didn't mean that.  He's grey and elderly."

"Say he pinched something," Anthony prompted.

Mrs. Barraclough nodded.

"I rather fear he has appropriated a cream jug.  Yes.  I thought
perhaps he might send it off from the post office.  Thank you.  And how
is your wife progressing?  Yes, of course she is.  Yes, I am coming
down to see her this evening if I can get away.  Goodbye."

"What's wrong with the policeman's missus?" demanded Anthony.

"As you're not a married man, Tony, I shall refuse to tell you," said
Mrs. Barraclough in the manner of Queen Victoria.

"Going to see her?"

"I was going to take her this basket of roses and some vegetables, but
as----"

"No, no, you take 'em and I'll go down to the village with you in the
car and take it on.  You won't mind walking home across the fields."

"Anthony," said Mrs. Barraclough seriously.  "Is it very real danger
you're in?"

"Pretty solid but don't you fret, I'm equal to it."

Flora and Jane came in from the garden.

"We've seen him down the road," they announced.

"Good.  Now, look here, everyone, I've wasted a deuce of a lot of time
when I ought to have been on the way.  Here's the position of affairs.
Flora, you're going to drive me to London."

"Right," said Flora with sparkling eyes.

"Jane!  Still got that old service revolver I gave you?"

"Um."

"Keep it handy.  Likely enough there'll be a couple of visitors here
before long and you've got to detain 'em somehow."

"I'll keep 'em till they grow roots," said Jane stoutly.

"It's a damn shame, dragging you into all this, but that bullet did me
in as a driver.  It's no joke shoving a motor bike along with a bullet
through your hand."

"But how did you get the wound, dear?"

As hurriedly as possible he outlined the day's happenings from the
moment of landing at Polperro.

"Who are these men?" Flora demanded.

"Couple of spies belonging to a crowd that tried to prevent me leaving
London three weeks ago."

"But what do they want?"

Anthony held up the morocco letter case and restored it to his pocket.

"Just this.  I've given 'em a pretty good lead all day--played hare and
hounds all over Dartmoor best part of the morning but somehow I don't
believe I've shaken 'em off."

"Where did you leave the bike?"

"Couple of miles back on the main road.  Shoved her in a thicket.
Front tyre burst and that settled it.  There's a bare hope they may
have been kidded into believing I'd gone straight on but it's slender
enough.  Comberstone knows I have a home hereabouts and they're pretty
certain to have watched my tracks on the road.  Mother's old bus is
going well you say?"

"I can whack her up to about a thirty average," said Flora.

"Thirty, and we've a hundred and fifty to go.  Yes, yes--ought to be in
Town by eleven."

"Easy."

"Then I'll just swallow a snack of grub and push off straight away.
Get your engine started."

"There's a lovely pie in the larder, dear," said Mrs. Barraclough.
"Just the sort you like best.  Jane!  My motor cloak and bonnet."

She took Anthony's hand and they hurried kitchenward together.

Flora and Jane looked at one another, their eyes adance with excitement.

"Oh, isn't this gorgeous," said Jane.

"Simply topping," echoed Flora.

"You lucky beast to be going up with him."

"I like that, when you've got a shooting programme."

"Oh, well, I suppose the honours are divided.  Good luck."

"Same to you."

They parted with a wave of the hand, Jane following her mistress and
Flora into the garden at a run.  But she had scarcely reached the path
when two men came round the corner of the house and bore down upon her.

Harrison Smith was too good a strategist to announce his arrival by
driving up to the front door.  He had left the Ford at the end of the
lane and entered the grounds by way of the kitchen garden.  At the
sight of Flora he bowed very politely, greeting her with a charming
smile and an allusion to the clemency of the evening.  It is possible
these social amenities might have carried some weight but for the
appearance of Freddie Dirk, whose heavy jowl, grimed with dust and
perspiration, was not consistent with the idea of an afternoon caller.
Flora fell back a pace into the room, wondering fearfully what course
she should pursue.

"Don't be frightened, my girl, don't be frightened," Harrison Smith
agreeably beseeched.

"Who are you?  I don't know you," said Flora.

"We're friends of your master's, of course."

"That's it," said Dirk, huskily.  "Pals of 'is, see!"

The tone was hardly convincing.

"My master is away, and has been away for some weeks."

"Yes, yes, yes, to be sure.  But he's come back."

"No," said Flora.

"Look 'ere, girl,"--Dirk's fat, short-fingered paw fell on her
shoulders--"we ain't soft--do you get me?  We knows what we're torkin'
abaht.  Mister Barraclough is 'ere and the sooner----"

"Tut, tut, tut," Harrison Smith interrupted.  "Don't talk like that,
Dirk--you're scaring the girl.  Now listen to me.  Your Master has
enemies, we're his friends.  It is of the utmost importance we should
see him at once."  He moved away and opened the door of Mrs.
Barraclough's bedroom.  "As a matter of fact his life depends upon it."

"Yus--'is life," Dirk echoed.

"I tell you my master is not here."

"Isn't 'e--isn't 'e."  Dirk's two hands fastened on Flora's wrist and
twisted the flesh in contrary directions, a domestic form of torture
known to the initiated as the Burning Bracelet.

"Let go, you brute--let go," she cried, and with her free hand caught
him a full swinging slap across the face.

What particular line Dirk's resentment would have taken is unknown, for
Harrison Smith came quickly between them with a muttered order and at
the same time the door opened and Jane ran in.  It speaks well for her
courage that she did not cry out or betray alarm.

"Jane," gasped Flora very quickly, "these men want to see master--I've
told them he isn't here----"

"Quiet you," said Dirk threateningly, while Harrison Smith descended on
the new arrival under a coverlet of smiles.

"Come along, my dear," he said, "you're a sensible looking girl.  Now
where's Mister Barraclough, eh?"

For a second Jane seemed lost in consideration, then shook her head
stupidly and replied in a rich brogue:

"Maister Bar'clough--doan't know 'un--never clapt eyes on 'un.  'Tis
on'y larst week I took sarvice 'ere t'oblige."

"Have you seen anyone strange about the premises today?"

"Noa."

"A man--tall--broad shouldered--wearing a blue suit and cap."

"Oh 'im," said Jane, her face lighting up with a semblance of
intelligence.  "I did see some un 'bout 'arf an hour ago, 'twas."

"Yes, yes.  Go on."

"Come out of tool shed at garden end and kept low by the 'edge."

"Did he enter the house?"

"Noa.  'E lit off down the road as fast as 'e cud make."

"Damn!  We've missed 'im," roared Dirk.

"Which direction?"

"Away from village 'twas."

Dirk was tugging at Harrison Smith's sleeve and dragging him toward the
French windows.

"No, no," cried Smith, "the front way--it's quicker."

The two turned at the exact second Barraclough, entirely oblivious of
their presence, walked into the room.  The light flashed dully on the
barrel of Harrison Smith's automatic.

"Put 'em up," he said, "put 'em up"--and as the order was obeyed--"Well
met indeed, Barraclough, well met indeed."




CHAPTER 27.

A KNOTTED KERCHIEF.

The timing and arrangement of the situation was flawless.  Barraclough
with his hands upheld, Harrison Smith masking the persuasive automatic
from the view of the two girls and Dirk's fingers travelling caressingly
toward the pocket in which his mascot reposed.  It was hugely dramatic.
Flora and Jane, robbed for the moment of the power of speech and action,
clung to one another on the far side of the room, their gaze riveted on
their hero, who, in this moment of crisis, was whistling a bar of ragtime
and accepting defeat with smiling eyes.

Harrison Smith's left hand ran professionally over the contours of
Barraclough's coat to satisfy himself that there was no concealed weapon.

"Most opportune," he remarked, "and we had almost despaired of seeing
you."  Then in a lower voice--"All right, but no games."

"Thank you," said Barraclough, and lowering his arms he walked slowly to
the writing table.

"And now you two nice little girls," said Harrison Smith, rubbing his
hands together, "cut along and pick flowers.  Much too nice an evening to
be spending your time indoors.  Off you go."

There was certainly a better chance of getting help if they could escape.
Nothing was to be gained by staying.  As they passed the table by which
Barraclough was standing he whipped an envelope from his pocket and
thrust it in Flora's hand with the words:

"Post that for me--quick."

Flora seized the envelope and made a dash for the window but hardly
covered half the distance before Dirk and Smith closed in upon her,
fighting for possession of the paper.  It was given to Jane to translate
the actual meaning of this extraordinary performance and she alone saw
Barraclough take the note case swiftly from his pocket and bury it under
the foliage in the basket of roses.  The others were too busily engaged
to attend to such a trifle.

"Let them have it, Flora," said Barraclough, sweetly.  "They are friends
of mine.  Do as I tell you."

"You girls get out," gasped Harrison Smith, coming down breathlessly with
the envelope, and after Flora and Jane had escaped into the garden,
"Cornered, Mr. Barraclough, and we've got the goods."

Anthony was smiling.

"Hadn't you better make sure?" said he.

The envelope was ripped open and a letter withdrawn.

"What's this?"

"I don't know--something my mother wrote.  Oh, I wasn't born yesterday
and if you think I carry the concession--search me."  And to emphasise
the uselessness of such a course he pulled out the lining of his inner
pocket.

Dirk and Smith closed in threateningly.

"We mean to have that paper," they said in a single voice.

"Haven't you chosen rather a public place to get it?" he answered
steadily.  "Oh, I realise I'm cornered, but is this the place for the
kill?  After all, I'm not much good to you without that paper."

"Where 'ave you put it?" hissed Dirk, edging closer.  "Where 'ave you put
it, eh?"

"Aha, my friend, that's the point.  But it won't be cleared up by
breathing hops in my face."

The barrel of Harrison Smith's pistol pressed unpleasantly into his short
ribs and Dirk's mascot "whump-whumphed" in the air above his head.

"A little persuasion."

"No, not even with a little persuasion."  His voice rang high on a note
of challenge.  "If you want that paper, you'll have to accept my terms
and my terms are stiff."

"I can tell you 'oo'll be stiff ternight if he don't----"

The sentence was never finished, for from the hall outside came the sound
of Mrs. Barraclough's voice:

"I may be a little late for dinner, Cook, so don't put on the potatoes
till the half hour."

"My mother," said Anthony, warningly.

With a curse and a growl Smith and Dirk backed away, pocketing their
weapons, as Mrs. Barraclough in a long motor cloak and veil came into the
room.

For a second she stood in the doorway, her eyes travelling from her son
to the two men and back again.  From the astonishment on her features
Anthony read plainly enough that Flora and Jane had failed to find and
advise her of the danger.

At this perilous stage a false move might mean the loss of everything.
The one hope was to preserve a seeming of normality and at the same time
convey a message as to the real significance of the situation.  And like
a flash came into his head a memory of boyhood scrapes and a mother who
had never failed him in the hour of need.  He whipped out his white
handkerchief and with a single hand, an old conjuring trick, threw a knot
in the centre and dangled it before Mrs. Barraclough's eyes.  No message
by wire or wireless ever reached its destination in quicker time than
that old S. O. S. of school boy fame.  He saw her tap out the "received"
signal with a forefinger on the front of her cloak, then turned with a
wave of the handkerchief to introduce the visitors.

"Mother dear, these are two friends of mine, Sergeant Hammersmith and Mr.
Cappell."  They were the first names to come into his head.  He
added--"This is my mother, gentlemen, and I am sure you will be grieved
to hear she has lately suffered from very indifferent health."

To give herself a moment for reflection, Mrs. Barraclough removed her
veiled motor bonnet and put it on the couch.  Then she turned and
descended upon Dirk with outstretched hands and a high pitched falsetto
that fairly rang with welcome.

"Oh, my dear Sergeant Hammer, this is indeed a pleasure.  How very kind
of you to drop in.  So few people drop in now-a-days; dropping in seems
to have quite dropped out and I do so dearly love seeing anyone from
Town.  Of course we are so old world and out of the way down here that we
never see anyone--no one at all--nobody and to hear news direct from----"
She broke off abruptly, fixed her glasses and fell back in an attitude of
amazed rapture--"Anthony, dear, do look.  Isn't Sergeant Picklesnip
exactly like the vicar--the old one, not the present incumbent, he's too
high for me.  I do hope----"  She descended upon Harrison Smith and wrung
him warmly by both hands--"I do hope you agree with me that the Roman
influence is most dangerous."  And before he had time to reply--"Ah, but
I wish you had known Anthony when he was a little boy and wore sailor
suits--white on Sundays with a cord and a whistle round his neck.  My
poor husband could not endure the whistle, so he took the pea out of it
and then it only made an airy noise instead of a blast."

"Mother dear," Anthony interposed, "aren't you going down to the village?"

A suggestion to which Harrison Smith proved a ready seconder.

"Don't let us detain you, Madam," he beseeched.

"No, I won't, I won't.  Besides, I mustn't be late.  As Mr. Gladstone
said in '84--and oh, what a hot summer that was--he said--'Detention is
the mother of time.'"

At which Freddie Dirk, who knew something of both detention and time,
shivered uncomfortably and wiped his forehead with the back of his hand.

"Never be late," continued Mrs. Barraclough, rallying her resources for a
new oration, "although I was late once for a flower show at
Weston-super-Mare--or was it a funeral, Anthony?  At any rate, there were
a lot of flowers there, so it may have been a wedding or a garden party.
But really, I mustn't stay a moment longer.  I've got to see a Mrs.
Brassbound--poor dear, she's--Anthony, go away, you mustn't listen--I'm
going to treat you as friends--there's going to be a baby--she's the wife
of our village constable, you know--such a nice man--but as I've always
said, Policemen will be Policemen."

"Yes, yes, yes," said Harrison Smith, whose patience was running out,
"very interesting.  I have a friend staying at the hotel.  I wonder if I
might use your telephone."

Mrs. Barraclough caught the warning in Anthony's eyes as she gave her
consent.  Also she caught a glint of light from the rose cutters that lay
on the sofa.

What more natural than for a hostess to be seated while her guest made
his call and what more fortunate than the fact that the telephone wire
passed over the arm of the sofa on its way to the insulator in the floor.
The snip of the scissors as she cut the wire was quite inaudible because
of the good lady's flow of remarks on the subject of telephony.

"They may keep you waiting," she said and kept on chattering until
Harrison Smith hung up the receiver in despair of being connected with
his ally Bolt.

"And now, Madam, I feel sure we have kept you much too long," he said.

"You'd better be off, Mother," said Anthony, who although vaguely aware
that she was endeavouring to create an atmosphere of vacuity, could not
fathom the advantage to be gained.

"I'm going, dear, I'm going.  I was thinking, that's all."

"Thinking," came from Dirk.

"Wondering if you two gentlemen could eat mutton.  My dear brother who
died in '93 had very strong views about mutton, especially when it was
cold.  He said----"

But the prospect of hearing what he said so shook the good manners of her
visitors that they almost breasted her toward the bedroom door.  They
would probably have succeeded in their object had not Flora hurried in
from the garden.

"The doctor is with her now," said Flora.  "I've got the car ready."

Mrs. Barraclough became almost hysterical.  There was no limit to the
instructions she showered upon the hapless Flora.  Were the vegetables in
the car?  Had she been sent for?  Was Mr. Brassbound there, and finally,
had Flora put the "you know" into the basket?

"The 'you know,'" said Flora, hazily.

"Silly, silly girl," wailed Mrs. Barraclough.  "Sergeant Ealing, do
excuse me whispering to my maid, but it is so difficult to speak out in
public."

She dropped her voice to a confidential whisper only for the briefest
space and Flora nodded gravely and said:

"Yes, Madam, I quite understand," and went out.

"And now I really must be going," said Mrs. Barraclough at her bedroom
door.  But she descended again upon her visitors, now purple with
exasperation, and possessed herself of their hands.

"I have enjoyed your conversation so much, Mr. Ravenscourt, and yours,
too, Sergeant Chiswick, but even the best of friends must part; as
Anthony used to say when I bought him his first comb.  Goodbye--goodbye."
She paused dramatically.  "Oh, I nearly forgot my salts--my salts.  It's
most important.  The doctor said that I should never go anywhere without
my salts."

It was only by exercise of something approaching violence that the
garrulous old lady was finally induced to enter her bedroom and the door
closed upon her.

"If ever anyone ought to be certified," declared Harrison Smith blindly.

"I am very much obliged to you, gentlemen," said Anthony.  "I don't
imagine she will be long now."

"For everyone's sake I 'ope she ain't," Dirk contributed.

But as though to discount this pious ambition came a call from behind the
closed door.

"Anthony, dear, Anthony!  Will you ring the bell for Jane, please?"

"The bell is at your elbow," said Anthony.  "It is for you to decide,
sir, whether it should be rung."

Harrison Smith tugged at the bell pull viciously.

"And, Anthony, dear, will you bring me my motoring bonnet?"

Anthony pointed at the motoring bonnet lying on the table next to the
rose basket, wherein, hidden by the stalks and leaves, was the morocco
letter case.

"Take the damn thing in yourself," said Harrison Smith.

It was Dirk who moved forward suspiciously as Barraclough picked up the
bonnet and moved toward the bedroom.  Harrison Smith waved him back.

"There's no other door.  Keep a watch on the window," he ordered.

Anthony entered unmolested and at precisely that moment Bolt came in from
the garden.

The united forces did not waste time in greetings.

"We've got him," said Harrison Smith.  "He's in there with his mother."

This was evident enough, for the sound of their voices was audible, Mrs.
Barraclough's high pitched tones crying out:

"Don't sit on the bed, dear, it creases the quilt."

"Better look out," Bolt warned.  "He's as slippery as an eel."

"Trust me, we're just waiting to get rid of the old woman, and then----"

The other door opened and Jane scampered in, crying:

"Did 'ee ring, marm, did 'ee ring?"

"Put that basket of roses in the car, Jane," Mrs. Barraclough replied,
and as Jane turned to obey, from the garden in rushed Flora and
Conybeare, calling on their mistress to hasten.

"Mrs. Brassbound, Mrs. Brassbound," cried Flora.  "There's not a moment
to lose."

"Terrible bad she is, and cryin' out for 'ee, m'am."

In the midst of this confusion appeared a veiled and cloaked figure,
apparently belonging to Mrs. Barraclough, who nervously flapped hands and
hastened, surrounded by a babbling mob of servitors, toward the nearest
window.

It did not occur to Barraclough's enemies to offer any resistance to this
general exodus, their attention was absorbed by the bedroom door, which
had shut with a snap and the click of a key.  They waited just long
enough for the party of cackling females to get out of the room and down
the path, then rushed at the door with foot and shoulder.  It stood up
longer than might have been expected, but Bolt's weight was more than
ordinary woodwork could withstand.  The lock burst--the headings split
and it fell inward with a crash.

Standing by the window, waving a knotted handkerchief to a disappearing
car was Mrs. Barraclough.  She scarcely wasted a glance upon the
intruders.

"Damnation--done!" roared Harrison Smith, as the truth dawned upon him.

In a solid block they swung round to find themselves staring down the
black barrel of a service revolver held dead rigid in the hands of Jane.

"Hands above your heads, please," she insisted.

"And if you'll first wait till dear Anthony turns the bend of the lane,"
cooed Mrs. Barraclough, "I'll go through their pockets and take away any
nasty things I may find there.  You put the roses in the car, Jane?"

"He's got it all right," came the answer.

"Dear roses," said Mrs. Barraclough, sentimentally.




CHAPTER 28.

SAND.

A panel is not beaten into shape by force but by recurrent blows, light
and accurate, and by the same cumulative process, Van Diest and his
colleagues sought to shape the will of Richard Frencham Altar to their
intention.

The fact that their effort had so far failed in no way discouraged the
belief that eventually it would succeed.  There was no doubt in their
minds but that in time he would be brought to speak, but Cranbourne's
unexpected disclosure that the opposition knew of their captive's
whereabouts robbed them of their most valuable asset.  Time, so to
speak, was no longer to be relied upon and they were compelled to
resort to a more expeditious method.

True it would be easy to remove the captive elsewhere but easy matters
are apt to go wrong on performance.  A clue might be provided where at
present no clue existed.  If Torrington brought a charge it would be
based on hypothetical evidence and come to nothing.  On the other hand
unpleasant suspicions would certainly be aroused and neither Van Diest
nor Hipps greatly desired to attract the attentions of the Police.

If Barraclough could be persuaded to disclose the secret all would be
well.  He would be generously rewarded not only for his confidence but
also for a guarantee to disclose none of the privations to which he had
been subjected.  The affair would end in an atmosphere of sweet accord.
Torrington's crowd would be knocked out of business and a spirit of
peace and harmony would descend like a benison upon the hard working
trio.

Could any solution be more satisfactory, but there was a fly in the
ointment.  Barraclough's resolution strengthened with adversity, he
kept his tongue behind locked teeth and said precisely nothing.

At nine o'clock that night the Dutchman's big Rolls Royce delivered him
and Ezra Hipps at Laurence's abode and Laurence himself came out to
meet them.

"Well?" said Hipps.

But Laurence shook his head.

"Nothing doing at present."

"Has he had any food?"

"Not today.  He's weak enough in all conscience."

"Sleep?"

"Damn little.  He dropped off two or three times and I got the chaps to
spray him with cold water.  That kept him lively.  Blayney and Parker
are sleeping in the room now and taking shifts to watch him at night.
Awfully sorry, you two, but I've done my best."

"I'll get right up," said Ezra P. Hipps.  "Say, Auriole'll be along
presently.  Tell her to stand by.  She may come in useful."

He marched heavily up the stairs and entered Richard's room.

Blayney was on duty sprawling watchful on a camp bed, his elbows
propped on a kit bag.

"Get out, you," said Hipps, and the man obeyed.  Then he turned to
Richard.

The last few days had wrought a desperate change in his looks.  Caverns
had sunk in his cheeks and his eyes were ringed with black.  That he
stood in earnest need of a shave heightened the pallor of brow and
temples.

He was seated, cramped rather, in an upright chair with chin down.  His
left hand beat a tattoo on the table top and he sucked the thumb of his
right hand like a badly trained child at a make-belief meal.

"Taste good?" asked Hipps.  "If I'd known you'd a fancy that way I'd
have brought along a soother."

Richard removed his thumb and said, "Go to Hell!" very distinctly.

Hipps walked a few paces toward him and remarked:

"Still pretty fresh, I see."

"Leaking badly, but still afloat," came the reply.

"Durn me! but you're a sound citizen, Bud.  I respect sand but I
despise a fool."

"All right you do," mumbled Richard sleepily.

"Pretty tired?"

"Not sufficiently wide awake to listen to your talk, damn you!"

The American smiled nastily.

"Maybe not, but this is a case of having to.  Say! ever been in one of
those big machine shops and seen a giant flywheel swizzling round at
three hundred revs. a minute?  Guess you wouldn't be gink enough to put
out a hand and try to stop it.  Never saw any machine yet that develops
more power than I can."

Richard shrugged a shoulder; it was too great an effort to shrug both
of them.

"And I guess you ain't going to stop the fly-wheel of my destiny."

"You've had a sample," he replied with a touch of spirit.

Hipps came a step closer and hooked his foot round a leg of Richard's
chair.

"Know anything about the third degree?" he demanded.

"What you've shown me."

Richard's voice sounded far away and disinterested.

"Show you some more.  Stand up!  Stand up!  I can't bear a drowsy man."
And he kicked the chair half across the room.  "Don't hang on to that
table--stand on your legs," and grasping Richard by his shirt front he
forced him into an upright position and held him there.  His voice
hardened and rasped like a cross cut file as question after question
boomed out with the relentless quality of minute guns.

"A year ago you went travelling."

"You say so."  The replies were barely audible.

"During that time you tumbled on your find."

"If I did, I did."

"When was it you struck?"

"That's my affair."

"I've made it mine.  When was it you struck?"

"During the six months," said Richard with a twinkle of dying humour.

"That answer won't do."

"Only one you'll get."

"I'm pretty close behind you, Anthony Barraclough."

Again the twinkle came and went as Richard gave answer.

"Still behind?"

"Anthony Barraclough, I've a complete list of the places you visited."

"Been buying a pocket atlas?"

"The actual places."

"Fine!"

"And I could hazard a guess where the locality is.  Like me to try?"

"If it amuses you any."

The American's voice rose and filled the room, reverberant as thunder.

"P'r'aps it isn't so far away after all."

And out of the wreckage of his resources, Richard Frencham Altar
brought up his big guns for a final effort at counter battery.

"P'r'aps it isn't, p'r'aps it is," he cried.  "Why, you blasted fool,
you'll get nothing from me--nothing.  If you know so damn much go and
find the place yourself."

Ezra Hipps seized him by the shoulders and flung him back against the
wall.

"We mean to find out."

"Not from me--not from me," Richard repeated, but the power which had
upheld him was dwindling fast.  He knew, knew beyond question that in a
few more moments the truth would be shaken out of him unless he could
devise some means of slackening the strain.  And then he had an
inspiration.

"You fool!  You fool!" he cried.  "Can't you see what you've done, you
and your idiot crew?  As you've driven health from my body so, by your
blasted privations, you've driven memory from my head."

He tottered drunkenly toward a chair and sat down all of a heap.

"What's that?" demanded Hipps, with real alarm.

"I can't remember," Richard laughed hysterically.  "I can't remember
what you want to know," and his head fell forward into his hands.

For nearly a minute, Hipps looked at him in silence and his face was
very white indeed.  Then with the breath escaping between his teeth he
turned away.

It was sheer lunacy on the part of Richard to peep through his fingers
to judge the effect of his words.  For it is an established truth that
the nerves of a man's back are sensitive to another's gaze.

Ezra Hipps swung round so quickly that Richard failed to cover his face
in time.  The mischief was done.

"Very clever," said the American and laughed.  "Very clever and I
nearly bought it, but not quite."  He seized Richard's wrist and
twisted it downward.  "A word of advice against the future, Mister
Barraclough.  Next time you're working a crumple-up don't let the chap
you're pulling it on see you looking at it between your fingers."  He
strolled up to the door whistling pensively and halted with his hand on
the latch.  "I'm doubting if you're going to be a whole lot of use to
us for you're a tough case.  When it comes up at Committee my thumb
points down."

He went out and the bolt shot home behind him.

For a long while Richard rocked in his chair muttering.  He felt very
lonely and his throat ached, his head ached--he ached all over--a
childish desire to snivel possessed him and could not be subdued.  If
only there had been a shoulder, some sweet, kind, soft shoulder to soak
up the tired angry tears that fell and fell.  A kindly shoulder, a
gentle voice to drive away the horror of these nightmare days.  Was all
sweetness gone out of the world?  Was the world no more than four
square walls peopled with devils who asked and asked and asked?  Was
there nothing else but greed of money, hatred, want, and damnable
persecution?  A voice within cried aloud: "Why suffer it all?  Why bear
the brunt of other men's adventure?"  Five thousand pounds.  Was it a
fair price for breaking one's body against rocks, for shattering one's
soul against man unkind?

Wild uncontrollable resentment seized him and in its wave tossed him
against the door of his prison battering at the panels with bare fists
and shrieking aloud in a voice he could not recognise as his own.

"Gentlemen!  Gentlemen!  You've made a mistake.  I'm not Bar'clough,
nev' met him.  Richard Frencham Altar I am--father shot
himself--Torrington paying me five thousand--keep it up for three
weeks--but you've made the course too stiff.  I can't stay the
distance.  I can't stay the distance."

His knees gave way beneath him and he fell to the floor beating the
boards and blubbering like a school-boy.

But there came no answer from the hollow empty house and presently the
paroxysm passed and he looked up slowly seeing, as it were, a vision of
himself false to every tradition of manhood he had held most dear.

"Coward!" he said.  "Rotten blasted coward!  Three weeks and this is
the last day."  He looked at his watch.  "Only another hour and then
I'm free to speak.  Stick it for another hour.  Stick it for another
hour."

And the very saying of the words seemed to increase his stature, swell
his chest, revitalise his manhood.

When a moment later the door opened and Van Diest chanting his
perpetual hymn came quietly into the room he found Richard rocking on
his heels beside a chair beating time to the music with a shaking
forefinger while from his parched lips he emitted a pathetic pretence
at whistling the same tune.

"S'bad," muttered Hugo Van Diest.  "S'bad business.  Must tink all the
time and be worried by dese things.  For God's sake you don't fidget.
You tink all the suffering was wit you, but it was inside of me where
the pain live."

"Ha ha!" said Richard.

"Discomfort is nutting.  I haf before me the prospec' to be beat.  It
wass the torture to be beat.  You know that."

"Not yet."

"Mus' be taught."

"Ha ha!" said Richard again and banged the dish cover against the table
implements of a foodless tray that had marked the hour of a meal time.

"Don't fidget!" roared Van Diest, emitting a cloud of tobacco smoke.

"Don't smoke!" Richard countered in the same tone.

"I shmoke on purpose."

"And I fidget on purpose."

With a sweep of the hand he sent the tray with a crashing to the floor.

"Ach!  Ach!  Ach!" cried Van Diest, and was almost choked with a
violent attack of coughing.

"I make you to speak!  I make you to speak!  What if I burn you with my
cigar--what if I----" he stopped abruptly and dropped his voice almost
to a whine.  "You don't know how goot I make myself to you.  I wass a
very kind man.  At my home I keep the birds."

"Poor darlings," said Richard.

"The canaries; and you look what I haf here.  A portrait of my little
granddaughter Sibelle.  She sit on my knee the Sunday afternoon and
listen to the tale of Hansell and Grethel.  She call me Grandparkins."

Richard swept the photograph aside with the back of his hand.

"I'm not sitting on anyone's knee, Grandparkins," he said.

A bright purple ran over Van Diest's features in blotches and streaks.
He rose to his feet and held out a quivering forefinger.

"You pay very heavy to make fun of my heart, Mister Barraclough.  If
you haf any senses at all you know that all mens wass the two mens--the
home man and the business man--and the one hass nothing to do with the
udter."

"Leave it at that," said Richard.  "I'm not feeling altogether at home
just now."

"That was your last word?"

"My last word."

"So!" said Van Diest.  "So!"  His eyebrows went up and down and he
seemed lost in thought for a moment.  Finally: "You go into the bedroom
now please."

He gave the order slowly and to Richard's hypersensitive ears it held a
threat of real and imminent danger.  It sounded as the burial service
must sound to a man who stands upon a trap with a knotted cord around
his throat.

"No!" said Richard.  "No!"

"The bedroom."

"No!"

An impasse.  They stood like duellists trying to read intention in each
other's eyes.

Hugo Van Diest made the mistake of his life when he abandoned mental
force for violence.  The hand he raised to strike Richard across the
face never reached its mark; instead he felt himself go tottering
backward across the room.  There was not much force in the blow Richard
struck, but the science was good and he put his weight into it.  Van
Diest took it on the point and as he measured his length on the floor
he saw Richard make a dash for the door which had remained unlocked
during the interview.

Ezra P. Hipps caught him on the landing outside and put on a jiu-jitsu
armlock which closed the argument and sent Richard staggering toward
his bedroom beaten it is true, but absurdly enough triumphant.

"Listen you," he gasped, his back against the panel.  "You think I can
be made to speak--you're wrong--You think I can be tortured and beaten
and bullied into giving up the secret.  You're wrong--wrong.  There's
something inside of me that'll lick you, lick you hollow.  Do your
damndest, my lads, my breaking point is outside your reach."  And as a
Parthian arrow he said "Blast you!" and banged the door.




CHAPTER 29.

INDIVIDUAL RESOURCE.

A point of interest arises as to how long one determined girl armed
with a revolver can hold up three desperate men also armed and further
fortified by greed of gold.  Your average tough is not greatly alarmed
by a pistol in the hands of a woman.  He banks on the theory that so
long as she thinks she is aiming in his direction, he is moderately
secure from harm.  It is when she is pointing at some other object fear
arises as to his safety and well being.

In this particular instance, however, there was an unusually
threatening quality in the demeanour of Jane.  She trained her gun like
any artilleryman and in a manner not lightly to be dismissed by the
casual process of a rush.  Added to which the position in which these
adventurers found themselves--a compact mass in a single doorway--did
not offer good opportunities for acts of individual or concerted
heroism.  They formed, as it were, a unified target, the bull's-eye of
which was the centre of Alfred Bolt's immense corporation.  To suppose
that any marksman, however indifferent, could fail to register a hit
upon so broad an invitation was to betray unreason.

Dirk who had had previous experience in similar situations remarked
with melancholy that the steely eyed Amazon who commanded their
destinies kept carefully out of reach of his foot.  This was a pity
since he was contemplating trying the effect of kicking her on the
knee-cap, a proceeding which if performed adroitly is often fruitful of
happy results.  Bolt, too, knew a very effective means of ramming his
head into the solar plexus of an adversary, but this again was a form
of attack dependent on proximity.

It was Harrison Smith's able staff work that won the day.  An old
enough trick, heaven knows, but one that generally works.  He waited
till her eyes were upon him, then shifted the direction of his gaze to
a point somewhere behind Jane's back and nodded very quickly.

She is hardly to be blamed for having swung round, but in the second
before she had recovered her wits and realised the bluff, the pistol
had been snatched away and the three men were pouring through the
French windows into the garden.

It was Mrs. Barraclough who caught her by the arm and prevented her
from following.

"Oh, oh, oh!" cried Jane.  "I've failed, failed."

"Nonsense, my dear," said the old lady.  "You girls have been just
wonderful."  She pointed to an horizon of trees a mile away, where a
cloud of dust showed against the shadows.  "Look what a lovely start he
has.  My Anthony would never let himself be caught by a pack of
such--such----"  She hesitated for lack of a word and added "Dirty
dogs" with astonishing vehemence.

"But what are we to do now?" wailed Jane.

"Let us walk down to the village church together and I don't think it
would be wrong if we said a little prayer."

They had reached the front garden when the Ford car, making a
considerable fuss about it, banged and snorted past the front gate.

There are those perhaps who will condemn Mrs. Barraclough's action, but
let them remember she was a mother.  After all it stands to the credit
of any mid-Victorian lady who, notwithstanding the ravages of seventy
years, is able to pick up a flower pot and hurl it accurately into a
moving vehicle.  The Reverend Prometheus Bolt caught the missile full
in the side of the head and the last view the old lady had of him was
under a shower of dirt and broken pottery, while from his lips arose a
cloud of invective more azure than the skies.

From where the car had been standing appeared Cynthia the cook.  In her
hand she carried a watering can, her cheeks were flushed and her eyes
wild.

"I'd have done in their car if you'd held 'em a moment longer," she
panted indignantly.  "Didn't have time to slash their tyres but I did
manage to get about half a pint of water in the petrol tank before they
slung me into the hedge."

And very valuable was the help thus afforded for within a mile the Ford
had banged and snuffled itself to a standstill and twenty minutes were
lost draining the tank and blotting up the rust coloured drops from the
bottom of the float chamber.  Both Dirk and Bolt were in favour of
returning to the house in order to conduct a punitive campaign, but
Harrison Smith would not hear of this.

"We must push the damn car all we know how," he said, Working
feverishly at the union of the induction pipe with a spanner that
didn't fit.  "If we haven't caught up with them by eight o'clock I
shall drop Bolt at a post office and he must get through to the Chief."

"What, the Dutchman?"

"No choice.  It's infernal luck, but better that than let him get
through with the thing."

"If you ask me, Smith," said Bolt critically.  "If you ask my opinion
I'd say you've made a bloomer of this show."

"You can keep your opinion till I do ask for it," came the retort.
"Get in.  She's clear now."

He took a heave on the starting handle and jumped to his place at the
wheel.

"Keep your eye on those tyre marks, Dirk.  If you lose 'em I'll break
your head."

And from the spirit of this remark it will be seen that kindliness and
fellowship had gone by the board.




CHAPTER 30.

THE TRUE AURIOLE.

Hugo Van Diest struggled to his feet gasping for breath and stroking
his chin with sympathetic fingers.  Comparatively speaking, Richard's
blow had been a light one, but the Dutchman's training had not fitted
him for taking punishment.  He was hurt, outraged and resentful.

"This young man wass very violent, Hipps," he muttered jerkily.  "I
donno--s'no use--seems."

"Are we beat, Chief?"

"I don't like this word 'beat.'  Mus' be a way."  He paused for a
moment to recover his breath then turned to Laurence.  "This Miss
Craven, she hass not arrifed yet?"

"She's here.  Came five minutes ago."

"She know how we stand, yes?"

Hipps nodded.

"She don't quite register on the line we've adopted to make him talk.
Kind o' kept that in the background.  Women are soft."

"Ask she come up," said Van Diest.

And Laurence went out passing Blayney who was on duty outside the door.

"What's the bend, Chief?" demanded Hipps.

Van Diest shook his head thoughtfully.  "Donno, donno.  Wass awful if
we mus' do someting.  Eh?  Hipps, eh?"

And he tilted his head suggestively toward Richard's bedroom.

"His own damn fault," came the answer.

"But it wass a man's life, Hipps."

"I've no choice that way myself."

Van Diest began to pace the floor, his fingers tattooing on his chest
and his head going from side to side.

"We ought to haf read better the character of this man.  S'no good to
know about the monies and not about the mens.  We find ourselves in a
terrible position.  Ss!  Terrible--terrible."

There was a clatter of footsteps on the stairs and Laurence, a
telegraph form in his hand, burst into the room.

"What you haf there?"

"Can't make head nor tail of the damn thing.  Read it aloud," cried
Laurence excitedly.

Ezra Hipps moved over to his Chief's side as the old man picked out the
code words and translated them aloud.

The message was simple enough.

"'Saw Barraclough Polperro this morning.  Been following all day.
Escaped in Panhard, probably will enter London by Portsmouth or Great
Western Road.  Am pursuing in Ford car.  Obstruct.  Harrison Smith.'"

It was handed in at eight o'clock and postmarked Wimborne.

"Saw Barraclough!" repeated Hipps.  "Harrison Smith's gone crazy."

For a moment Van Diest said nothing, then remarked:

"Smart man, you know.  Smart man."

"He's made a mistake," said Laurence.  "How in hell could he see
Barraclough when----"  There was no point in finishing the sentence.

"S'not often he make a mistake.  Our opponents haf been ver' quiet, you
know, ver' quiet.  Perhaps now they draw the kipper across the path."

"He's got bats," said Hipps.  "Been standing in the sun."

"I'd ignore the whole thing," said Laurence.  "Ten to one it's a trick.
A stunt put up by our adversaries."

"In our private code, Laurence?  No, no, no.  I tink it wass well we
take some precautions with this gentlemen who wass so like our guest.
You will telephone to Mr. Phillips please that I would like some of
those roads that lead into London made--difficult."  Then as Laurence
seemed disposed to argue: "You haf your orders," he thundered.

As Laurence was leaving the room, Auriole came in and stood hesitating
on the threshold.

"Ah!  Miss Craven," said Van Diest stooping to kiss her fingers.  "For
you a little work.  You will talk to our guest, yes?  So stubborn he
wass.  You ver' clever woman, ver' gentle.  You put your arms around
him--so!  You whisper, you beseech, you ver' sympathetic.  P'r'aps you
make 'im cry.  Then he tell you what he refuse to tell us.
S'understood?"

"Yes, I understand," said Auriole in a small voice.

"Goot!  Then we go downstairs now.  Come, Hipps."  At the door he
paused.  "S'ver' important you succeed because we haf tried all the
rest."  He spoke the final words slowly and with great meaning, then
turned and went out.

Auriole caught Ezra Hipps by the sleeve as he passed her.

"What does he means--'all the rest?'" she questioned.

The American scarcely paused in his stride.  "Think it over," he said,
and closed the door behind him.

With a heart that thumped hammer blows against her side, Auriole turned
toward Richard's bedroom and paused with her hand on the latch.  She
felt as a traitor might feel who was seeking audience of his sovereign.
For a traitor she was.  False to her original employers, to her ideals
and to a man who, even though he might have stirred in her the hope of
a wedding had never willingly wrought her a single wrong.  A dozen
times in the last three days her hand had gone out to the telephone and
the will had been there to confess to Cranbourne that her allegiance to
his side existed no longer, but even in this her honesty had broken
down.  She saw herself, as she hesitated on the threshold, a wretched
mercenary creature--the sport of greed and jealousy--self-centred and
governed by thought of gain.  It was not a pleasant reflection.  For
the doubtful blessing of being wife to an unscrupulous millionaire she
had deafened her ears to the call of every decent instinct.

And now the Fates had so contrived that it rested with her to make the
supreme final appeal and on her success or failure depended the safety
and future of the man within.  A horrible conviction came over her that
these men who held Barraclough captive would indeed stop at nothing to
gain their ends and that the innuendoes they had uttered were terribly
in earnest.  Unless he were persuaded to speak his very life would be
forfeit, and it was this consideration that fortified her to make the
effort.

Richard was sprawling on the wire mattress when she threw open the
door.  He raised a pair of hollow eyes that looked at her without
recognition.  Instinctively she shrunk away from him appalled at the
changes in his face and bearing.

"What have they been doing to you?" was startled from her.

Richard hitched himself into a sitting posture and coughed.

"Who are you?" he said.

"Don't you even know me?"

He thought before replying.

"Yes, I know you.  You're the woman who was jealous of someone."

"Someone!  Is that how you speak of your sweetheart!"

"Wait a bit.  It's coming back.  Isabel, wasn't it?  Isabel Irish.
Well, what do you want?"

She came a little nearer.

"To be with you.  I haven't seen you for a long time, now."

"You deserted me, didn't you?  I m-missed you at first.  Th' one bright
spot your coming."

"Was it?" she whispered.

He staggered to his feet and walked rockily into the inner room.

"No!  What'm I saying.  Man with a sweetheart doesn't want you."

"Tony!"

"No, no.  'Cos you're the worst devil of the lot.  Decoyed me to this
damn place."

"Tony, I'm so sorry," her hand fell on his sleeve, but he drew away.

"Don't come near me.  Don't touch me.  I mustn't be touched."

"Then I'll sit over here," said she.

"Yes, there.  No, get out.  Leave me alone, d'y' hear?"  His voice
pitched up high and imperative, but as suddenly dropped again.  "I beg
your pardon.  I'm not much of a man to talk to a woman jus' now."

"I think you're a very fine man, Tony."

"Ha!  Yes.  A devil of a fellow!"

"But so stubborn," she whispered.

"There you go," he cried.  "I knew it.  I knew you came here for that."

"Tony!  Tony!" she implored.  "This has gone too far.  You've been
splendid, but what's the use.  Just think, my dear, how rich you'd be."

"I don't want to be rich.  Rich men torture each other," he cried,
steadying himself against the back of a chair.

"You've only to say one word and you can walk out of here without a
care in the world."

The sound of violins was in her voice.  The promise of life care-free
and full of sunshine was in her eyes and the curve of her smile.

He tried to look away, but the appeal was too strong.

"I can walk out of here," he repeated.  "Out of here!"

"Such a lovely world, too."

The touch of her breath on his cheek was like a breeze and the smell of
her hair like violets.

"Yes, yes."

"A great big garden of a world," he crooned, and no song ever sounded
sweeter.

He felt his power to resist was ebbing away--falling from him like a
cloak.  With a mighty effort, he replied:

"A garden full of Eves."

And he sat humped up upon the camp bed.  Auriole glided toward him and
slipped her arms round his neck.  He made no effort to escape.

"Eves are rather nice," she whispered.

His head tilted back against her.

"Rather nice," he echoed.  "Rather nice.  Soft shoulders where a man
can rest his head."  A glorious drowsiness was stealing over his limbs,
a blessed sense of drifting into unknown contentment.  She drew up her
knees and they sat huddled together on the narrow canvas bed like babes
in a wood.  He was barely conscious of her voice.  It came to his ears
as gently as the sound of waves running over sand.

"--all the wonderful things we could do, Tony.  The plans we could make
come true.  We could go out to a fairy-like dinner together--in one of
your wonderful cars you could fetch me--and the streets would be
twinkling with lights like jewels in Aladdin's cave."

Then he found he was talking too.

"A farm in New Zealand," he said.  "Great flocks of sheep and herds of
cattle.  I know the place.  There are mountains with snow caps, green
grass plains, black firs and running water.  I could have all that--if
only--But no."

"Nothing is out of reach, Tony.  Everything can be yours at the price
of a little sentence--just a little sentence."

"No, no."

"Yon need never see those others again, but just tell me.  Men tell
everything to women, they can't keep a secret from a woman.  Nature
never intended they should.  That's why Nature made women the mothers
because the first secret of life is theirs, and all the rest follow
after."

"You're bad, bad," he moaned.  "A cheat trying to get at me by
kindness."

"And isn't kindness worth a little?  Come, kneel down and whisper.  It
will be easy with your head in my lap and my arms around you.  Kneel
down and whisper."

Heaven perhaps could tell where Richard found that last speck of sand
which gave him the power to spring to his feet, to shake off the subtle
influence of touch and voice, and to answer in a voice that fairly rang
with resolve:

"No, nothing--_nothing_."

To Auriole he looked almost godlike as he stood with clenched fists and
every fibre quivering.  It was in that instant of admiration and
amazement she recognised him as another man and the cry burst from her
lips:

"You're not Anthony Barraclough!"

Richard wavered visibly and for the first time she saw real fear in his
eye.

"What are you saying?  You're mad," he answered.

"You're not Anthony Barraclough!"

"I am.  I am."

"No!"  She seized him by the shoulders and stared into his face.
"You're different, your eyes, your mouth.  Who are you?"

"Anthony Barraclough!" he cried.

"It's not true.  Anthony would never have stood this.  The men, yes.
The torture, yes, but he always gives way to a woman.  Who are you?"

"I've said," he answered brokenly.  "I've said."

A turmoil of thoughts raced through her mind and she spoke them aloud.

"Anthony away getting the concession.  You here taking his place.  It
was clever--clever.  Damn them for letting you do it.  And you've done
it so wonderfully--borne all this when at a word you might----"

"Talking nonsense," he moaned desperately.

"And you don't know what the secret is.  No one but Anthony does.
That's true, isn't it?"

"I do know.  I do know--won't say."

"You can't know.  That's true, isn't it?  Answer me--answer!"

And quite suddenly Richard Frencham Altar's world went all black and
his knees gave way beneath him.  He fell with his head in his hands
crying and gasping like a broken hearted child.  And Auriole came to
him and put her arms round him and kissed his neck, his hair, and his
poor thin hands.

"And I've helped in the torture," she sobbed.  "Broken you down.  Oh!
what a beast.  What a beast I am."

"Very tired," said Richard.  "Want to go to sleep."

"There's no sleep for you in this house except----"

The door opened and Ezra Hipps walked in.

"Sorry to interrupt," he said, "but how's things?"

"I was just coming," said Auriole with a quick pretence at light
heartedness.  "I have something important to say."

Hipps shook Richard by the shoulder.

"How's that memory?" he enquired.

Once again the last reserves were pushed into the line.

"Bad," said Richard.  "Damn bad."

"Then I guess that ends the play," said the American.

"I want you," said Auriole.  "Please."

They went out of the room together.




CHAPTER 31.

A WAY OUT.

When Auriole slipped quietly into the room five minutes later she found
Richard asleep on the camp bed with Blayney's kit bag tucked under his
head.

Below stairs there existed a state of turmoil.  She had exploded her
bombshell as to Richard's false identity secure in the belief that it
would result in his immediate liberation.

"But Hell! what are you thinking off?" Hipps had roared.  "D'you
imagine we can pass him out after what's happened?  So long as the
fellar's above ground we ain't safe."

"You can't mean----" she had cried.

"We're busy.  Keep out of the path, kid."

She had left them rattling instructions through the telephone to a
person called Phillips.  The need of the moment from their point of
view was to waylay the returning Barraclough.

Van Diest was shouting for his car and from the jargon of voices,
Auriole learnt their intention of making an immediate descent upon the
rival camp to demand terms.  In the midst of the chaos Auriole slipped
away, snatched up a bottle of champagne and some biscuits from the
dining table and ran up the stairs to Richard's room.

Parker, who was at the door, shot the bolt after she entered and in so
doing destroyed a foolish hope that she might succeed in getting
Richard out of the house while the excitement relaxed observation.  Her
two seater car was under the trees at the end of the road and if they
could reach it----

She seized Richard's arm and stifled the cry he gave with her other
hand.

"Hush, hush, for pity's sake," she implored.  "Here's some
champagne--drink it.  No, no, it isn't poison--drink--drink," and she
filled a glass that stood upon the table.  "Eat these biscuits too, and
listen to me."

Of course he did not understand.  He drank the champagne and ate the
biscuits wolfishly while she talked.  It was clear something had
happened--some unlooked for reversal of feeling--but beside the food
and drink nothing seemed to matter.  The good wine felt like new life
blood flowing through his veins.

"They're downstairs now," she said.  "Making up their minds."

He found intelligence enough to ask:

"They know I'm not Barraclough?"

"I told them, yes."

"You shouldn't," he said simply.

"I thought they'd let you go."

"Well?"  He refilled his glass.

"They said it wouldn't be possible now.  That's why I've got to get you
away--somehow--somehow."

She was moving desperately up and down the room as though by very
desire she would create an opening in the walls.

"Get me away!" he said stupidly.  "Why do you want to get me away?"

"Because you're a different man, a splendid man.  And they're beasts
and brutes."

It was all very confusing, very unbelievable.  Richard had a faint
impression that it was happening to someone else or in a dream.  Why
was this wonderful creature worrying about him.  The wine was mounting
to his head.

"A splendid man," he repeated senselessly.  "And you want to get me
away.  Tha's kind--kind."

"I've a car outside if we could only reach it."

That was a droll thing to say, but it sounded real.  He answered as
though someone had actually spoken of a car outside and a chance of
reaching it.

"Not a hope."

The bottle was empty now, which was a good thing.

"There must be.  The windows!"

He shook his head as she ran toward them.  If the beautiful lady wanted
to play the escape game he might as well take an intelligent interest
and play it sensibly.

"No good," said he.  "Soon as you lift the shutter bar an alarm starts
ringing and they all rush in."

"S'pose we did that," said Auriole with a sudden idea.  "Worked in the
dark, started the bell, and when they came in made a dash for it."

Sensible talk this, he must reply sensibly.

"No good.  One of 'em always stands in the door."

"Then somehow we must get them away from the door into your bedroom."

That was logical, interesting, too.

"Of course we must get them away from the door.  Tha's the idea.  Tha's
the idea," he said.

"Oh! can't you think of a way?" she begged.

It wasn't fair to ask questions.  The game was of her invention, not
his.  Still, in common politeness one must take a hand, show a
willingness.  It would be awful if she lost patience with him and left
him to his loneliness.

He answered that unspoken fear simply as a child.

"But you won't leave me alone again, will you?"

"Can't you realise I'm on your side," she said, shaking him by the arm.

"My side, yes," he repeated.  "I'm glad you're on my side.  We're
friends aren't we?"

To this pleasant reflection he sat down on the hard chair and smiled
happily.  Friends is a lovely word to play with when one has been over
long neglected.  He wished she would sit too, and make a pillow for his
head, but instead she was flitting from place to place acting in the
oddest way.  From the camp bed she had dragged Blayney's kit bag and
was buttoning it into an old dressing gown provided for his use.

"I must have a head," she was saying, which sounded idiotic to Richard
who saw that her own was beautiful.

He pointed to a bronze bust of Van Diest which had been placed on the
mantelpiece a few days before, presumably to act as a reminder of the
influence dominating the apartment.

"Try that one," he suggested, laughing inanely.

But Auriole did not laugh.  She gave a glad cry and called on him to
help.  Together they carried the bust and soon had tied it securely
inside the dressing gown.

It did not occur to Richard to ask the reason why this strange dummy
had been created.  It was all of a piece with the dream-like spirit
which pervaded everything.  Her explanation was voluntary.

"It's to put in your bed," she said.  "We'll take out the electric
bulbs, then start the bells going.  When they come in and you don't
answer they'll go into the bedroom.  They'll find this and think it's
you."

"Think this is me!" said Richard.  "That's funny."  He broke into a
storm of laughter which ended as abruptly as it began, ended from a
sudden realisation that all this folly and mummery was a real and solid
effort to compass his escape.  "Wait a bit," he said, rubbing his brow
fiercely.  "It's coming back.  I see the idea.  Bless you, for trying.
We'll have a shot."

He dragged the dummy into the inner room by the waist cord of the
dressing gown which was tied about its neck.  The brain fog was gone.
He was surprisingly clear headed now, and an unnatural vitality buoyed
him up.  The bedroom door swung to behind him and he heard Auriole cry:

"I'm doing the lights, be quick."

And at that moment he had a notion and acted upon it quickly.  An old
gas bracket over the door helped the operation.  When he had finished
he kicked over a chair and re-entered the now pitch dark room.

"I've got hold of the shutter bar," he heard her cry.

"Let her go," he answered.

And down in the hall below they heard the big alarm bell clang out the
warning.

Clinging to each other's hands they waited, their backs flattened
against the wall.  And presently it came; the sound of men's footsteps
dashing up the stairs.  The door burst open and a number of dark shapes
poured into the room.  Framed in the open doorway, a black silhouette
against the light from the well of the staircase, stood Blayney, a
pistol in his hand.

There was a veritable hubbub of voices.  "What's the matter with the
lights?"  "Where are the switches?"  "Hell! that sucker is trying to
put it over on us!"  "The bedroom shutters--He's trying to escape."
"For Lord's sake where's the door?"

Someone found the knob in the darkness and the bedroom door was flung
open.  There was a scream from Laurence.  Then Hipps' voice bellowing:

"Great God! he's hanged himself."

Swinging from the lintel, shadowy against the grey light beyond was,
apparently, the figure of Richard Frencham Altar dangling on a rope.

Even the perfectly trained Blayney deserted his post to leap forward
and see, and in that instant of neglect, Richard and Auriole darted
from the room and slammed and bolted the door.

Nor could Richard resist the temptation of lifting an exultant cry of,
"Good-night, gentlemen," ere he was seized by Auriole and hurried down
the stairs.

As they passed through the front garden and ran stumbling toward the
waiting car they could hear above them the sound of curses and hammer
blows echoing through the house.




CHAPTER 32.

THE APPOINTED HOUR.

Hilbert Torrington was first to arrive.  His big car deposited him at
Crest Chambers at ten forty-five, a quarter of an hour before the time
promised for Barraclough's arrival.  The ever attentive Doran took his
hat and coat, turned on the table lamp and provided him with a pack of
Patience cards.

"You look hopeful, sir," he remarked.

"I always expect the best till I have knowledge of the worst," came the
smiling rejoinder.  "I trust you have quite recovered from the effects
of the anaesthetic."

"Thank you, sir.  But my recovery'll date from the hour the Captain
gets back."

Doran liked to refer to his master by the military rank he had borne
during the war.

"To be sure," said Mr. Torrington.  "That will be a welcome event to
all of us."

Next came Cranbourne, very anxious and ever pulling out his watch,
tugging at his lower lip or pacing up and down.

"Why not take a chair?" suggested Mr. Torrington.

"Can't!  I feel things y'know."

"All my life I've been feeling things without showing it," came the
reflective observation.  "If only I had that two of diamonds!  It's
sure to be the last card."

"How you can sit there playing cards!"

"I'm too old to walk about."

Cranbourne stopped and looked at him.

"Mr. Torrington," he said.  "Has it occurred to you that in undertaking
this thing we have been guilty of grave wrong-doing?  To line our own
pockets while we stayed safe at home men have gone out at the risk of
their lives.  We may talk of adventure--the romance of business--we may
call our job by a dozen pretty names, but it analyses out at something
fairly damnable when we apply the supreme test."

Mr. Torrington nodded.

"And yet what is the alternative?" he asked.  "Life is only a matter of
diamond cut diamond."

"It's a scavenger's job," said Cranbourne.  "And you can't get away
from that."

"Without conflict there would be no progress."

Cranbourne shook his head angrily.

"What right have we to control other men's destinies?" he said.  "Where
is the justice that puts such men as ourselves in command?"

"Opportunity does that, not justice," said Mr. Torrington slowly.  "My
first employment was cleaning windows.  I saw a man, who was so
engaged, fall from a fourth floor sill into the street.  I picked him
up dead, carried him into the building and I asked for his job.  A
nasty story isn't it?"

Cranbourne snorted.

"It covers us all," he said.  "We spend our lives robbing flowers from
cemeteries, keeping our souls in our trousers pockets along with the
other small change.  Hullo!"

Doran opened the door and announced Nugent Cassis.  That meant that all
over the town clocks would be striking eleven.

"Any news?" he rapped out.

"None."

"But there wouldn't be," said Cranbourne.  "He promised to send a
message when he was nearing home.  It's time he was here."  The little
man was plainly agitated.

Hilbert Torrington smiled at him over the carefully arranged playing
cards.

"They tell me, Cassis, your wife has been indisposed.  I trust she is
better."

"I really don't know," came the irritable response.  "You can hardly
expect----"

"These trifles so easily escape us," murmured the old man.

Nugent Cassis scowled and turned to Cranbourne.

"How's that other fellow getting on?  What's his name--Altar?"

"He's holding out."

"At Laurence's house?"

"I believe so."

"You've heard from the woman lately!"

"Not lately."

"I've a doubt about that woman.  She's been seen a good bit with the
American.  I've had them watched.  Nothing would surprise me less than
to hear she'd given us away."

"That's hardly likely, Cassis, since she believes it is Barraclough
they've got hold of."

"Women are very tricky.  I don't trust 'em!  Suppose they've made it
uncomfortable for Frencham Altar, what?  Well it was only to be
expected."

The callous practicality of tone fired Cranbourne to answer:

"Expected, yes.  But one of these days if there's any justice knocking
about this old world of ours we shall have to pay."

"Five thousand was the price," retorted Cassis.

It is probable there might have been a row had not Mr. Torrington
intervened with the suggestion that Frencham Altar's cheque should be
signed while they were waiting.  Cassis obstructed the idea.  He
thought tomorrow would be quite soon enough.  He scouted Mr.
Torrington's statement that on the morrow they would have to see about
Frencham Altar's release.  He said that this was a matter dependant on
Barraclough's return.

"Our contract with Altar terminated at eleven tonight," insisted Mr.
Torrington.  "Kindly sign this cheque beneath my signature."

And very grumblingly Cassis obliged.

"We have staked a lot of money on this affair," he said.

"Yes, and not a little reputation," replied the old man.

"Don't follow your reasoning."

"I'm getting old, Cassis, reaching the age when the hereafter becomes
the nearafter."

"Then I should retire from business before you waste any more money,"
said Cassis with surprising venom.

But Mr. Torrington did not resent the remark since he knew how nerves
affect certain dispositions.

The arrival of Lord Almont Frayne, resplendent from the Opera, relieved
the situation of tension.  It would have taken a very practised eye to
detect anxiety under the mask of bored and elegant indifference he had
assumed.  He apologised for being late, but had been button-holed by a
fellow in the foyer who wanted to talk polo.  Very disappointing
evening altogether.  The prima donna had sung flat and an understudy
was on for Tenor's part.  It was only as an after thought he mentioned
the object of their meeting and he touched upon it in the lightest vein.

"Nothing doing?"

"Nothing."

"Ah! well, it's early yet.  Hot ain't it?  Mind if I get myself a peg?"
He was crossing to the decanter when he stopped, drew an envelope from
his pocket and placed it on the table before Mr. Torrington.

"What do you make of that?" he asked.  "Came early this morning, no
post mark--nothing--just slipped through the box."

Hilbert Torrington took from the envelope a single flower pressed
almost flat.  It was a dog rose.

"Odd," he muttered, "distinctly odd."  He weighed the flower in his
hand and sniffed the envelope critically.  It had no scent.  "You have
no one, Almont--I mean, there isn't anyone who'd be likely to--Well,
you're a young man."

"Oh, Lord! no, nothing of that kind."

And Almont's inflection suggested that the very idea of such a thing
caused him pain.

Hilbert Torrington pursed his lips and stared at the ceiling.

"What does a dog rose suggest to you, Cassis?"

"A silly interruption," replied that gentleman sourly.

"Yes, yes, but was there not--dear me, it's so long ago I've almost
forgotten--was there not some floral Lingua Franca--Ah! the language of
flowers."

Cassis snorted, but Cranbourne was at the book shelves in an instant.

"It's printed at the back of dictionaries," he said.  "Here's one!"  He
took out a volume and turned over the pages as he spoke.  "This is it.
Rose--Love.  Yellow rose--jealousy.  White rose--I am worthy of you.
Dog rose--Hope."

"Hope," repeated Mr. Torrington.

Lord Almont struck the table and sprang to his feet.

"By God!" he cried.  "Barraclough's going to win through."

In the midst of a babel of tongues the telephone rang imperatively.
Mr. Torrington picked up the receiver.

"Yes, yes," he said.  "Who?  You are speaking for Mr. Van Diest."

The three other men came instantly to attention and exchanged glances.
There was a pause.  Then Mr. Torrington said:

"Indeed!  Oh, very well--delightful," and he replaced the receiver.

"What's happened?" Almont demanded.

"I don't entirely know.  But it appears that Van Diest and his amiable
colleague Hipps, are shortly paying us a visit--here."

There was a moment of consternation.

"But Good Lord!" exclaimed Cranbourne.  "That may mean anything."

Nugent Cassis threw up his hands desperately.  Every vestige of his
quiet business habit had vanished and instead he was a nerve-racked
exasperated man who paced up and down jerking out half sentences,
reproaches and forecasts of failure.

"It's that fellow Frencham Altar given us away.  Damn stupid
introducing the type--man on a bench--Means ruin to the lot of us.
Coming here are they?  Refuse to see them.  I knew there'd be a break
down somewhere--felt it in my joints--If everything had gone according
to schedule, Barraclough would have been back by now--Punctual
man--reliable----"

"Big stakes involve big risks," said Mr. Torrington sweetly.

"And haven't we taken them?" Cassis barked.  "Good Heavens alive!
why--What's that?"

There was a murmur of voices in the hall, the room door was thrown
open, and Isabel Irish came in breathlessly.  She threw a quick glance
round the circle of faces as though seeking someone.

"Where is he?  Where's Tony?  It's after eleven--half past--Why isn't
he here?"

Mr. Torrington rose and offered a chair, which she refused with a
gesture.

"We are waiting, my dear."

"But why isn't he here?" she repeated.

"How can we possibly say?" ejaculated Cassis testily.  "In a venture of
this kind----"

She caught up the word "venture" and threw it back at him.

"No message, nothing."

Cranbourne was about to answer, but Torrington interrupted him to tell
her of the dog rose Lord Almont had received.

"That was from him--that was from Tony," she cried.  "I gave him a
spray of them on the night he started."

"That's encouraging," said Lord Almont.

But Cassis was not in a mood to be encouraged.

"It may mean much or little," he snorted.  "Still, there is nothing to
prevent our hoping."

Of all worldly trials, waiting is the severest, and tatters the nerves
quicker than any other.  Isabel Irish did not like Nugent Cassis--he
belonged to the money people who had no real existence in her
reckoning--but ordinarily speaking she would never have lashed out at
him with such vehemence.  The fire in her voice and eyes entirely
robbed the little man of power to retort.  Nor was the tirade she
uttered levelled at him alone, everyone present came in for a share.
One small girl with a shock of curly hair whipping with scorpions the
heads of a mighty financial concern.

"Hoping he'll get through with the cash," she said, "so that you can
have money and more money and then more money.  That's all he counts
for to you--a machine to fill your pockets----  Doesn't matter if he
gets broken throwing out the coins, wouldn't matter if he never came
back at all so long as the concession came safely to hand.  Oh! it
makes me sick--it makes me sick."  Her voice broke, but she forced the
tears back by sheer strength of will.  "He may be dead--anything may
have happened to him----  And you could have prevented it all, sent an
army to protect him.  But no, that wouldn't do--too conspicuous--other
people might find out--profits might have to be divided--so all you can
do is to sit in a circle waiting--waiting--like a dog with a biscuit on
its nose for the words 'Paid for, paid for.'"

And having emptied out her soul's measure of resentment she threw
herself onto the sofa and sobbed and sobbed with her curly head in Mr.
Torrington's lap.

No one spoke, not even when Doran came in and whispered that Van Diest
and Hipps had arrived and demanded audience.  It was Cranbourne who
came forward and picking her up in his arms like an injured child
carried her into the other room and laid her on Barraclough's bed.

"We haven't lost yet, my dear," he said, and stroked her forehead.

He left her crying gently on the pillow, her little pink cheeks all
shiny with tears.

Mr. Torrington waited for Cranbourne to return before giving Doran
instructions to show in the gentlemen.  To Cassis' unspoken protest he
replied:

"They evidently have some information which we lack.  It would be wise
to find out what it is."

Ezra P. Hipps was first to enter.  He came in like a triumphant army
occupying captured territory.  Close upon his heels was Hugo Van Diest,
smiling ingratiatingly and bowing to the company.  Hilbert Torrington
rose and returned the courtesy.

"An unexpected pleasure, gentlemen.  And what precisely do you want?"

"I guess it's a talk to the man who shoots the bull in the ring," Hipps
replied, and added: "That substitute trick has exploded and the chap
who pulled it has done a guy."

Mr. Torrington and Cranbourne exchanged glances.

"Am I to understand that Mr. Frencham Altar has found your hospitality
too oppressive?" he asked.

"Put it how you like, but that's a side show," came the answer.  "We're
here on business."

Nugent Cassis had recovered some of his self-possession and remarked
crisply:

"We are very busy, Mr. Hipps."

"And since the light came into the temple, Nugent Cassis, we've been
busy ourselves.  Struck me one or two little matters need adjusting."

"Your treatment of the substitute for example," said Cranbourne.

"Not unlikely, but that job'll keep, and it's in hand already under
Laurence."

"Dear me, we are being very frank, are we not?" murmured Mr. Torrington.

"Gentlemen, it's come to our ears that a certain Mr. Barraclough is
taking grave risks tonight to get home."

Cranbourne flashed an eye at the bedroom door.  "Go on!" he said.
"Talk straight, man."

Hilbert Torrington held up a hand.

"One minute," he suggested.  "I imagine Mr. Hipps is reluctant to speak
out before so many witnesses.  It would be better perhaps if Mr. Van
Diest and myself discussed this matter in private.  Is everyone
agreeable?"

There was some small demur, but it was finally agreed upon.  The others
went out into the hall, leaving Mr. Torrington and Van Diest alone.

They were both very smiling and scrupulously polite, but the air of the
room seemed to crackle with stored electricity.  The Dutchman was given
a chair by the writing table and cigarettes were placed at his elbow.
Indeed, every social amenity was observed before Hilbert Torrington
fired the first round.

"Let us assume, Van Diest, that we are neither of us honourable men."

Van Diest took quite a long time lighting a cigarette before replying.

"You don't mind if I smoke?"

"It's an admirable sedative for conscience and nerves alike.  Wouldn't
you prefer a cigar of Barraclough's?"

"Ach! it wass of this young man I wass about to speak."

"I had almost guessed it," said Mr. Torrington, and picking up the
patience cards began to lay them out in little packs.

"It is said he iss on the road tonight--wass seen by a man who hass
done some works for me."

"Indeed!  That must have surprised you very much.  After cherishing the
belief that he was snugly accommodated at Laurence's house."

Van Diest acknowledged this thrust gracefully.

"A clever idea thiss substitute--a nice fellow too--vonderful
determination."

"Hm!  Careless of you to lose him."

"Mislay, my friend.  I do not know thiss verb to lose."

"So you come to me for instruction?  Ah well, it's never too late to
learn."

For the first time Van Diest scowled, but quickly controlled his
features and waved a hand over the cards.

"You tell your fortune, eh?"

"Dear me, no!  I can wait for that to develop.  A mere game of
patience, nothing more."

"There are times, Mr. Torrington, when action is of more value than
patience."

"I treasure your opinion," came the smiling rejoinder.  "What was it
you were saying?  A man of yours saw Barraclough?  Was that all he did?"

"Not a very smart man that."

"But you've others--smarter?"

"Mus' not let ourselves be beat, y'know."

"So galling isn't it?"

"I haf no experience," retorted Van Diest, and rising crossed to a
canary cage in the window where, to Mr. Torrington's silent
indignation, he spent quite a long while whistling and saying "Sweet
sweet" to the little inmate.

"But what if you are beaten already, Van Diest?  Anthony Barraclough is
on his way home presumably with the concession in his pocket."

"But he hass not yet arrifed, eh?  Dicky, eh?  Oh, this poor little one
he will miss his master.  So the poor--the poor--Sweet!  Sweet!"

Mr. Torrington frowned and placing a piece of sugar from the saucer of
his coffee cup in a spoon held it out at arm's length.

"Present this sugar to your feathered friend with my compliments," said
he.  "And ask him to excuse you for a moment."

Hugo Van Diest returned to the table wreathed in smiles.

"So you wish to talk.  Proceed."

"If Barraclough has the concession what have you to gain?"  The banter
had died out of the old man's voice.

"There wass millions of concessions never taken up.  S'pose thiss one
is lost, eh?  Who will be the wiser?"

"I see.  Dog in the Manger?"

"We lock the stable door before the horse arrife that is all."

"And how far have you decided to go--all the way?"

Van Diest appeared to deliberate before answering.

"Accidents, you know, they will happen.  These boys wass ver' reckless.
With all these motors and trains life is risky, the streets too, are
dangerous.  You never know with these boys."  He stopped as Hilbert
Torrington drew the telephone toward him.  "What are you going to do?"

"Ring up the Police, my friend.  You will be charged with conspiracy
and intent to murder."

Van Diest's little eyes glittered threateningly.  "By the time the
Police arrife it will be too late," said he.  "Put down that telephone.
I wass not so easily frightened."  His voice pitched up and seemed
suddenly to catch fire.  He rose to his feet and beat the table with
both hands.  "You fool, thiss wass business, business, business, the
meaning, the motive of my whole life, and if you think I give way at
the threat of a rope you don't know Hugo Van Diest.  My heart, my whole
soul, I haf invest in this enterprise and I don't leave it.  I don't
move one inch till I haf what I want."

"Money?" thundered Mr. Torrington.

"Pounds, my friend, shillings and pence."

"And men's lives."  There was a fine scorn in the old man's tone.
"Money!  I hate the name of it.  It turns the honour and cleanliness of
men into trashy circles of metal.  To business then.  What chance has
Barraclough of winning through?"

"Very small."

"Go on!"

"If you want that thiss radium company shall be floated you would haf
the better chance if----"

"Well?"

"You gif to us one-third interest."

"And that represents his chances?"

Van Diest nodded unpleasantly.

"But you will understand of course, that there iss not a lot of time to
lose."

"In a word you are prepared to call off your dogs for a matter of
millions."

"So!"

The bedroom door was flung open and Isabel burst excitedly into the
room.

"There are some horrible men watching the back of the flats," she
cried.  "Are they ours?"

"Perhaps you would like to answer this young lady?" asked Mr.
Torrington.

But Van Diest only shrugged his shoulders.  Isabel ran to the window.

"And there--down there," she pointed to the street below, "there are
more.  What does it mean?"

The sound of her cries brought the others hurrying into the room.

"What is it now?" demanded Cassis.

But Hilbert Torrington was at the telephone.  What he actually said
sounded incomprehensible, but what it actually meant to the man who
received it was an order to despatch a dozen men immediately to the
doors of the flats and distribute a sprinkling over the neighbouring
streets.  There might be a fight, there probably would.  If Barraclough
were seen a body guard was to be formed at once.

Isabel was repeating her question at the window.

"Those men!  Who are they?  What does it mean?"

It was Cranbourne who had the honesty to reply.

"Danger!"




CHAPTER 33.

A SMASH UP.

Flora's handling of the old Panhard was beyond praise.  Accurate, well
judged and with just enough dash of risk at cross roads or in traffic
to steal an extra mile or two on the average speed per hour.  The night
had chilled and Anthony Barraclough, wrapped in his mother's cloak
watched the girl beside him with a queer mixture of admiration and
impatience.  Admiration for her faultless nerve and impatience that the
car for all its ancient virtue in no sense could be termed a
speed-monger.  Flora's attitude amused him too, it was so tremendously
intense, so devoted to duty and withal so exactingly efficient.  There
is no particular reason why it should be so, but it always tickles the
male sense of humour to watch a woman do a man's job as capably as a
man himself could do it.  Her conduct when they punctured on the long
stretch between Wimbourne and Ringwood had been exemplary.  She jacked
up, changed wheels and was away again in the shortest possible time.
True a little over a quarter of an hour was lost, but the locking ring
had rusted in its thread, as sometimes happens, and it was heavy work
for a girl to shift it unaided.  She had forbidden Barraclough to help
and had made him picket a hundred yards down the road in case the
pursuers should come up unexpectedly.

After that all had gone well--except for a plug sooting on number three
cylinder and a halt for petrol about fifty miles outside London.  A
full moon had risen with sundown which lit the countryside brightly,
and made the run almost as easy as by day.

Only once did Barraclough see the pursuing Ford, two spots of light
visible from the top of the rise threading through the valley five
miles to the rear.  Of course, it might have been any other car, but a
kind of second sense convinced him that this was not the case.  He did
not confide to Flora what he had seen, but the tapping of his foot on
the floor-board gave her the information as surely as any spoken word.

She startled him not a little by rapping out the enquiry:

"How much lead have we got."

"Five miles."

"We shall do it.  They won't average more than twenty-eight and we're
good for that.  Where are we now?"

"Hogs-back."

"What's time?"

"'Bout ten to eleven."

"Hm!  Think they'll shove any obstacles in the way?"

"Depends," said Anthony.  "If they sent a message through it's pretty
certain we may run into a hold up."

"Going to chance it?"

"No.  We'll slip off the main road at Cobham and trickle in through the
byes."

"Right oh! tell me when."

For some miles they drove in silence and once again between Ripley and
Guildford had a glimpse of the following lights.  With a considerable
shock Barraclough realised that the distance separating the two cars
had greatly diminished.  But hereabouts an unexpected piece of luck
favoured them.  At a point where the road narrowed between hedges a
farm gate was thrown open and a flock of sheep was driven out into the
highway.  Flora contrived to dash past before the leaders of the flock
came through the gate.  Another second and she would have been too
late.  Glancing back Anthony observed that the entire road was solid
with sheep, a compact mass that moved neither forward nor backward.

"Our friends'll lose five minutes penetrating that," he announced
gleefully.

It did not occur to him until later that every one of those woolly ewes
was an unknowing servant of Hugo van Diest and that their presence in
the road was the direct result of a wire dispatched to a quiet little
man named Phillips who had been given the task of making the way into
London difficult.  Mr. Phillips had not had very much time, but he had
done his best.  A series of telegraph poles had been cut down outside
Staines, Slough, and at various points along the Portsmouth road.  A
huge furniture van with its wheels off obstructed the narrows at
Brentford, and in one or two places wires had been drawn across the
King's highway.

It was the side turning at Cobham saved them running into one of these
obstacles by a narrow margin of scarcely a hundred yards.  Also it was
the side turning, bumpy narrow and twisted that proved their undoing.

An upward climb, a perilously fast descent, a corner taken a trifle too
fine, a sharp flint, a burst front tyre, and at a point where two roads
crossed the veteran car almost somersaulted into a ditch, wrecked
beyond hope of repair.  They were doing forty when it happened and it
was a miracle they escaped with their lives.

Flora was first to scramble over the tilted side and survey the ruins
of their hopes.  Anthony still wrapped in his mother's cloak followed
and shook his head over the extent of the damage.

"You hurt?" he asked.

"No.  Are you?"

"I'm all right.  What happened?"

"Front tyre.  Wheel fairly kicked out of my hand."

"It's damn bad luck," said Anthony.

"Brutal."  She bent over and switched off her lights.  "What are we
going to do?"

He looked at a sign-post, knocked crooked by the car when it plunged
off the metal into the ditch.

"This road leads from Oxshott--London that way.  With any luck we might
get a lift."

"Late for anything to be about."  She looked back along the way they
had come.  The road could be seen threading its way among pines for a
couple of miles or more.  "We shall know they're coming five minutes
before they can get here.  Still I suppose you won't wait for them."

"No fear.  Couldn't put up much of a fight with this hand."

"Pigs," said Flora.  "I'd like to kill them."

"Both sides are pretty lethal.  Wouldn't fancy my chances if----"

"You think they'd----"

"Course they would.  Why in blazes doesn't something roll up?  Bet your
life if they can't get the concession for themselves they'll take
precious good care no one else shall profit by it."  He paced up and
down looking this way and that.  "It was like my infernal conceit
bringing the thing through myself.  Anyone but an idiot would have
registered it from Cherbourg.  Almost wish we'd stuck to the main road.
There'd have been some traffic there.  Damn all motorists who're in bed
tonight."

Very faintly through the thin night air came the throb of an engine.

Flora clutched his arm.

"D'you hear?"

"They're coming."

"That's no Ford," she said.  "It's coming from over there."  And she
pointed toward Oxshott.

"You're right," said Anthony.  "Got your gun--give it to me."

"What for?"

"Because that car is going to stop whether it wants to or not."

Flora clapped her hands ecstatically.

"Oh, let me hold 'em up," she pleaded.

"No fear.  You've risked enough already.  Run round the bend and meet
'em.  If they won't pull up for you they will for me."

He took the pistol from Flora and planted himself squarely in the
middle of the road.

"Off you go."  And she went.

Through the darkness ahead came patterns of light making black lace of
the twigs and branches.  He heard Flora cry "Stop--stop," and the
squawk of a Claxon horn.  But still the car came on.  It swung round
the curve and made directly for him, flooding him in light from the
heads.

It wanted some nerve to stand there, but nerve was a quality possessed
by Anthony Barraclough.  He never moved an inch and in his left hand
held the pistol levelled at the approaching car.

"I'll fire," he cried.

He saw the driver snatch at his brakes, the steel studs tore up the
surface of the road as the car, a small two-seater, came to a
standstill within a foot of where he stood.

Then happened an amazing thing.  A woman sprang out and ran toward him
crying:

"Anthony--you!"

His eyes were dazzled by the head lights, but his memory for voices was
not dulled.  He leapt back a clear five feet and presented the pistol
full in her face.

"I know you," he said.  "You're Auriole Craven.  But if you or any of
that damn crowd try to stop me----"

"No, no, no," she cried.  "I'm with you--not against.  What on earth
are you doing here?"

"Doing?  I'd almost done it.  Smashed up in the final sprint.  I want a
seat in your car.  Must get to London tonight."

"To London.  No.  It wouldn't be safe--it wouldn't be fair."

"Fair!  You don't understand--don't realise--there are millions of
pounds at stake."

"I don't care if there are hundreds of millions," she retorted.  "The
car is only a two-seater and slow at that.  There are two of us already
and----"

He interrupted her impatiently, with an order to chuck out her
passenger--minor considerations had no weight with him--everything,
everybody must be sacrificed to the need of the moment.

"Minor considerations?" said Auriole bitterly.  "You speak as if you'd
carried the game alone, as far as it has gone.  But it was my
passenger--the man you want to chuck out--who made it possible.  The
man who was tortured while you were free to----"

She did not finish the sentence for even as she spoke Richard Frencham
Altar stepped shakily from the car and came toward them.  The
extraordinary resemblance between the two men wrung a cry of amazement
from Flora.

"Barraclough?" said Richard rocking on his heels.  "Pretty
extraordinary meeting like this on the finishing straight.  How goes?"

"Good God, man!" said Anthony.  "They put you through it."

"That's all right," said Richard.  "Never mind paying a price if you
win the game."

"Get back into the car," Auriole pleaded.  "You'll be caught again."

But he put her aside.

"Wait a bit--wait a bit.  Looks as if my job isn't finished yet.
What's the trouble here?" and he nodded at the wrecked car.

It was Flora who poured out the story of the chase and ultimate smash
and at the very moment of explanation the lights of Harrison Smith's
Ford flashed for a moment upon the sky line to reappear a second later
creeping down the avenue of trees on the hillside.

"Look, look," she cried.

To Anthony Barraclough it was a novel experience to act on another
man's orders.  In that instant of gathering danger Richard Frencham
Altar became captain of the situation.  He literally flung Anthony into
the car and refused to listen to Auriole's protests.

"We're players of a game, aren't we?" he said, "and we're going to play
it to a finish.  I think, too, it 'ud do me good to have one clean
smack at 'em before I'm through."

He hardly knew how it came about that he and Auriole kissed one
another--somehow they found time for that and as the car moved away she
leant out to say:

"You dear brave wonderful Sportsman."

Then he and Flora were alone in the road watching the red rear lamp
disappear into the night.

"You've got some pluck," said Flora.  As she helped him into the cloak
that Anthony had thrown aside.  "Going to wait and hold 'em up?"

"May as well.  That little two seater would never have carried four.
Got a gun by any chance?"

"No, he had mine.  Didn't he give it to you?"

"He did not, so that's that.  You better make for those trees."

"If you think I'm going to desert," began Flora stoutly.

"You're going to obey orders, my dear.  Go on--push off."

There was a quality in his voice that compelled obedience.

"Oh, I hate you," said Flora.  "Please, please let me stay."

But he was inexorable.

"They'll be here in a minute.  Go!" he ordered.

And to hide her tears of rage and mortification Flora went.

Richard glanced over her shoulder at the oncoming lights.

"Pity about that pistol," he muttered.

On the road at his feet lay a lady's hand-bag with silk cords.  It was
part of the equipment furnished by Mrs. Barraclough.  Richard stooped
and picked it up.  There was a barrel of tar and a sand heap by the
sign board and it struck him that both might by useful.  With all the
speed he could command he rolled the tar barrel up the road and left it
blocking the way.  Then he returned to the sand heap and filled the
hand-bag very full and tightened the strings.  It felt quite business
like as he spun it in the air.

The noise of the oncoming Ford was now plainly detectable, but with it
was another sound, a sound that caused him to throw up his head and
listen.  From the Oxshott road it came, the tump--tump--tump of a
single cylinder motor cycle engine.  He knew that music very well, had
heard it a score of times during his three weeks' imprisonment.  The
particular ring of the exhaust could not be mistaken.

"That's Laurence's bike for a thousand pounds," he exclaimed and
quickly pulled the hood of the cloak over his head.

To guess at the relative distances, the motor cycle should arrive half
a minute before the car and banking on the chance, Richard sat down on
the heap of sand and waited.

It was Laurence right enough--in evening dress, and hatless, just as he
had sprung to the pursuit after at last they succeeded in breaking down
the door.

He saw the wrecked motor and what was apparently an old woman huddled
at the roadside.  He pulled up within a couple of yards and shouted at
her.

"Hi! you Madam! seen a car with a man and a girl in it go by?"

But he received no answer even when he shouted the question a second
time.  The old lady seemed painfully deaf and employing the most
regrettable language, Oliver Laurence descended from his mount, leant
it against the fence and came nearer to yell his inquiry into her ear.
He did not have time to recover from his surprise, when the voice of
Richard Frencham Altar replied: "Yes, I have."  The sand-bag descended
on the top of his head directed by a full arm swing.  A dazzling
procession of stars floated before his eyes as though he were plunged
into the very heart of the milky-way--flashed and faded into velvet
black insensibility.

From behind heralded by a beam of light and the squawk of a horn, came
a crash as the Ford Car hit the tar barrel end on.  Its front axle went
back ten inches and the rear wheels rose upward.  Two shadowy forms,
that were groundlings at another time, took wings and flew in a neat
parabola over the windscreen, striking the metal surface of the road
with a single thud.  They made no effort to rise, but lay in awkward
sprawling attitudes as though in the midst of violent activity they had
fallen asleep.

Richard Frencham Altar stood alone, blinking rather stupidly at the
havoc he had wrought.  It was such a relief when Flora stole out of the
shadow of the trees and came toward him.

"What a shemozzle, isn't it?" he said dazedly.  "I think we'd better
get out of this, don't you?"

He wheeled the motor cycle into the centre of the road and bade her
jump up behind.

Folks who were returning home late that night were astonished to see a
hatless man with a white unshaved face tearing through the side streets
of the south-west district of London on a motor cycle with a pretty,
but very dishevelled maiden clinging on to the Flapper bracket and
deliriously shouting apparently for no better reason than joy of speed.

An old gentleman who signed himself "Commonsense" wrote to the papers
about it next day and expressed his disgust in no measured terms.




CHAPTER 34.

THE FINISHING STRAIGHT.

"Gentlemen," said Mr. Torrington.  "We have an important decision to
make.  Barraclough is on his way home, presumably with the concession
in his pocket.  Our opponents have made certain dispositions to prevent
his safe arrival--those dispositions they are prepared to remove in
consideration of a third interest."

Cassis snorted violently.  Actual propinquity with danger, the clash of
mind against mind had in a large measure restored his self-possession.

"Preposterous," he ejaculated.

Hilbert Torrington continued.

"It rests with us to decide whether or no we will accept their terms or
take a chance."

"Don't forget the chance is Barraclough," cried Cranbourne, then
swinging round on Hipps, he demanded:

"What are the odds against him?"

"Steep," was the laconical rejoinder.

Cranbourne hesitated a bare second.

"Accept their terms," said he.

"In favour?"

"Of course in favour."

Nugent Cassis shook him by the sleeve.

"I am heartily opposed to their acceptance.  It is absurd to suppose
that Barraclough is unequal to the task we have set him."

"Against?" queried Mr. Torrington.

"Emphatically against."

When it came to Almont's turn to vote his distress of mind was
pathetic.  He stood alternatively on one leg and the other.  He spoke
of "Jolly old public school traditions."  He "doubted if the dear old
sportsman could endure the idea of being protected at such a cost."

"No, damn it all," he concluded.  "Why should we split the prize?"

"We can't juggle with men's lives," urged Cranbourne.

"It's insanity to wilt at the last moment," said Cassis.

Up went Lord Almont's hand.

"I vote against," he said.

Rather piteously Cranbourne appealed to his chief.  As Chairman of the
board Hilbert Torrington's vote counted as two.

"It rests with you, sir," he said.

The old man nodded and a queer smile played round the corners of his
mouth--the smile of a pranky schoolboy.

"But surely," he said.  "No one will doubt the course I shall take.
One must always stand by one's colours.  I accept the hazard Against."
He moved a pace or two forward and bowed to Van Diest.  "Good-evening,
Gentlemen."

Until this moment no one had been conscious of Isabel's presence in the
room.  She had been a silent agonised spectator, controlled by the
belief that the value of persons would eventually be proved higher than
the value of things.  But the cold blooded refusal to protect her lover
at the price of a few paltry millions, appalled her beyond bearing.
She ceased to be a pretty child with a shock of curly hair and was
transformed into a veritable fury.

"You beasts, you brutes, you torturers!" she cried.  "You'd let them
kill him without lifting a hand--you--you, ohh!"

Van Diest and the American moved toward the door, but she barred the
way.

"Pick up that telephone.  You shall have your price."

"I can't think you command it," said Hipps.

"Can't you?  Then listen.  If you stop them--call off the men that are
after him, you shall be told the map reference of the place where he
found the radium."

There was a startled murmur from the company.

"He may have failed to get the concession.  If that were so you'd have
an equal chance.  Will you call them off if I give you that?"

"But you can't, my dear," said Torrington gently.

"And even if you could, you mustn't," snapped Cassis.

"Mustn't!"  There was something magnificent in her scorn.  "Why I'd
wreck the whole crowd of you for one sight of him.  Here you----" and
she swung round on Ezra Hipps.  "Write this down."

"Bluff," said he.

"D'you think I'd let the man I love carry a secret I didn't share?
Write this down."

It was Van Diest who stepped forward with "I take her word.  Go on."

"Brewster's Series 19," cried Isabel.  "Map 24."

Instantly a condition of chaos ruled.  Cassis cried to her to stop "for
Heaven's sake."  Someone else exclaimed "That European."  "It covers
the northern area of----" and "Go on.  Go on."  Hipps was shouting.  To
concentrate in the midst of such a din was almost impossible.  She
covered her cars, closed her eyes, to force memory of the words and the
numerals that were to follow.  "Square F.  North 27.  West 33."

"She's there," cried Hipps, and whipped out a pistol to cover Cassis
who was making for the telephone.

"No you don't.  Stand away."  He picked up the instrument and gave a
number.  "That Phillips?  Clear all roads."

It was all that Isabel wanted to hear, just those three words which
meant one man's safety at the possible price of a mighty fortune.  It
meant nothing to her that the American was calling for "My man with a
suitcase at Charing Cross straight away.  I hit this trail myself."
She was not even conscious of a medley of voices in the street below--a
series of cries and shouts--the blast of a police whistle.  All this
was without meaning.  Consciousness was slipping away and had almost
deserted her when the door was flung open and Anthony Barraclough burst
into the room.  He stood an instant, chest out and with eyes feverishly
bright.

"Sorry I'm late, gentlemen, but I've done the trick--this packet----"
he rocked a little.  "By Gad, I believe I'm going to faint."  He
tottered forward into Isabel's arms and said--"It's you--how ripping!"
That was all.

Cassis pushed forward with the words:

"Has he got it--has he got it?"

"This is what you want, I suppose," said Isabel, and taking the letter
case from his pocket, threw it on the table.  "He's fainted.  Help me
get him to his bed."

Doran and she half carried and half dragged him from the room.

No one was aware of Auriole, who had entered just behind and stood now
with her back to the wall, biting her lip.  After all, when a game is
won, pawns are relatively of little importance--except to themselves.

"Signed?  Registered?" said Van Diest, edging forward.

Nugent Cassis held the crackling document before his eyes--a Concession
to Millions--and he answered between his teeth:

"Signed and registered."

"So," said Van Diest, with unexpected control, "we lose--Finish."  But
his hands trembled as he turned away.

Ezra P. Hipps did not desert his post at the telephone until he heard
those words.  Then he snapped viciously,

"Say, cancel those orders, Phillips--Wash out the lot."

It was too ridiculous at such a moment to contemplate the price of
victory, but that is precisely what Auriole did.

"And you've never asked--never given a thought to the real man--the man
who made it possible--who stayed out there on the road while----"  She
bit back her tears and turned savagely on Hipps and Van Diest.  "Oh,
God," she cried, "if anything has happened to him."

But nothing had--if you discount a little discomfort bravely borne.  He
walked into the room even as she spoke.  Dirty he was, dishevelled and
hollow-eyed, a very travesty of his former self.  But there was a
spring in his bearing that fires of adversity had failed to rob of its
temper.  He entered with a swing, a certain jauntiness--a dash of
_nonchaloir_--pushing his way through the group of astonished
financiers in the doorway and marching up to Van Diest and the American
with a very fine air of "you be damned" about the carriage of his head.

"Get out," he said, uncompromisingly.  "And tomorrow morning I'm coming
down to Charing Cross to see you off by the Continental."

They both addressed him simultaneously and in very different tones to
the ones he had grown accustomed to during the past three weeks.  The
word "cheque" figured largely in their proposals.  Richard Frencham
Altar cut them short with:

"Cheque from you?  No, thanks.  I'll take the smallest coin in each of
your countries to wear on my watch chain.  It'll remind me of my
dealings with two millionaires.  That train goes at ten tomorrow
morning."

Ezra P. Hipps happened to see the light in Auriole's eyes as he and Van
Diest moved toward the door.  It was quite unmistakable and from his
point of view, conclusive.  He said nothing, however, and they passed
out in silence.

It is probable that Hilbert Torrington also read a meaning in the
girl's eyes for he was very active in marshalling his forces for
departure.

"I think, gentlemen," he said, "we might meet tomorrow to discuss our
obligation to Mr. Frencham Altar--an obligation by no means covered by
the small arrangement we made with him."  He grasped Richard warmly by
the hand and there was moisture at the corners of his eyes.  "What a
splendid boy you are," he said.  "Lord, but youth and adventure is a
wonderful partnership, with a dash of romance thrown in as a prize.
It's been a great game--hasn't it?  A real tough fight.  Great fun.
Good night."

Even Cassis had something nice to say before they took their leave and
left the man and the girl together.

Then Richard looked at Auriole and grinned, perhaps because her
expression was so desperately serious.

"Couldn't you smile at a chap?" he asked.

She wrapped her cloak around her.

"You don't understand," she said.  "Everything seems good to you at the
moment--even me."

He shook his head whimsically.

"Don't say me that piece," he begged.  "It sounds horrid.  Where are
you going?"

"I don't belong here," she answered.

"For that matter, neither do I, but I dare say I could extend my lease
for another half hour--even though it did expire at eleven o'clock."

She came down and faced him.

"Listen," she said.  "I don't want to be a nuisance to you and I won't
be."

"You will be if you keep going to that door."

"I don't even know your name, but if you look at me like that, with
laughter in your eyes--if you play the fool at such a time as this--how
can I possibly keep my resolve."

"What resolve?"

"To go away and never come back."

"Come here," said Richard Frencham Altar, "come here at once."

"Oh, please," she pleaded.  "Honestly, my dear, I'm not up to much and
I know you are going to think I am.  Oh, what are you going to do?"

This because his arms had gone round her and he had raised her chin to
the level of his own.

"I'm going to start on the greatest adventure of all," he answered.




THE END.