[Sidenote: Imperial palace.]

Tiberius did but little for the improvement of his capital beyond
erecting a triumphal arch, in commemoration of the exploits of
Germanicus, on the Via Sacra, and establishing the Praetorian Camp near
the Servian Agger. Caligula extended the imperial palace, and began the
Circus Neronis in the gardens of Agrippa, near where St. Peter's now
stands.

[Sidenote: Claudian aqueduct.]

Claudius constructed the two noble aqueducts, the Aqua Claudia and Arno
Novis,--the longest of all these magnificent Roman monuments,--the
latter of which was fifty-nine miles in length, and some of its arches
were one hundred and nine feet in height.

Nero still further extended the precincts of the imperial palace, and
included the Esquiline. The great fire which occurred in his reign, A.D.
65, and which lasted six days and seven nights, destroyed some of the
most ancient of the Roman structures surrounding the Palatine, and very
much damaged the Forum, to say nothing of the statues and treasures
which perished. But the city soon arose from her ashes more beautiful
than before. The streets were laid out on a more regular plan and made
wider, the houses were built lower, and brick was substituted for wood.

[Sidenote: The Imperial Palace.]

The great work of Nero was the construction of the Imperial Palace on
the site of the buildings which had been destroyed by the fire. He gave
it the name of Aurea Domus, and, if we may credit Suetonius, [Footnote:
Suet. _Ner_., 31.] its richness and splendor surpassed any other
similar edifice in ancient times. It fronted the Forum and Capitol, and
in its vestibule stood a colossal statue of the emperor, one hundred and
twenty feet high. The palace was surrounded by three porticoes, each one
thousand feet in length. The back front of the palace looked upon the
artificial lake, afterwards occupied by the Flavian Amphitheatre. Within
the area were gardens and vineyards. It was entirely overlaid with gold,
and adorned with jewels and mother-of-pearl. The supper rooms were
vaulted, and the compartments of the ceiling, inlaid with ivory, were
made to revolve and scatter flowers upon the banqueters below. The chief
banqueting-room was circular, and perpetually revolved in imitation of
the motion of the celestial bodies. There are scarcely no remains of
this extensive palace, which engrossed so large a part of the city, and
which covered the site of so many famous temples and palaces, and which
exhausted even the imperial revenues, great as they were, even as
Versailles taxed the magnificent resources of Louis XIV., and St.
Peter's obliged the Popes to appeal to the contributions of Christendom.

[Sidenote: Temple of Peace.]

The next great edifice which added to the architectural wonders of the
city, was the temple built by Vespasian after the destruction of
Jerusalem, which he called the Temple of Peace. It was adorned with the
richest sculptures and paintings of Greece, taken from Nero's palace,
which Vespasian demolished as a monument of insane extravagance. In this
temple were deposited also the Jewish spoils, except the laws and veil
of the temple.

[Sidenote: Falvian Amphitheatre.]

[Sidenote: The Colosseum.]

But the great work of this emperor, and the greatest architectural
wonder of the world, was the amphitheatre, which he built on the ground
covered by Nero's lake, in the middle of the city, between the Velia and
the Esquiline. For magnitude it can only be compared with the pyramids
of Egypt, and its remains are the most striking monument we have of the
material greatness of the Romans. Though not the first of the
amphitheatres which were erected, its enormous size rendered the
erection of subsequent ones unnecessary. It was here that emperors,
senators, generals, knights, and people, met together to witness the
most exciting and sanguinary amusements ever seen in the world. It was
built in the middle of the city, with a perfect recklessness of expense,
and could accommodate eighty-seven thousand spectators, round an arena
large enough for the combats of several hundred animals at a time. It
was a building of an elliptical form, founded on eighty arches, and
rising to the height of one hundred and forty feet, with four successive
orders of architecture, six hundred and twenty feet by five hundred and
thirteen, inclosing six acres. It was built of travertine, faced with
marble, and decorated with statues. The eighty arches of the lower story
formed entrances for the spectators. The seats were of marble covered
with cushions. The spectators were protected from the sun and rain by
ample canopies, while the air was refreshed by scented fountains. The
nets designed as a protection from the wild beasts were made of golden
wire. The porticoes were gilded; the circle which divided the several
ranks of spectators was studded with a precious mosaic of beautiful
stones. The arena was strewed with the finest sand, and assumed, at
different times, the most different forms. Subterranean pipes conveyed
water into the arena. The furniture of the amphitheatre consisted of
gold, silver, and amber. The passages of ingress and egress were so
numerous that the spectators could go in and out without confusion. Only
a third part of this wonderful structure remains, and whole palaces have
been built of its spoils. [Footnote: Dyer, _Hist. of the City of
Rome_, p. 245. Gibbon, chap. 12. Montaigne, _Essays_, in. 6.
Lipsius, _de Amphitheatro_.]

[Sidenote: Rebuilding of the Capitol.]

[Sidenote: Arch of Titus.]

Another great fire which took place A.D. 80,--the same in which Titus
dedicated the Colosseum,--and which raged three days and nights,
destroyed the region of the Circus Flaminius, including some of the
finest temples of the city, and especially on the Capitoline, and
created the necessity for new improvements. These were made by Domitian,
who rebuilt the Capitol itself with greater splendor on its old site,
and erected several new edifices. Martial speaks with peculiar
admiration of the Temple of the Gens Flavia. [Footnote: Martial,
_L_., ix. Ep. 4, 35. ] He also erected that beautiful arch to his
brother Titus which still remains one of the finest monuments of the
imperial city. The Odeum, a roofed theatre, was erected by him, capable
of holding twelve thousand people. He also made many additions to his
palace on the Palatine--so lofty, that Martial, his flatterer,
described it as towering above the clouds, and Statius compared the
ceiling to the cope of heaven.

[Sidenote: Forum Trajanum.]

[Sidenote: Basilica Ulpia.]

No great improvements were made in the city until Trajan commenced his
beneficent and splendid reign. His greatest work was the Forum which
bears his name, to which allusion has been made, eleven hundred feet
long, in the centre of which was that beautiful pillar, one hundred and
twenty-eight feet high, which is still standing. The Forum, the Basilica
Ulpia, and the temple dedicated by Hadrian to Trajan, were all parts of
this magnificent structure, one of the most imposing ever built, filled
with colossal statues and surrounded with colonnades.

[Sidenote: Temple of Venus and Rome.]

[Sidenote: Mausoleum of Hadrian.]

[Sidenote: Hadrians Villa.]

None of the Roman emperors had so great a passion for building as
Hadrian, who succeeded Trajan A.D. 117. He erected a vast number of
edifices, and in his reign Rome attained its greatest height of
architectural splendor. The most remarkable among the edifices which he
built was the Temple of Venus and Rome, facing on one side the
Colosseum, and the other the Forum, on the site of the Atrium, or the
golden house of Nero. This seems to have been one of the largest of the
Roman temples, erected on an artificial terrace five hundred feet long
and three hundred broad. It was surrounded with a portico four hundred
feet by two hundred, and another portico of four hundred columns
inclosed the terrace on which the temple was built, the columns of which
were forty feet in height. The roof was covered with bronze tiles.
Ammianus Marcellinus classes this magnificent temple with the Capitoline
Temple, the Flavian Amphitheatre, and the Pantheon. The next greatest
work of Hadrian was the Mausoleum, which is now converted into the
Castle of St. Angelo, built on a platform of which each side was two
hundred and fifty-three feet in length. From the magnificent colonnade
which supported the platform on which it was built, and the successive
stories supported by arches and pillars, between which were celebrated
statues, this circular edifice, one hundred and eighty-eight feet in
diameter, must have been one of the most imposing edifices in the city.
After eighteen centuries, it still remains a monument of architectural
strength, and it served for one of the strongest fortresses in Italy
during the Middle Ages. I pass by, without notice, the villa this
emperor erected at Tivoli, the ruins of which are among the most
interesting which remain of that great age.

[Sidenote: Column of Marcus Aurelius.]

[Sidenote: Arch of Septimius Severus.]

[Sidenote: Baths of Caracalla.]

Under Hadrian Rome attained its greatest splendor, and after him, there
was a progressive decline in the arts, since the public taste was
corrupted. Still successive emperors continued to adorn the city. Marcus
Aurelius, the wisest and best of all the emperors, erected a column
similar to that of Trajan, to represent his wars with the Germanic
tribes, and this still remains; he also built a triumphal arch.
Septimius Severus erected the most beautiful of the triumphal arches, of
which the Arc de Triumph in Paris is an imitation; and Caracalla built
one of the greatest of the Roman baths, which, with the porticoes which
surrounded it, formed a square of eleven hundred feet on each side--so
enormous were these structures of luxury and utility, designed not only
for the people as a sanitary measure, but for places of gymnastic
exercises, popular lectures, and the disputations of philosophers. The
Pantheon was merely an entrance to the baths of Agrippa. The baths of
Trajan covered an area nearly as great. But those of Caracalla surpassed
them all in magnificence. Nothing was more striking to a traveler than
the painted corridors, the arched ceilings, the variegated columns, the
elaborate mosaic pavements, the immortal statues, and the exquisite
paintings which ornamented these places of luxury and pleasure. From
amid their ruins have been dug out the most priceless of the statues
which ornament the museums of Italy--the Farnese Hercules, the colossal
Florae, the Torso Farnese, the Torso Belvidere, the Atreus and Thyestes,
the Laocoon, beside granite and basaltic vases beautifully polished,
cameos, bronzes, medals, and other valuable relics of ancient art. To
supply these baths new aqueducts were built, and the treasures of the
empire expended. Those subsequently erected by Diocletian contained
three thousand two hundred marble seats, and the main hall now forms one
of the most splendid of the Roman churches.

[Sidenote: Temples and Palaces.]

[Sidenote: General aspect of the city.]

[Sidenote: What a traveler would see in a walk.]

[Sidenote: The Via Sacra.]

[Sidenote: The Velabrum.]

[Sidenote: The Fora.]

[Sidenote: View from the summit of the Capitoline Hill.]

[Sidenote: Gardens of Lucullus.]

[Sidenote: The Subura.]

[Sidenote: Circus Maximus.]

[Sidenote: View of Rome from the Capitol.]

Such is a brief view of the progress of those architectural wonders
which made Rome the most magnificent city of antiquity, and perhaps the
grandest, in its public monuments, of any city in ancient or modern
times. What a concentration of works of art on the hills, and around the
Forum, and in the Campus Martins, and other celebrated quarters! There
were temples rivaling those of Athens and Ephesus; baths covering more
ground than the Pyramids, surrounded with Corinthian columns and filled
with the choicest treasures, ransacked from the cities of Greece and
Asia; palaces in comparison with which the Tuileries and Versailles are
small; theatres which seated more people than any present public
buildings in Europe; amphitheatres more extensive and costly than
Cologne, Milan, and York Minster cathedrals combined, and seating eight
times as many people as could be crowded into St. Peter's Church;
circuses where, it is said, three hundred and eighty-five thousand
spectators could witness the games and chariot-races at a time; bridges,
still standing, which have furnished models for the most beautiful at
Paris and London; aqueducts carried over arches one hundred feet in
height, through which flowed the surplus water of distant lakes; drains
of solid masonry in which large boats could float; pillars more than one
hundred feet in height, coated with precious marbles or plates of brass,
and covered with bass-reliefs; obelisks brought from Egypt; fora and
basilicae connected together, and extending more than three thousand
feet, in length, every part of which was filled with "animated busts" of
conquerors, kings, and statesmen, poets, publicists, and philosophers;
mausoleums greater and more splendid than that Artemisia erected to the
memory of her husband; triumphal arches under which marched in stately
procession the victorious armies of the Eternal City, preceded by the
spoils and trophies of conquered empires,--such was the proud capital--
a city of palaces, a residence or nobles who were virtually kings,
enriched with the accumulated treasures of ancient civilization. Great
were the capitals of Greece and Asia, but how preeminent was Rome, since
all were subordinate to her. How bewildering and bewitching to a
traveler must have been the varied wonders of the city! Go where he
would, his eye rested on something which was both a study and a marvel.
Let him drive or walk about the suburbs, there were villas, tombs,
aqueducts looking like railroads on arches, sculptured monuments, and
gardens of surpassing beauty and luxury. Let him approach the walls--
they were great fortifications extending twenty-one miles in circuit,
according to the measurement of Ammon as adopted by Gibbon, and forty-
five miles according to other authorities. Let him enter any of the
various gates which opened into the city from the roads which radiated
to all parts of Italy--they were of monumental brass covered with bass-
reliefs, on which the victories of generals for a thousand years were
commemorated. Let him pass up the Via Appia, or the Via Flaminia, or the
Via Cabra--they were lined with temples and shops and palaces. Let him
pass through any of the crowded thoroughfares, he saw houses towering
scarcely ever less than seventy feet--as tall as those of Edinburgh in
its oldest sections. Let him pass through the varied quarters of the
city, or wards as we should now call them, he finds some fourteen
regions, as constituted by Augustus, all marked by architectural
monuments, and containing, according to Lipsius, a population larger
than London or Paris, guarded and watched by a police of ten thousand
armed men. Most of the houses in which this vast population lived,
according to Strabo, possessed pipes which gave a never-failing supply
of water from the rivers which flowed into the city through the
aqueducts and out again through the sewers into the Tiber. Let him walk
up the Via Sacra--that short street, scarcely half a mile in length--and
he passes the Flavian Amphitheatre, the Temple of Venus, and Rome, the
Arch of Titus, the temples of Peace, of Vesta, and of Castor, the Forum
Romanum, the Basilica Julia, the Arch of Severus, and the Temple of
Saturn, and stands before the majestic ascent to the Capitoline Jupiter,
with its magnificent portico and ornamented pediment, surpassing the
facade of any modern church. On his left, as he emerges from beneath the
sculptured Arch of Titus, is the Palatine Mount, nearly covered by the
palace of the Caesars, the magnificent residences of the higher nobility,
and various temples, of which that of Apollo was the most magnificent,
built by Augustus of solid white marble from Luna. Here were the palaces
of Vaccus, of Flaccus, of Cicero, of Catiline, of Scaurus, of Antonius,
of Clodius, of Agrippa, and of Hortensius. Still on his left, in the
valley between the Palatine and the Capitoline, though he cannot see it,
concealed from view by the great temples of Vesta and of Castor, and the
still greater edifice known as the Basilica Julia, is the quarter called
the Velabrum, extending to the river, where the Pons Aemilius crosses it--
a low quarter of narrow streets and tall houses where the rabble lived
and died. On his right, concealed from view by the Aedes Divi Julii and
the Forum Romanum, is that magnificent series of edifices extending from
the Temple of Peace to the Temple of Trajan, including the Basilica
Pauli, the Forum Julii, the Forum Augusti, the Forum Trajani, the
Basilica Ulpia, more than three thousand feet in length and six hundred
in breadth, almost entirely surrounded by porticoes and colonnades, and
filled with statues and pictures--on the whole the grandest series of
public buildings clustered together probably ever erected, especially if
we take in the Forum Romanum and the various temples and basilicas which
connected the whole together--a forest of marble pillars and statues. He
ascends the steps which lead from the Temple of Concord to the Temple of
Juno Moneta upon the Arx or Tarpeian Rock, on the southwestern summit of
the hill, itself one of the most beautiful temples in Rome, erected by
Camillus on the spot where the house of M. Manlius Capitolinus had
stood. Here is established the Roman mint. Near this is the temple
erected by Augustus to Jupiter Tonans and that built by Domitian to
Jupiter Gustos. But all the sacred edifices which crown the Capitoline
are subordinate to the Templum Jovis Capitolini, standing on a platform
of eight thousand square feet, and built of the richest materials. The
portico which faces the Via Sacra consists of three rows of Doric
columns, the pediment is profusely ornamented with the choicest
sculptures, the apex of the roof is surmounted by the bronze horses of
Lysippus, and the roof itself is covered with gilded tiles. The temple
has three separate cells, though covered with one roof; in front of each
stand colossal statues of the three deities to whom it is consecrated.
Here are preserved what was most sacred in the eyes of Romans, and it is
itself the richest of all the temples of the city. What a beautiful
panorama is presented to the view from the summit of this consecrated
hill, only mounted by a steep ascent of one hundred steps. To the south
is the Via Sacra extending to the Colosseum, and beyond it is the Appia
Via, lined with monuments as far as the eye can reach. Little beyond the
fora to the east is the Carinae, a fashionable quarter of beautiful shops
and houses, and still further off are the Baths of Titus, extending from
the Carinae to the Esquiline Mount. This hill, once a burial-ground, is
now covered with the house and gardens of Maecenas, and of the poets whom
he patronized. It is not rich in temples, but its gardens and groves are
beautiful. To the northeast are the Viminal and Quirinal hills, after
the Palatine the most ancient part of the city--the seat of the Sabine
population. Abounding in fanes and temples, the most splendid of which
is the Temple of Quirinus, erected originally to Romulus by Numa, but
rebuilt by Augustus, with a double row of columns on each of its sides,
seventy-six in number. Near by was the house of Atticus, and the gardens
of Sallust in the valley between the Quirinal and Pincian, afterwards
the property of the emperor. Far back on the Quirinal, near the wall of
Servius, were the Baths of Diocletian, and still further to the east the
Pretorian Camp established by Tiberius, and included within the wall of
Aurelian. To the northeast the eye lights on the Pincian Hill covered by
the gardens of Lucullus, to possess which Messalina caused the death of
Valerius Asiaticus, into whose possession they had fallen. In the valley
which lay between the fora and the Quirinal was the celebrated Subura,--
the quarter of shops, markets, and artificers,--a busy, noisy, vulgar
section, not beautiful, but full of life and enterprise and wickedness.
The eye now turns to the north, and the whole length of the Via Flaminia
is exposed to view, extending from the Capitoline to the Flaminian gate,
perfectly straight, the finest street in Rome, and parallel to the
modern Corso. It is the great highway to the north of Italy. Monuments
and temples and palaces line this celebrated street. It is spanned by
the triumphal arches of Claudius and Marcus Aurelius. To the west of it
is the Campus Martius, with its innumerable objects of interest,--the
Baths of Agrippa, the Pantheon, the Thermae Alexandrinae, the Column of
Marcus Aurelius, and the Mausoleum of Augustus. Beneath the Capitoline
on the west, toward the river, is the Circus Flaminius, the Portico of
Octavius, the Theatre of Balbus, and the Theatre of Pompey, where forty
thousand spectators were accommodated. Stretching beyond the Thermae
Alexandrinae, near the Pantheon, is the magnificent bridge which crosses
the Tiber, built by Hadrian when he founded his Mausoleum, to which it
leads, still standing under the name of the Ponte S. Angelo. The eye
takes in eight or nine bridges over the Tiber, some of wood, but
generally of stone, of beautiful masonry, and crowned with statues. At
the foot of the Capitoline, toward the southwest, are the Portico of
Octavius and the Theatre of Marcellus, near the Pons Cestius. Still
further southwest, between the Capitoline and the Aventine, in a low
valley, are the Velabrum and the Forum Boarium, once a marsh, but now
rich in temples and monuments, among which are those of Hercules Fortuna
and Mater Matuta. There are no less than four temples consecrated to
Hercules in the Forum Boarium, one of the most celebrated places in
Rome, devoted to trade and commerce. Beyond still, in the valley between
the Palatine and the Aventine, is the great Circus Maximus, founded by
the early Tarquin. It is the largest open space inclosed by walls and
porticoes in the city. It seats three hundred and eighty-five thousand
people. How vast a city, which can spare nearly four hundred thousand of
its population to see the chariot-races! Beyond is the Aventine itself.
This also is rich in legendary monuments and in the palaces of the
great, though originally a plebeian quarter. Here dwelt Trajan, before
he was emperor, and Ennius the poet, and Paula, the friend of St.
Jerome. Beneath the Aventine, and a little south of the Circus Maximus,
west of the Appian Way, are the great baths of Caracalla, the ruins of
which, next to those of the Colosseum, made on my mind the strongest
impression of any thing that pertains to antiquity, though these were
not so large as those of Diocletian. The view south takes in the Caelian
Hill, the ancient residence of Tullus Hostilius. The beautiful Temple of
Divus Claudius, the Arch of Dolabella, the Macellum Magnum,--a market
founded by Nero,--the Castra Peregrina, the Temple of Isis, the Campus
Martialis, are among the most conspicuous objects of interest. This hill
is the residence of many distinguished Romans. It is covered with
palaces. Among them is the house of Claudius Centumalus--so high, that
the augurs command him to lower it. It towers ten or twelve stories into
the air. Scarcely inferior in size is the house of Mamura, whose
splendor is described by Pliny. Here also is the house of Annius Verus,
the father of Marcus Aurelius, surrounded with gardens. But grander than
any of these palaces is that of Plautius Lateranus, the _egregioe
Lateranorum oedes_, which became imperial property in the time of
Nero, and on whose site stands the basilica of St. John Lateran,--the
gift of Constantine to the bishop of Rome,--one of the most ancient of
the Christian churches, in which, for fifteen hundred years, daily
services have been performed.

[Sidenote: Population.]

[Sidenote: Number of houses.]

Such are the objects of interest and grandeur which strike the eye as it
is turned toward the various quarters of the city. But these are only
the more important. The seven hills, appearing considerably higher than
at the present day, as the valleys are raised fifteen or twenty feet
above their ancient level, are covered with temples, palaces, and
gardens; the valleys are densely crowded with shops, houses, baths, and
theatres. The houses rise frequently to the tenth platform or story. The
suburban population, beyond the walls, is probably greater than that
within. The city, virtually, contains between three and four millions or
people. Lipsius estimates four millions as the population, including
slaves, women, children, and strangers. Though this estimate is regarded
as too large by Merivale and others, yet how enormous must have been the
number of the people when there were nine thousand and twenty-five
baths, and when those of Diocletian could accommodate three thousand two
hundred people at a time. The wooden theatre of Scaurus contained eighty
thousand seats; that of Marcellus would seat twenty thousand; the
Colosseum would seat eighty-seven thousand, and give standing space for
twenty-two thousand more. The Circus Maximus would hold three hundred
and eighty-five thousand spectators. If only one person out of four of
the free population witnessed the games and spectacles at a time, we
thus must have four millions of people altogether in the city. The
Aurelian walls are now only thirteen miles in circumference, but Lipsius
estimates the circumference at forty-five miles, and Vopiscus nearly
fifty. The diameter of the city must have been eleven miles, since
Strabo tells us that the actual limit of Rome was at a place between the
fifth and sixth milestone from the column of Trajan in the Forum--the
central and most conspicuous object in the city except the
capitol. [Footnote: Strabo, lib. v. ch. 3.] Even in the sixth century,
after Rome had been sacked and plundered by Goths and Vandals, Zacharia,
a traveler, asserts that there were three hundred and eighty-four
spacious streets, eighty golden statues of the gods; sixty-six large
ivory statues of the gods; forty-six thousand six hundred and three
houses; seventeen thousand and ninety-seven palaces; thirteen thousand
and fifty-two fountains; three thousand seven hundred and eighty-five
bronze statues of emperors and generals; twenty-two great horses in
bronze; two colossi; two spiral columns; thirty-one theatres; eleven
amphitheatres; nine thousand and twenty-six baths; two thousand three
hundred shops of perfumers; two thousand and ninety-one
prisons. [Footnote: St. Ampere, _Hist. Romaine a Rome_.] This seems
to be incredible. "But," says Story, "Augustus divided the city into
eighteen regions: each region contained twenty-two vici; each vicus
contained about two hundred and thirty dwelling-houses, so that there
must have been seventy-five thousand houses; of these houses, seventeen
thousand were palaces, or domus. If each contained two hundred persons,
(and four hundred slaves were maintained in a single palace,) reckoning
family, freedmen, and slaves, we have three millions four hundred
thousand people, and supposing the remaining fifty-eight thousand houses
to have contained twenty-five persons each, we have in them one million
four hundred and fifty thousand, which would give an entire population
of four millions eight hundred and fifty thousand." If Mr. Merivale's
estimate of seven hundred thousand is correct, then the Colosseum would
hold nearly one in six of the whole population, which is incredible.
Indeed, it is probable that even four millions was under than above the
true estimate, which would make Rome the most populous city ever seen
upon our globe. Nor is it extravagant to suppose this. The city
numbered, according to the census, eighty thousand people in the year
197; and in 683 it had risen to four hundred and fifty thousand. Is it
strange it should have numbered four millions in the time of Augustus,
or even six millions in the time of Arelian, when we bear in mind that
it was the political and social centre of a vast empire, and that empire
the world? If London contains three millions at the present day, and
Paris two millions, why should not a capital which had no rival, and
which controlled at least one hundred and twenty millions of people? So
that Pliny was not probably wrong when he said, "_Si quis altitudinem
tectorum addat, dignam profecto oestimationem concipiat, fateatur qui
nullius urbis magnitudinem potuisse ei comparare._" "If any one
considers the height of the roofs, so as to form a just estimate, he
will confess that no city could be compared with it for magnitude."

[Sidenote: The monuments which survive.]

[Sidenote: Games of Titus.]

Modern writers, taking London and Paris for their measure of material
civilization, seem unwilling to admit that Rome could have reached such
a pitch of glory and wealth and power. To him who stands within the
narrow limits of the Forum, as it now appears, it seems incredible that
it could have been the centre of a much larger city than Europe can now
boast of. Grave historians are loth to compromise their dignity and
character for truth, by admitting statements which seem, to men of
limited views, to be fabulous, and which transcend modern experience.
But we should remember that most of the monuments of ancient Rome have
entirely disappeared. Nothing remains of the Palace of the Caesars, which
nearly covered the Palatine Hill; little of the fora which, connected
together, covered a space twice as large as that inclosed by the palaces
of the Louvre and Tuileries with all their galleries and courts; almost
nothing of the glories of the Capitoline Hill; and little comparatively
of those Thermae which were a mile in circuit. But what does remain
attests an unparalleled grandeur--the broken pillars of the Forum; the
lofty columns of Trajan and Marcus Aurelius; the Pantheon, lifting its
spacious dome two hundred feet into the air; the mere vestibule of the
Baths of Agrippa; the triumphal arches of Titus and Trajan and
Constantine; the bridges which span the Tiber; the aqueducts which cross
the Campagna; the Cloaca Maxima, which drained the marshes and lakes of
the infant city; but above all, the Colosseum. What glory and shame are
associated with that single edifice! That alone, if nothing else
remained of Pagan antiquity, would indicate a grandeur and a folly such
as cannot now be seen on earth. It reveals a wonderful skill in masonry,
and great architectural strength; it shows the wealth and resources of
rulers who must have had the treasures of the world at their command; it
indicates an enormous population, since it would seat all the male
adults of the city of New York; it shows the restless passions of the
people for excitement, and the necessity on the part of government of
yielding to this taste. What leisure and indolence marked a city which
could afford to give up so much time to the demoralizing sports! What
facilities for transportation were afforded, when so many wild beasts
could be brought to the capital from the central parts of Africa without
calling out unusual comment! How imperious a populace that compels the
government to provide such expensive pleasures! The games of Titus, on
its dedication, last one hundred days, and five thousand wild beasts are
slaughtered in the arena. The number of the gladiators who fought
surpasses belief. At the triumph of Trajan over the Dacians, ten
thousand gladiators were exhibited, and the emperor himself presides
under a gilded canopy, surrounded by thousands of his lords. Underneath
the arena, strewed with yellow sand and sawdust, is a solid pavement so
closely cemented that it can be turned into an artificial lake on which
naval battles are fought. But it is the conflict of gladiators which
most deeply stimulates the passions of the people. The benches are
crowded with eager spectators, and the voices of one hundred thousand
are raised in triumph or rage as the miserable victims sink exhausted in
the bloody sport.

[Sidenote: Roman triumphs.]

But it is not the gladiatorial sports of the amphitheatre which most
strikingly attest the greatness and splendor of the city; nor the
palaces, in which as many as four hundred slaves are sometimes
maintained as domestic servants, twelve hundred in number according to
the lowest estimate, but probably five times as numerous, since every
senator, every knight, and every rich man was proud to possess a
residence which would attract attention; nor the temples, which numbered
four hundred and twenty-four, most of which were of marble, filled with
statues, the contributions of ages, and surrounded with groves; nor the
fora and basilicae, with their porticoes, statues, and pictures, covering
more space than any cluster of public buildings in Europe, a mile and a
half in circuit; nor the baths, nearly as large, still more completely
filled with works of art; nor the Circus Maximus, where more people
witnessed the chariot races at a time than are nightly assembled in all
the places of public amusement in Paris, London, and New York combined--
more than could be seated in all the cathedrals of England and France;
it is not these which most impressively make us feel that Rome was the
mistress of the world and the centre of all civilization. The triumphal
processions of the conquering generals were still more exciting to
behold, for these appeal more directly to the imagination, and excite
those passions which urged the Romans to a career of conquest from
generation to generation. No military review of modern times equaled
those gorgeous triumphs, even as no scenic performance compares with the
gladiatorial shows. The. sun has never shone upon any human assemblage
so magnificent and so grand, so imposing and yet so guilty. And we
recall the picture of it with solemn awe as it moves along the Via Sacra
and ascends the Capitoline Hill, or passes through the theatres of
Pompey and Marcellus, that all the people might witness the brilliant
spectacle. Not only were displayed the spoils of conquered kingdoms, and
the triumphal cars of generals, but the whole military strength of the
capital. An army of one hundred thousand men, flushed with victory,
follows the gorgeous procession of nobles and princes. The triumph of
Aurelian, on his return from the East, gives us some idea of the
grandeur of that ovation to conquerors. "The pomp was opened by twenty
elephants, four royal tigers, and two hundred of the most curious
animals from every climate, north, south, east, and west. These were
followed by one thousand six hundred gladiators, devoted to the cruel
amusement of the amphitheatre. Then were displayed the arms and ensigns
of conquered nations, the plate and wardrobe of the Syrian queen. Then
ambassadors from all parts of the earth--all remarkable in their rich
dresses, with their crowns and offerings. Then the captives taken in the
various wars, Goths, Vandals, Samaritans, Alemanni, Franks, Gauls,
Syrians, and Egyptians, each marked by their national costume. Then the
Queen of the East, the beautiful Zenobia, confined by fetters of gold,
and fainting under the weight of jewels, preceding the beautiful chariot
in which she had hoped to enter the gates of Rome. Then the chariot of
the Persian king. Then the triumphal car of Aurelian himself, drawn by
elephants. Finally the most illustrious of the Senate, the people, and
the army closed the solemn procession, amid the acclamations of the
people, and the sound of musical instruments. It took from dawn of day
until the ninth hour for the procession to pass to the capital, and the
festival was protracted by theatrical representations, the games of the
circus, the hunting of wild beasts, combats of gladiators, and naval
engagements. Liberal donations were presented to the army, and a portion
of the spoils dedicated to the gods. All the temples glittered with the
offerings of ostentatious piety, and the Temple of the Sun received
fifteen thousand pounds of gold. The soldiers and the citizens were then
surfeited with meat and wine. The disbanded soldiery thronged the
amphitheatre, and yelled their fiendish applause at the infernal games,--
the gorged robbers of the world, drunk in a festival of hell,"
[Footnote: Henry Giles.]--a representation of war as terrible as war
itself, compensating to the Roman people the massacres which they could
not see.

If any thing more were wanted to give us an idea of Roman magnificence,
we would turn our eyes from public monuments, demoralizing games, and
grand processions; we would forget the statues in brass and marble,
which outnumbered the living inhabitants, so numerous that one hundred
thousand have been recovered and still embellish Italy, and would
descend into the lower sphere of material life--to those things which
attest luxury and taste--to ornaments, dresses, sumptuous living, and
rich furniture. The art of working metals and cutting precious stones
surpassed any thing known at the present day. In the decoration of
houses, in social entertainments, in cookery, the Romans were
remarkable. The mosaics, signet rings, cameos, bracelets, bronzes,
chains, vases, couches, banqueting tables, lamps, chariots, colored
glass, gildings, mirrors, mattresses, cosmetics, perfumes, hair dyes,
silk robes, potteries, all attest great elegance and beauty. The tables
of thuga root and Delian bronze were as expensive as the sideboards of
Spanish walnut, so much admired in the great exhibition at London. Wood
and ivory were carved as exquisitely as in Japan and China. Mirrors were
made of polished silver. Glass-cutters could imitate the colors of
precious stones so well, that the Portland vase, from the tomb of
Alexander Severus, was long considered as a genuine sardonix. Brass
could be hardened so as to cut stone. The palace of Nero glittered with
gold and jewels. Perfumes and flowers were showered from ivory ceilings.
The halls of Heliogabulus were hung with cloth of gold, enriched with
jewels. His beds were silver, and his tables of gold. Tiberius gave a
million of sesterces for a picture for his bed-room. A banquet dish of
Drusillus weighed five hundred pounds of silver. The cups of Drusus were
of gold. Tunics were embroidered with the figures of various animals.
Sandals were garnished with precious stones. Paulina wore jewels, when
she paid visits, valued at $800,000. Drinking-cups were engraved with
scenes from the poets. Libraries were adorned with busts, and presses of
rare woods. Sofas were inlaid with tortoise-shell, and covered with
gorgeous purple. The Roman grandees rode in gilded chariots, bathed in
marble baths, dined from golden plate, drank from crystal cups, slept on
beds of down, reclined on luxurious couches, wore embroidered robes, and
were adorned with precious stones. They ransacked the earth and the seas
for rare dishes for their banquets, and ornamented their houses with
carpets from Babylon, onyx cups from Bythinia, marbles from Numidia,
bronzes from Corinth, statues from Athens--whatever, in short, was
precious or rare or curious in the most distant countries. The luxuries
of the bath almost exceed belief, and on the walls were magnificent
frescoes and paintings, exhibiting an inexhaustible productiveness in
landscape and mythological scenes, executed in lively colors. From the
praises of Cicero, Seneca, and Pliny, and other great critics, we have a
right to infer that painting was as much prized as statuary, and equaled
it in artistic excellence, although so little remains of antiquity from
which we can form an enlightened judgment. We certainly infer from
designs on vases great skill in drawing, and from the excavations of
Pompeii, the most beautiful colors. The walls of the great hall of the
baths of Titus represent flowers, birds, and animals, drawn with
wonderful accuracy. In the long corridor of these baths the ceiling is
painted with colors which are still fresh, and Raphael is said to have
studied the frescoes with admiration, even as Michael Angelo found in
the Pantheon a model for the dome of St. Peter's, and in the statues
which were dug up from the ruins of the baths, studies for his own
immortal masterpieces.

Thus every thing which gilds the material wonders of our day with glory
and splendor, also marked the old capitol of the world. That which is
most prized by us, distinguished to an eminent degree the Roman
grandees. In an architectural point of view no modern city approaches
Rome. It contained more statues than all the Museums of Europe. It had
every thing which we have except machinery. It surpassed every modern
capitol in population. It was richer than any modern city, since the
people were not obliged to toil for their daily bread. The poor were fed
by the government, and had time and leisure for the luxuries of the bath
and the excitements of the amphitheatre. The citizen nobles owned whole
provinces. Even Paula could call a whole city her own. Rich senators, in
some cases, were the proprietors of twenty thousand slaves. Their
incomes were known to be 1000 pounds sterling a day, when gold and
silver were worth four times as much as at the present day. Rome was
made up of these citizen kings and their dependants, for most of the
senators had been, at some time, governors of provinces, which they
rifled and robbed. In Rome were accumulated the choicest treasures of
the world. Her hills were covered with the palaces of the proudest
nobles that ever walked the earth, Rome was the centre, and the glory,
and the pride of all the nations of antiquity. It seemed impossible that
such a city could ever be taken by enemies, or fall into decay.
"_Quando cadet Roma cadet et mundus_," said the admiring Saxons
three hundred years after the injuries inflicted by Goths and Vandals.
Nor has Rome died. Never has she entirely passed into the hands of her
enemies. A hundred times on the verge of annihilation, she was never
annihilated. She never accepted the stranger's yoke--she never was
permanently subjected to the barbarian. She continued to be Roman after
the imperial presence had departed. She was Roman when fires, and
inundations, and pestilence, and famine, and barbaric soldiers desolated
the city. She was Roman when the Pope held Christendom in a base
subserviency. She was Roman when Rienzi attempted to revive the virtues
of the heroic ages, and when Michael Angelo restored the wonders of
Apollodorus. And Roman that city will remain, whether as the home of
princes, or the future capitol of the kings of Italy, or the resort of
travelers, or the school of artists, or the seat of a spiritual
despotism which gains strength as political and temporal power passes
away before the ideas of the new races and the new civilization.



The most valuable book of reference for this chapter is the late work of
Dr. Dyer, author of the article "Roma" in Smith's Dictionary. In fact
this chapter is a mere compilation of that elaborate work, ("History of
the City of Rome,") which may be said to be exhaustive. Mabillon and
Montfaucon--two French Benedictines--rendered great service in the
seventeenth century to Roman topography. Edward Burton and Richard
Burgess wrote descriptions of Roman antiquities, now superseded by the
writings of those great German scholars, who made a new epoch of Roman
topography--Niebuhr, Bunsen, Platner, Gerhard, and Rostell, who,
however, have succeeded in throwing doubt on many things supposed to be
established. One of the most learned treatises on ancient Rome is the
celebrated _Handbuch_ of Becker. Stephano Piale and Luigi Canina
are the most approved of the modern Italian antiquarians.

[Relocated Footnote:

[Sidenote: Mausoleum of Augustus.]

[Sidenote: Those who were buried in it.]

"This enduring structure, which survived the conflagrations, the wars,
and the anarchies of fifteen hundred years, consisted of a large tumulus
of earth, raised on a lofty basement of white marble, and covered on the
summit with evergreens in the manner of a hanging garden. On the summit
was a bronze statue of Augustus himself, and beneath the tumulus was a
large central hall, round which ran a range of fourteen sepulchral
chambers, opening into this common vestibule. At the entrance were two
Egyptian obelisks, fifty feet in height, and all around was an extensive
grove divided into walks and terraces. The young Marcellus, whose fate
was bewailed by Virgil, was its first occupant. Here was placed Octavia,
the neglected wife of Antony, and Agrippa, the builder of the Parthenon,
and Livia, the beloved wife of Augustus, and beside them the first
imperator himself. Here were the poisoned ashes of the noble Germanicus,
borne from Syria; here the young Drusus, the pride of the Ciaudian
family, and at his side the second Drusus, the son of Tiberius. Here
reposed the dust of Agrippina, after years of exile, by the side of her
husband, Germanicus; here Nero and his mother, Agrippina, and his
victim, Britannicus; here Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, and all the
other Caesars to Nerva. Then the marble door was closed, for the
sepulchral cells were full."--Story's _Roba di Roma_.]




CHAPTER IV.

ART IN THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


In my enumeration of the external glories of the Roman world, I only
attempted to glance at those wonders which were calculated to strike a
traveler with admiration. Among these were the great developments of
Art, displayed in architecture, in statuary, and in painting. But I only
enumerated the more remarkable objects of attraction; I did not attempt
to show the genius displayed in them. But ancient art, as a proud
creation of the genius of man, demands additional notice. We wish to
know to what heights the Romans soared in that great realm of beauty and
grace and majesty.

[Sidenote: Origins and principles of art.]

[Sidenote: Fascinations of art.]

[Sidenote: Development of art.]

[Sidenote: Glory of art.]

The aesthetic glories of art are among the grandest triumphs of
civilization, and attest as well as demand no ordinary force of genius.
Art claims to be creative, and to be based on eternal principles of
beauty, and artists in all ages have claimed a proud niche in the temple
of fame. They rank with poets and musicians, and even philosophers and
historians, in the world's regard. They are favored sons of inspiration,
urged to their work by ideal conceptions of the beautiful and the true.
Their productions are material, but the spirit which led to their
creation is of the soul and mind. Imagination is tasked to the uttermost
to portray sentiments and passions. The bust is "animated," and the
temple, though built of marble, and by man, is called "religious." Art
appeals to every cultivated mind, and excites poetic feelings. It is
impressive even to every order, class, and condition of men, not,
perhaps, in its severest forms, since the taste must be cultivated to
appreciate its higher beauties, but to a certain extent. The pyramids
and the granite image temples of Egypt must have filled even the rude
people with a certain awe and wonder, even as the majestic cathedrals of
mediaeval Europe, with their imposing pomps, stimulated the poetic
conceptions of the Gothic nations. Art is popular. The rude savage
admires a gaudy picture even as the cultivated Leo X. or Cardinal
Mazarini bent in admiration before the great creations of Raphael or
Domenichino. Art appeals to the senses as well as to the intellect and
the heart, and is capable of inspiring the passions as well as the
loftiest emotions and sentiments. The Grecian mind was trained to the
contemplation of aesthetic beauty in temples, in statues, and in
pictures; and the great artist was rewarded with honors and material
gains. The love of art is easier kindled than the love of literary
excellence, and is more generally diffused. It is coeval with songs and
epic poetry. Before Socrates or Plato speculated on the great certitudes
of philosophy, temples and statues were the pride and boast of their
countrymen. And as the taste for art precedes the taste for letters, so
it survives, when the literature has lost its life and freshness. The
luxurious citizens of Rome ornamented their baths and palaces with
exquisite pictures and statues long after genius ceased to soar to the
heights of philosophy and poetry. The proudest triumphs of genius are in
a realm which art can never approach, yet the wonders of art are still
among the great triumphs of civilization. Zeuxis or Praxiteles may not
have equaled Homer or Plato in profundity of genius, but it was only a
great age which could have produced a Zeuxis or Praxiteles. I cannot
place Raphael on so exalted a pinnacle as Luther, or Bacon, or Newton,
and yet his fame will last as long as civilization shall exist. The
creations of the chisel will ever be held in reverence by mankind, and
probably in proportion as wealth, elegance, and material prosperity
shall flourish. In an important sense, Corinth was as wonderful as
Athens, although to Athens will be assigned the highest place in the
ancient world. It was art rather than literature or philosophy which was
the glory of Rome in the period of her decline. As great capitals become
centres of luxury and display, artists will be rewarded and honored. The
pride of a commercial metropolis is in those material wonders which
appeal to the senses, and which wealth can purchase. A rich merchant can
give employment to the architect, when he would be disinclined to reward
the critic or the historian. Even where liberty and lofty aspirations
for truth and moral excellence have left a state, the arts suffer but
little decline. The grandest monuments of Rome date to the imperial
regime, not to the republican sway. When the voice of a Cicero was mute,
the Flavian amphitheatre arose in its sublime proportions. Imperial
despotism is favorable to the adornment of Paris and St. Petersburg,
even as wealth and luxury will beautify New York. When the early lights
of the Church were unheeded in the old capitals of the world, new
temples and palaces were the glory of the state. Art was the first to be
revived of the trophies of the old civilization, and it will be the last
to be relinquished, by those whom civilization has enriched. Art excites
no dangerous passions or sentiments in a decaying monarchy, and it is a
fresh and perpetual pleasure, not merely to the people, but to the
arbiters of taste and fashion. The Popes rewarded artists when they
crushed reformers, and persecuted inquiring genius. The developments of
art appeal to material life and interests rather than to the spiritual
and eternal. St. Paul scarcely alludes to the material wonders of the
cities he visited, even as Luther was insensible to the ornaments of
Italy in his absorbing desire for the spiritual and moral welfare of
society. Art is purely the creation of man. It receives no inspiration
from Heaven; and yet the principles on which it is based are eternal and
unchangeable, and when it is made to be the handmaid of virtue, it is
capable of exciting the loftiest sentiments. So pure, so exalted, and so
wrapt are the feelings which arise from the contemplation of a great
picture or statue, that we sometimes ascribe a religious force to the
art itself, while all that is divine springs from the conception of the
artist, and all that is divine in his conception arises from sentiments
independent of his art, as he is stimulated by emotions of religion, or
patriotism, or public virtue, and which he could never have embodied had
he not been a good man, rather than a great artist, or, at least,
affected by sentiments which he learned from other sources. There can be
no doubt that, through the vehicle of art, the grandest and noblest
sentiments may be expressed. Hence artists may be great benefactors; yet
sometimes their works are demoralizing, as they appeal to perverted
taste and passions. This was especially true in the later days of Rome,
when artists sought to please their corrupt but wealthy patrons. The
great artists of Greece, however, had in view a lofty ideal of beauty
and grace which they sought to realize without reference to profit, or
worldly advantage, or utilitarian necessities. Art, when true and
exalted, as it sometimes is, and always should be, has its end in
itself. Like virtue, it is its own reward. Michael Angelo worked,
preoccupied and wrapt, without the stimulus of even praise, even as
Dante lived in the visions to which his imagination gave form and
reality. Art is therefore self-sustained, unselfish, lofty. It is the
soul going forth triumphant over external circumstances, jubilant and
melodious even in poverty and neglect, rising above the evils of life in
its absorbing contemplation of ideal loveliness. The fortunate accidents
of earth are nothing to the true artist, striving to reach his ideal of
excellence,--no more than carpets and chairs are to a great woman pining
for sympathy or love. And it is only when there is this soul-longing to
reach the excellence it has conceived for itself alone that great works
have been produced. The sweetest strains of music sometimes come from
women where no one listens to their melodies. Nor does a great artist
seek or need commiseration, if ever so unfortunate in worldly
circumstances. He may be sad and sorrowful, but only in the profound
seriousness of superior knowledge, in that isolation to which all genius
is doomed.

[Sidenote: Great artists labor from inspiration.]

We have reason to believe that the great artists of antiquity lived, as
did the Ionic philosophers, in their own glorious realms of thought and
feeling, which the world could neither understand nor share. Their ideas
of grace and beauty were realized to the highest degree ever known on
earth. They were expressed in their temples, their statues, and their
pictures. They did not live for utilities. When art became a utility, it
degenerated. It became more pretentious, artificial, complicated,
elaborate, ornamental even, but it lacked genius, the simplicity of
power, the glory of originality. The horses of the sun cannot be made to
go round in a mill. The spiritual must keep within its own seclusion, in
its inner temple of mystery and meditation.

[Sidenote: Grecian art consecrated to Paganism.]

[Sidenote: Greatness and beauty of Grecian art.]

[Sidenote: Grecian admiration of art.]

Grecian art was consecrated to Paganism, and could not therefore soar
beyond what Paganism revealed. It did not typify those exalted
sentiments which even a Gothic cathedral portrayed--sacrifice; the man
on the cross; the man in the tomb; the man ascending to heaven. Nor did
it paint, like Raphael, etherial beauty, such as was expressed in the
mother of our Lord, her whom all generations shall bless, _regina
angelorum, mater divinae gratiae_. But whatever has been reached by the
unaided powers of man, it reproduced and consecrated, and it realized
the highest conceptions of beauty and grace that have ever been
represented. All that the mind and the soul could, by their inherent
force, reach, it has attained. Modern civilization has no prouder
triumphs than those achieved by the artists of Pagan antiquity in those
things which pertain to beauty and grace. Grecian artists have been the
schoolmasters of all nations and all ages in architecture, sculpture,
and painting. How far they themselves were original we cannot decide,
although they were probably somewhat indebted to the Assyrians and
Egyptians. But they struck out so new a style, and so different from the
older monuments of Asia and Egypt, that we consider them the great
creators of art. But whether original or not, they have never been
surpassed. In some respects their immortal productions remain objects of
hopeless imitation. In the realization of ideas of beauty which are
eternal, like those on which Plato built his system of philosophy, they
reached absolute perfection. And hence we infer that art can flourish
under Pagan as well as Christian influences. We can go no higher than
those ancient Pagans in one of the proudest fields of civilization; for
art has as sincere and warm admirers as it had in Grecian and Roman
times, but the limit of excellence has been reached. It is the mission
of our age to apply creative genius to enterprises and works which have
not been tried, if any thing new is to be found under the sun. Nor was
it the number and extent of the works of art among the Greeks and
Romans, nor their perfection, which made art so distinguishing an
element of the old civilization. It was the spirit of the age, the
absorption of the public mind, the great prominence which art had in the
eyes of the people. Art was to the Greeks what tournaments and churches
were to the men of the Middle Ages, what the Reformation was to Germany
and England in the sixteenth century, what theories of political rights
were to the era of the French Revolution, what mechanical inventions to
abridge human labor are to us. The creation of a great statue was an
era, an object of popular interest--the subject of universal comment. It
kindled popular inspirations. It was the great form of progress in which
that age rejoiced. Public benefactors erected temples, and lavished upon
them the superfluous wealth of the State. And public benefactors, in
turn, had statues erected to their memory by their grateful admirers.
The genius of the age expressed itself in marble histories. And these
histories stand in the mystery of absolute perfection--the glory and the
characteristic of a great and peculiar people.

[Sidenote: Principles of art.]

[Sidenote: Devotion of the Greeks for Art.]

Much has been written on those principles upon which art is founded, and
great ingenuity displayed. But treatises on taste, on beauty, on grace,
and other perceptions of intellectual pleasure, are not very
satisfactory, and must be necessarily indefinite. In what does beauty
consist? Do we arrive at any clearer conceptions of it by definitions?
Whether beauty, the chief glory of the fine arts, consists in certain
arrangements and proportions of the parts to a whole, or in the fitness
of means to an end, or is dependent on associations which excite
pleasure, or is a revelation of truth, or is an appeal to sensibilities,
or is an imitation of Nature, or the realization of ideal excellence, it
is difficult to settle and almost useless to inquire. "Metaphysics,
mathematics, music, and philosophy have been called in to analyze,
define, demonstrate, and generalize." [Footnote: Cleghorn, _Ancient
and Modern Art_, vol. i. p. 67.] Great writers have written ingenious
treatises, like Burke, Alison, and Stewart. Beauty, according to Plato,
is the contemplation of mind; Leibnitz maintained it consists in
perfection; Diderot referred beauty to the idea of relation; Blondel
asserted it was harmonic proportions; Peter Leigh speaks of it as the
music of the eye. Yet everybody understands what beauty is, and that it
is derived from Nature, agreeable to the purest models which Nature
presents. Such was the ideal of Phidias. Such was it to the minds of the
Greeks, who united every advantage, physical and mental, for the
perfection of art. Nor could art have been so wonderfully developed had
it not been for the influence which the great poets, orators,
dramatists, historians, and philosophers exercised on the inspiration of
the artists. Phidias, being asked how he conceived the idea of his
Olympian Jupiter, answered by repeating a passage of Homer. We can
scarcely conceive of the enthusiasm which the Greeks exhibited in the
cultivation of art. Hence it has obtained an ascendency over that of all
other nations. Roman art was the continuation of the Grecian. The Romans
appreciated and rewarded Grecian artists. They adopted their
architecture, their sculpture, and their paintings; and, though art
never attained the estimation and dignity in Rome that it did in Greece,
it still can boast of a great development. But, inasmuch as all the
great models were Grecian, and appropriated and copied by the Romans,--
inasmuch as the great wonders of the "Eternal City" were made by
Greeks,--we cannot treat of Roman art in distinction from Grecian. And
as I wish to show simply the triumph of Pagan genius in the realm of
art, and most of the immortal creations of the great artists were
transported to Rome, and adorned Rome, it is within my province to go
where they were originally found.

  "Tu, regere imperio populos, Romane, memento!
  Hae tibi erunt artes."

[Sidenote: Art first impressive in achitecture.]

The first development of art was in architecture, not merely among the
Greeks, but among the older nations. Although it refers, in a certain
sense, to all buildings, yet it is ordinarily restricted to those
edifices in which we recognize the principle of beauty, such as
symmetrical arrangement, and attractive ornaments, like pillars,
cornices, and sculptured leaves.

The earliest buildings were houses to protect men from the inclemencies
of the weather, and built without much regard to beauty; but it is in
temples for the worship of God, that architecture lays claim to dignity.
It was the result of devotional feelings; nor is there a single instance
of supreme excellence in art being reached, which was not sacred, and
connected with reverential tendencies. In the erection and decoration of
sacred buildings there was a profound sentiment that they were to be the
sanctuaries of God, and genius was stimulated by pious emotions. In
India, in Egypt, in Greece, in Italy, the various temples all originated
in blended superstition and devotion. Nor did the edifice, erected for
religious worship, reach its culminating height of beauty and grandeur
until that earnest and profoundly religious epoch which felt as injuries
the insults offered to the tomb which covered the remains of the Saviour
of the world. Then arose those hoary and Gothic vaults of Cologne and
Westminster, the only modern structures which would probably have called
out the admiration of an ancient Greek.

[Sidenote: Egyptian architecture.]

[Sidenote: Monuments of Egypt.]

[Sidenote: Temple of Carnack.]

[Sidenote: Features of Egyptian art.]

But architecture is conventional, and demands a knowledge of its system
and a mind informed as to the principles on which it depends for beauty.
Hence, in the oldest temples of India and Egypt, there was probably
vastness, without elegance or even embellishment. But no nation ever
left structures that, in extent and grandeur, can compare with those of
ancient Egypt; and these were chiefly temples. Nothing remains of the
ancient monuments of Thebes but the ruins of edifices consecrated to the
deity--neither bridges, nor quays, nor baths, nor theatres. It was when
the Israelites were oppressed by Pharaoh that the great city of
Heliopolis, which the Greeks called Thebes, arose, with its hundred
gates, and stately public buildings, and magnificent temples. The ruins
of these attest grandeur and vastness. They were built of stone, in huge
blocks, and we are still at a loss to comprehend how such heavy stones
could have been transported and erected. All the monuments of the
Pharaohs are wonders of science and art, especially such as appear in
the ruins of Carnack--a temple formerly designated as that of Jupiter
Ammon. It was in the time of Sesostris, or Rameses the Great, the first
of the Pharaohs of the nineteenth dynasty, that architecture in Egypt
reached its greatest development. Then we find the rectangular cut
blocks of stone in parallel courses, and the heavy piers, and the
cylindrical column, with its bell-shaped capital, and the bold and
massive rectangular architraves extending from pier to pier and column
to column, surmounted by a deep covered coping or cornice. But the
imposing architecture of Egypt was chiefly owing to the vast proportions
of the public buildings. It was not produced by beauty of proportion, or
graceful embellishments. It was designed to awe the people, and kindle
sentiments of wonder and astonishment. So far as this end was
contemplated, it was nobly reached. Even to this day the traveller
stands in admiring amazement before those monuments which were old three
thousand years ago. No structures have been so enduring as the Pyramids.
No ruins are more extensive and majestic than those of Thebes. The
temple of Carnack and the palace of Rameses the Great, were probably the
most imposing ever built by man. This temple was built of blocks of
stone seventy feet in length, on a platform one thousand feet long and
three hundred wide, with pillars sixty feet in height. But this and
other structures did not possess that unity of design, which marked the
Grecian temples. Alleys of colossal sphinxes form the approach. At
Carnack the alley was six thousand feet long, and before the main body
of the edifice stand two obelisks commemorative of the dedication. The
principal structures do not follow the straight line, but begin with
pyramidical towers which flank the gateways. Then follows, usually, a
court surrounded with colonnades, subordinate temples, and houses for
the priests. A second pylon, or pyramidical tower, now leads to the
interior and most considerable part of the temple, a portico inclosed
with walls, which only receives light through the entablature or
openings in the roof. Adjoining to this is the cella of the temple,
without columns, inclosed by several walls, often divided into various
small chambers, with monolith receptacles for idols or mummies or
animals. The columns stand within the walls. The Egyptians had no
perpetual temples. The colonnade is not, as among the Greeks, an
expansion of the temple; it is merely the wall with apertures. The
walls, composed of square blocks, are perpendicular only on the inside,
and beveled externally, so that the thickness at the bottom sometimes
amounts to twenty-four feet, and thus the whole building assumes a
pyramidical form, the fundamental principle of Egyptian architecture.
The columns are more slender than the early Doric, are placed close
together, and have bases of circular plinths; the shaft diminishes, and
is ornamented with perpendicular or oblique furrows, but not fluted like
Grecian columns. The capitals are of the bell form, ornamented with all
kinds of foliage, and have a narrow but high abacus, or bulge out below,
and are contracted above, with low, but projecting abacus. They abound
with sculptured decorations, borrowed from the vegetation of the
country. The highest of the columns of the temple of Luxor is five and a
quarter times the greatest diameter. [Footnote: Muller.]

[Sidenote: The Pyramids.]

But no monuments have ever excited so much curiosity and wonder as the
Pyramids, not in consequence of any particular beauty or ingenuity, as
from their immense size and unknown age. None but sacerdotal monarchs
would ever have erected them--none but a fanatical people would ever
have toiled upon them. They do not indicate civilization, but despotism.
We do not know for what purpose they were raised, except as sepulchres
for kings. They do not even indicate as high a culture as the temples of
Thebes, although they were built at a considerable period subsequently,
even several generations after Sesostris reigned in splendor. The
pyramid of Cheops, at Memphis, covers a square whose side is seven
hundred and sixty-eight feet, and rises into the air four hundred and
fifty-two, and is a solid mass of stone, which has suffered less from
time than the mountains near it. And it is probable that it stands over
an immense substructure, in which may yet be found the lore of ancient
Egypt, and which may even prove to be the famous labyrinth of which
Herodotus speaks, built by the twelve kings of Egypt. According to this
author, one hundred thousand men worked on this monument for forty
years. What a waste of labor!

The palaces of the kings are mere imitations of the temples, and the
only difference of architecture is this, that the rooms are larger and
in greater numbers. Some think that the labyrinth was a collective
palace of many rulers.

Such was the massive grandeur of Egyptian antiquities: at the best
curiosities, but of slight avail for moral or aesthetic culture, they yet
indicate a considerable civilization at a very remote period--proving
not merely by architectural monuments, but by their system of writing,
an original and intellectual people. [Footnote: Muller, _Ancient
Art_; Wilkinson, _Topog. of Thebes_; Champollion, _Lettres Ecrites
d'Egypt_; _Journal des Sav._ 1836; _Encyclopedia Britannica_;
Strabo.]

[Sidenote: Babylonian architecture.]

Of Babylonian architecture we know but little, beyond what the
Scriptures and ancient authors allude to in scattered notices. But,
though nothing survives of ancient magnificence, we feel that a city
whose walls, according to Herodotus, were eighty-seven feet in
thickness, three hundred and thirty-seven in height, and sixty miles in
circumference, and in which were one hundred gates of brass, must have
had considerable architectural splendor. The Tower of Belus, the Palace
of Nebuchadnezzar, and the Obelisk of Semiramis, were probably wonderful
structures, certainly in size, which is one of the conditions of
architectural effect.

[Sidenote: Tyrian monuments.]

The Tyrians must have carried architecture to considerable perfection,
since the Temple of Solomon, one of the most magnificent in the ancient
world, was probably built by Phoenician artists. It was not remarkable
for size; it was, indeed, very small; but it had great splendor of
decoration. It was of quadrangular outline, erected upon a solid
platform of stone, and having a striking resemblance to the oldest Greek
temples, like those of aegina and Paestum. The portico of the temple, in
the time of Herod, was one hundred and eighty feet high, and the temple
itself was entered by nine gates thickly coated with silver and gold.
The inner sanctuary was covered on all sides with plates of gold, and
was dazzling to the eye. The various courts and porticoes and palaces
with which it was surrounded, gave to it a very imposing effect.

[Sidenote: Early Doric monuments.]

[Sidenote: The principles of Doric architecture.]

[Sidenote: The features of the Doric order.]

[Sidenote: The Parthenon.]

Architecture, however, as the expression of genius and high
civilization, was perfected only by the Greeks. Egyptian monuments were
curiosities to the Greek and Roman mind, as they are to us objects of
awe and wonder. And as we propose to treat of the arts in their
culminating excellence chiefly,--to show what the Pagan intellect of man
could accomplish, unaided by light from heaven, we turn to the great
teacher of the last two thousand years. It was among the ancient
Dorians, who descended from the mountains of Northern Greece eighty
years after the fall of Troy, that art first appeared. The Pelasgi,
supposed to be Phoenicians, erected cyclopean structures fifteen hundred
years before Christ, as seen in the giant walls of the Acropolis,
[Footnote: _Dodwell's Classical Tour_, Muller.] constructed of huge
blocks of hewn stone, and the palaces of the princes of heroic times,
[Footnote: Homer's description of the palace of Odysseus.] like the
Mycenaean treasury, the lintel of the doorway of which is one stone
twenty-seven feet long and sixteen broad. [Footnote: Mure, _Tour in
Greece_.] But these edifices, which aimed at splendor and richness
merely, were deficient in that simplicity and harmony which have given
immortality to the temples of the Dorians. In this style of architecture
every thing was suitable to its object, and was grand and noble. The
great thickness of the columns, the beautiful entablature, the ample
proportion of the capital; the great horizontal lines of the architrave
and cornice, predominating over the vertical lines of the columns; the
severity of geometrical forms, produced for the most part by straight
lines, gave an imposing simplicity to the Doric temple. How far the
Greek architects were indebted to the Egyptian we cannot tell, for
though columns are found amid the ruins of the Egyptian temples, they
are of different shape from any made by the Greeks. In the structures of
Thebes we find both the tumescent and the cylindrical columns, from
which amalgamation might have been produced the Doric column. The Greeks
seized on beauty wherever they found it, and improved upon it. The Doric
column was not, probably, an entirely new creation, but shaped after the
models furnished by the most original of all the ancient nations, even
the Egyptians. The Doric style was used exclusively until after the
Macedonian conquest, and was chiefly applied to temples. The Doric
temples are uniform in plan. The columns were fluted, and were generally
about six diameters in height. They diminished gradually from the base,
with a slight convexed swelling downward. They were superimposed by
capitals proportionate, and coming within their height. The entablature
which the column supported is also of so many diameters in height. So
regular and perfect was the plan of the temple, that, "if the dimensions
of a single column, and the proportion the entablature should bear to
it, were given to two individuals acquainted with the style, with
directions to compose a temple, they would produce designs exactly
similar in size, arrangement, and general proportions." Then the Doric
order possessed a peculiar harmony, but taste and skill were
nevertheless necessary in order to determine the number of diameters a
column should have, and, accordingly, the height of the entablature. The
Doric was the favorite order of European Greece for one thousand years,
and also of her colonies in Sicily and Magna Graecia. The massive temples
of Paestum, the colossal magnificence of the Sicilian ruins, and the more
elegant proportions of the Athenian structures, like the Parthenon and
Temple of Theseus, show the perfection of the Doric architecture.
Although the general style of all the Doric temples is so uniform, yet
hardly two temples were alike. The earlier Doric was more massive; the
latter were more elegant, and were rich in sculptured decorations.
Nothing could surpass the beauty of a Doric temple in the time of
Pericles. The stylobate or pedestal, from two thirds to a whole diameter
of a column in height, was built in three equal courses, which gradually
receded from the one below, and formed steps, as it were, of a grand
platform on which the pillars rested. The column was from four to six
diameters in height, with twenty flutes, with a capital of half a
diameter supporting the entablature. This again, two diameters in
height, was divided into architrave, frieze, and cornice. But the great
beauty of the temple was the portico in front, a forest of columns,
supporting the pediment, about a diameter and a half to the apex, making
an angle at the base of about 14 degrees. From the pediment projects the
cornice, while, at the apex and at the base of it, are sculptured
ornaments, generally, the figures of men or animals. The whole outline
of columns supporting the entablature is graceful, while the variety of
light and shade arising from the arrangement of mouldings and capitals
produce a grand effect. The Parthenon, the most beautiful specimen of
the Doric, has never been equaled, and it still stands august in its
ruins--the glory of the old Acropolis, and the pride of Athens. It was
built of Pentelic marble, and rested on a basement of limestone. It was
two hundred and twenty-seven feet in length, and one hundred and one in
breadth, and sixty-five in height, surrounded with forty-eight fluted
columns, six feet and two inches at the base, and thirty-four feet in
height, while within the peristyle, at either end, was an interior range
of columns, standing before the end of the cella. The frieze and the
pediment were elaborately ornamented with reliefs and statues, while the
cella, within and without, was adorned with the choicest sculptures of
Phidias. The grandest was the colossal statue of Minerva, in the eastern
apartment of the cella, forty feet in height, composed of gold and
ivory; while the inner walls were decorated with paintings, and the
temple itself was a repository of countless treasure. But the Parthenon,
so regular, with its vertical and horizontal lines, was curved in every
line, with the exception of the gable,--pillars, architrave,
entablature, frieze, and cornice, together with the basement--all arched
upwards, though so slightly as not to be perceptible, and these curved
lines gave to it a peculiar grace which cannot be imitated, as well as
solidity.

[Sidenote: The Acropolis.]

Nearly coeval with the Doric was the Ionic order, invented by the
Asiatic Greeks, still more graceful, though not so imposing. The
Acropolis is a perfect example of this order. The column is nine
diameters in height, with a base, while the capital is more ornamented.
The shaft is fluted with twenty-four flutes and alternate fillets, and
the fillet is about a quarter the width of the flute. The pediment is
flatter than of the Doric order, and more elaborate. The great
distinction of the Ionic column is a base, and a capital formed with
volutes, with a more slender shaft. Vitruvius, the greatest authority
among the ancients in architecture, says that, "the Greeks, in inventing
these two kinds of columns, imitated in the one the naked simplicity and
dignity of a man, and in the other, the delicacy and ornaments of a
woman; the base of the Ionic was the imitation of sandals, and the
volutes of ringlets."

[Sidenote: Temple of Minerva.]

The Corinthian order exhibits a still greater refinement and elegance
than the other two, and was introduced toward the end of the
Peloponnesian war. Its peculiarity is columns with foliated capitals,
and still greater height, about ten diameters, with a more ornamented
entablature. Of this order, the most famous temple in Greece was that of
Minerva at Tegea, built by Scopas of Paros, but destroyed by fire four
hundred years before Christ.

Nothing more distinguished Greek architecture than the variety, the
grace, and the beauty of the mouldings, generally in eccentric curves.
The general outline of the moulding is a gracefully flowing cyma, or
wave, concave at one end, and convex at the other, like an Italic
_f_, the concavity and convexity being exactly in the same curve,
according to the line of beauty which Hogarth describes.

[Sidenote: Architecture among the Greeks seen in greatest perfection in
temples.]

The most beautiful application of Grecian architecture was in the
temples, which were very numerous, and of extraordinary grandeur, long
before the Persian war. Their entrance was always to the west or the
east. They were built either in an oblong or round form, and were mostly
adorned with columns. Those of an oblong form had columns either in the
front alone, in the fore and back fronts, or on all the four sides. They
generally had porticoes attached to them. They had no windows, receiving
their light from the door or from above. The friezes were adorned with
various sculptures, as were sometimes the pediments, and no expense was
spared upon them. The most important part of the temple was the cella,
where the statue of the deity was kept, and was generally surrounded
with a balustrade. Beside the cella was the vestibule, and a chamber in
the rear or back front in which the treasures of the temple were kept.
Names were applied to the temples, as well as the porticoes, according
to the number of columns in the portico at either end of the temple,
such as the tetrastyle with four columns in front, or hexastyle when
there were six. There were never more than ten columns in front. The
Parthenon had eight, but six was the usual number. It was the rule to
have twice as many columns along the sides as in front, and one more.
Some of the temples had double rows of columns on all sides, like that
of Diana at Ephesus, and of Quirinus at Rome. The distance between the
columns varied from a diameter and half of a column to four diameters.
About five eighths of a Doric temple were occupied by the cella, and
three eighths by the portico.

[Sidenote: Simplicity of Grecian temples.]

That which gives so much simplicity and harmony in the Greek temples,
which are the great elements of beauty in architecture, is the simple
outline, in parallelogrammic and pyramidal forms, in which the lines are
straight and uninterrupted through their entire length. This simplicity
and harmony are more apparent in the Doric than in any of the other
orders, and pertain to all the temples of which we have knowledge. Nor
can any improvement be made upon them, or any alteration which does not
conflict with established principles. The Ionic and Corinthian, or the
Voluted and Foliated orders, do not possess that harmony which pervades
the Doric, but the more beautiful compositions are so consummate that
they will ever be taken as models of study.

[Sidenote: Matchless proportions of the Grecian temples.]

It is not the magnitude of the Grecian temples and other works of art
which most impresses us. It is not for this that they are important
models. It is not for this that they are copied and reproduced in all
the modern nations of Europe. They were generally small compared with
the temples of Egypt, or the vast dimensions of Roman amphitheatres.
Only three or four would compare in size with a Gothic cathedral, like
the Parthenon, the Temple of Zeus at Olympia, and the Temple of Diana at
Ephesus. Even the Pantheon at Rome is small, compared with the later
monuments of the Caesars. The traveler is always disappointed in
contemplating their remains, so far as size is concerned. But it is
their matchless proportions, their severe symmetry, the grandeur of
effect, the undying beauty, the graceful form which impress us, and make
us feel that they are perfect. By the side of the Colosseum they are
insignificant in magnitude. They do not cover acres like the baths of
Caracalla. Yet who has copied the Flavian amphitheatre? Who erects an
edifice after the style of the Thermae? But all artists copy the
Parthenon. That, and not the colossal monuments of the Caesars, reappears
in the capitals of Europe, and stimulates the genius of a Michael Angelo
or a Christopher Wren.

The flourishing period of Greek architecture was during the period from
Pericles to Alexander--one hundred and thirteen years. The Macedonian
conquest introduced more magnificence and less simplicity. The Roman
conquest accelerated the decline in severe taste, when different orders
were used indiscriminately.

[Sidenote: Beginning of Roman art.]

[Sidenote: Romans copied the Greeks.]

In this state the art passed into the hands of the masters of the world,
and they inaugurated a new era in architecture. The art was still
essentially Greek, although the Romans derived their first knowledge
from the Etruscans. The Cloaca Maxima was built during the reign of the
second Tarquin--the grandest monument of the reign of the kings. It is
not probable that temples and other public buildings were either
beautiful or magnificent until the conquest of Greece, when Grecian
architects were employed. The Romans adopted the Corinthian style, which
they made even more ornamental, and by the successful combination of the
Etruscan arch with the Grecian column, laid the foundation of a new and
original style, susceptible of great variety and magnificence. They
entered into architecture with the enthusiasm of their teachers, but, in
their passion for novelty, lost sight of the simplicity which is the
great fascination of a Doric Temple. "And they deemed that lightness and
grace were to be attained not so much by proportion between the vertical
and the horizontal, as by the comparative slenderness of the former.
Hence we see a poverty in Roman architecture in the midst of profuse
ornament. The great error was a constant aim to lessen the diameter,
while they increased the elevation, of the columns. Hence the massive
simplicity and severe grandeur of the ancient Doric disappear in the
Roman, the characteristics of the order being frittered down into a
multiplicity of minute details." [Footnote: Memes, _Sculpture and
Architecture._] And when they used the Doric at all, they used the
base, which was never done at Athens. They also altered the Doric
capital, which cannot be improved. Again, most of the Grecian Doric
temples were peripteral, that is, were surrounded with pillars on all
the sides. But the Romans did not build with porticoes even on each
front, but only on one, which had a greater projection than the Grecian.
They generally are projected three columns. Many of the Roman temples
are circular, like the Pantheon, which has a portico of eight columns
projected to the depth of three. Nor did the Romans construct hypaethral
temples, or uncovered, with internal columns, like the Greeks. The
Pantheon is an exception, since the dome has an open eye; and one great
ornament of this beautiful structure is in the arrangement of internal
columns placed in the front of niches, composed with antae, or pier-
formed ends of walls, to carry an entablature round under an attic on
which the cupola rests. They also adopted coupled columns, broken and
recessed entablatures, and pedestals, which are considered blemishes.
They again paid more attention to the interior than to the exterior
decoration of their palaces and baths, as we may infer from the ruins of
Adrian's villa at Tivoli, and the excavations of Pompeii.

The Roman Corinthian, like the Greek orders, consisted of three parts,
stylobate, column, and entablature, but the stylobate was much loftier,
and was not graduated, except in the access before a portico. The column
varied from nine and a half to ten diameters, and was always fluted with
twenty-four flutes and fillets. The height of the capital is a diameter
and one eighth; the entablature varies from one diameter and seven
eighths to two diameters and a half. The portico of the Pantheon is one
of the best specimens of the Corinthian order. The entablature of the
temple of Jupiter Stator, like that of the Pantheon, is two diameters
and one half. The pediments are steeper than those made by the Greeks,
varying in inclination from eighteen to twenty-five degrees. The
mouldings used in Roman architectural works are the same as the Grecian
in general form, although they differ from them in contour. They are
less delicate and graceful, but were used in great profusion. Roman
architecture is overdone with ornament, every moulding carved, and every
straight surface sculptured with foliage or historical subjects in
relief. The ornaments of the frieze consist of foliage and animals, with
a variety of other things. The great exuberance of ornament is
considered a defect, although when applied to some structures it is
exceedingly beautiful. In the time of the first Caesars architecture had
a character of grandeur and magnificence. Columns and arches appeared in
all the leading public buildings, columns generally forming the
external, and arches the internal construction. Fabric after fabric
arose on the ruins of others. The Flavii supplanted the edifices of
Nero, which ministered to debauchery, by structures of public utility.

[Sidenote: Changes made by the Romans.]

[Sidenote: Invention of the arch.]

[Sidenote: Uses of the arch.]

The Romans invented no new principle in architecture, except the arch,
which was not known to the Greeks, and carried out by them to greater
perfection than by the Romans; but this, for simplicity, harmony, and
beauty, has never been surpassed in any age, or by any nation. The
Romans were a practical and utilitarian people, and needed for their
various structures greater economy of material than large blocks of
stone, especially for such as were carried to great altitudes. The arch
supplied this want, and is perhaps the greatest invention ever made in
architecture. No instance of its adoption occurs in the construction of
Greek edifices, before Greece became a part of the Roman Empire. Its
application dates back to the Cloaca Maxima, and may have been of
Etrurian invention. It was not known to Egyptians, or Persians, or
Indians, or Greeks. Some maintain that Archimedes of Sicily was the
inventor, but to whomsoever the glory of the invention is due, it is
certain that the Romans were the first to make a practical application
of its wonderful qualities. It enabled them to rear vast edifices into
the air with the humblest materials, to build bridges, aqueducts,
sewers, amphitheatres, and triumphal arches, as well as temples and
palaces; its merits have never been lost sight of by succeeding
generations, and it is at the foundation of the magnificent Gothic
cathedrals of the Middle Ages. Its application extends to domes and
cupolas, to arched floors and corridors and roofs, and to various other
parts of buildings where economy of material and labor is desired. It
was applied extensively to doorways and windows, and is an ornament as
well as a utility. The most imposing forms of Roman architecture may be
traced to a knowledge of the properties of the arch, and as brick was
more extensively used than any other material, the arch was invaluable.
The imperial palace on Mount Palatine, the Pantheon, except its portico
and internal columns, the temples of Peace, of Venus and Rome, and of
Minerva Medica, were of brick. So were the great baths of Titus,
Caracalla, and Diocletian, the villa of Adrian, the city walls, the
villa of Maecenas at Tivoli, and most of the palaces of the nobility;
although, like many of the temples, they were faced with stone. The
Colosseum was of travertine faced with marble. It was the custom to
stucco the surface of the walls, as favorable to decorations. In
consequence of this invention, the Romans erected a greater variety of
fine structures than either the Greeks or Egyptians, whose public
edifices were chiefly confined to temples. The arch entered into almost
every structure, public or private, and superseded the use of long stone
beams, which were necessary in the Grecian temples, as also of wooden
timbers, in the use of which the Romans were not skilled, and which do
not really pertain to the art of architecture. An imposing building must
always be constructed of stone or brick. The arch also enabled the
Romans to economize in the use of costly marbles, of which they were
very fond, as well as of other stones. Some of the finest columns were
made of Egyptian granite, very highly polished.

The extensive application of the arch doubtless led to the deterioration
of the Grecian architecture, since it blended columns with arcades, and
thus impaired the harmony which so peculiarly marked the temples of
Athens and Corinth. And as taste became vitiated with the decline of the
Empire, monstrous combinations took place, which were a great fall from
the simplicity of the Parthenon, and the interior of the Pantheon.

[Sidenote: Magnificence of Roman architecture.]

But whatever defects marked the age of Diocletian and Constantine, it
can never be questioned that the Romans carried architecture to a
perfection rarely attained in our times. They may not have equaled the
severe simplicity of their teachers, the Greeks, but they surpassed them
in the richness or their decorations, and in all buildings designed for
utility, especially in private houses and baths and theatres.

[Sidenote: The effect of columns in architecture.]

The Romans do not seem to have used other than semicircular arches. The
Gothic, or Pointed, or Christian architecture, as it has been variously
called, was the creation of the Middle Ages, and arose nearly
simultaneously in Europe after the first Crusade, so that it would seem
to be of Eastern origin. But it was a graft on the old Roman arch,--in
the shape of an ellipse rather than a circle. Aside from this invention,
to which we are indebted for the most beautiful ecclesiastical
structures ever erected, we owe every thing in architecture to the
Greeks and Romans. We have found out no new principles which were not
equally known to Vitruvius. No one man was the inventor or creator of
the wonderful structures which ornamented the cities of the ancient
world. We have the names of great architects, who reared various and
faultless models, but they all worked upon the same principles. And
these can never be subverted. So that in architecture the ancients are
our schoolmasters, whose genius we revere the more we are acquainted
with their works. What more beautiful than one of those grand temples
which the heathen but cultivated Greeks erected to the worship of their
unknown gods: the graduated and receding stylobate as a base for the
fluted columns, rising at regular distances, in all their severe
proportion and matchless harmony, with their richly carved capitals,
supporting an entablature of heavy stones, most elaborately moulded and
ornamented with the figures of plants and animals, and rising above
this, on the ends of the temple, or over a portico several columns deep,
the pediment, covered by chiseled cornices, with still richer ornaments
rising from the apices and at the feet; all carved in white marble, and
then spread over an area larger than any modern churches, making a
forest of columns to bear aloft those ponderous beams of stone, without
any thing tending to break the continuity of horizontal lines, by which
the harmony and simplicity of the whole are seen. So accurately squared
and nicely adjusted were the stones and pillars of which these temples
were built, that there was scarcely need of even cement. Without noise
or confusion or sound of hammers did those temples rise, since all their
parts were cut and carved in the distant quarries, and with mathematical
precision. And within the cella, nearly concealed by the surrounding
columns, were the statues of the gods, and the altars on which incense
was offered, or sacrifices made. In every part, interior and exterior,
do we see a matchless proportion and beauty, whether in the shaft, or
the capital, or the frieze, or the pilaster, or the pediment, or the
cornices, or even the mouldings--everywhere grace and harmony, which
grow upon the mind the more they are contemplated. The greatest evidence
of the matchless creative genius displayed in those architectural
wonders is that, after two thousand years, and with all the inventions
of Roman and modern artists, no improvement can be made, and those
edifices which are the admiration of our own times are deemed beautiful
as they approximate the ancient models which will forever remain objects
of imitation, No science can make two and two other than four. No art
can make a Doric temple different from the Parthenon without departing
from the settled principles of beauty and proportion which all ages have
endorsed. Such were the Greeks and Romans in an art which is one of the
greatest indices of material civilization, and which by them was derived
from geometrical forms, or the imitation of Nature.



[Sidenote: Perfection of Grecian sculpture.]

The genius displayed by the ancients in sculpture, is even more
remarkable than in architecture. It was carried to perfection, however,
only by the Greeks. But they did not originate the art, since we read of
sculptured images from the remotest antiquity. The earliest names of
sculptors are furnished by the Old Testament. Assyria and Egypt are full
of relics to show how early this art was cultivated. It was not carried
to perfection as early, probably, as architecture; but rude images of
gods, carved in wood, are as old as the history of idolatry. The history
of sculpture is in fact identified with that of idols. It was from
Phoenicia that Solomon obtained the workmen for the decoration of his
Temple. But the Egyptians were probably the first who made considerable
advances in the execution of statues. They are rude, simple, uniform,
without beauty or grace, but colossal and grand. Nearly two thousand
years before Christ, the walls of Thebes were ornamented with sculptured
figures, even as the gates of Babylon were of sculptured bronze. The
dimensions of Egyptian colossal figures surpass those of any other
nation. The sitting figures of Memnon at Thebes are fifty feet in
height, and the Sphinx is twenty-five, and these are of granite. The
number of colossal statues was almost incredible. The sculptures found
among the ruins of Carnac must have been made nearly four thousand years
ago. [Footnote: Wilkinson's _Ancient Egyptians_.] They exhibit
great simplicity of design, but without much variety of expression. They
are generally carved from the hardest stones, and finished so nicely
that we infer that the Egyptians were acquainted with the art of
hardening metals to a degree not known in our times. But we see no ideal
grandeur among any of the remains of Egyptian sculpture. However
symmetrical or colossal, there is no expression, no trace of emotion, no
intellectual force. Every thing is calm, impassive, imperturbable. It
was not until sculpture came into the hands of the Greeks that any
remarkable excellence was reached. But the progress of development was
slow. The earliest carvings were rude wooden images of the gods, and
more than a thousand years elapsed before the great masters were
produced which marked the age of Pericles.

It is not my object to give a history of the development of the plastic
art, but to show the great excellence it attained in the hands of
immortal sculptors.

[Sidenote: Admiration for sculpture among the Greeks.]

[Sidenote: High estimation of sculpture among the Greeks.]

The Greeks had an intuitive perception of the beautiful, and to this
great national trait we ascribe the wonderful progress which sculpture
made. Nature was most carefully studied, and that which was most
beautiful in Nature became the object of imitation. They ever attained
to an ideal excellence, since they combined in a single statue what
could not be found in a single individual, as Zeuxis is said to have
studied the beautiful forms of seven virgins of Crotona in order to
paint his famous picture of Venus. Great as was the beauty of Thryne, or
Aspasia, or Lais, yet no one of them could have served for a perfect
model. And it required a great sensibility to beauty in order to select
and idealize what was most perfect in the human figure. Beauty was
adored in Greece, and every means were used to perfect it, especially
beauty of form, which is the characteristic excellence of Grecian
statuary. The gymnasia were universally frequented, and the great prizes
of the games, bestowed for feats of strength and agility, were regarded
as the highest honors which men could receive--the subject of the
poet's ode and the people's admiration. Statues of the victors
perpetuated their fame and improved the sculptor's art. From the study
of these statues were produced those great creations which all
subsequent ages have admired. And from the application of the principles
seen in these forms we owe the perpetuation of the ideas of grandeur and
beauty such as no other people have ever discovered and scarcely
appreciated. The sculpture of the human figure became a noble object of
ambition, and was most munificently rewarded. Great artists arose, whose
works adorned the temples of Greece, so long as she preserved her
independence; and when it was lost, their priceless productions were
scattered over Asia and Europe. The Romans especially seized what was
most prized, whether or not they could tell what was most perfect.
Greece lived in her marble statues more than in her government or laws.
And when we remember the estimation in which sculpture was held, the
great prices paid for masterpieces, the care and attention with which
they were guarded and preserved, and the innumerable works which were
produced, filling all the public buildings, especially consecrated
places, and even open spaces, and the houses of the rich and great,--
calling from all classes admiration and praise,--it is improbable that
so great perfection will ever be reached again in those figures which
are designed to represent beauty of form. Even the comparatively few
statues which have survived the wars and violence of two thousand years,
convince us that the moderns can only imitate. They can produce no
creations which were not surpassed by Athenian artists. "No mechanical
copying of Greek statues, however skillful the copyist, can ever secure
for modern sculpture the same noble and effective character it possessed
among the Greeks, for the simple reason that the imitation, close as may
be the resemblance, is but the result of the eye and hand, while the
original is the expression of a true and deeply felt sentiment. Art was
not sustained by the patronage of a few who affect to have what is
called _taste_. In Greece, the artist, having a common feeling for
the beautiful with his countrymen, produced his works for the public,
which were erected in places of honor and dedicated in temples of the
gods." [Footnote: _Encyclopedia Britannica_, "Sculpture," R. W. T.]

[Sidenote: Phidias and his contemporaries.]

[Sidenote: The statue of Zeus by Phidias.]

But it was not until the Persian wars awakened in Greece the slumbering
consciousness of national power, and Athens became the central point of
Grecian civilization, that sculpture, like architecture and painting,
reached its culminating point of excellence, under Phidias and his
contemporaries. Great artists, however, had previously made themselves
famous, like Miron, Polycletus, and Ageladas; but the great riches which
flowed into Athens at this time gave a peculiar stimulus to art,
especially under the encouragement of such a ruler as Pericles, whose
age was the golden era of Grecian history. Pheidias or Phidias was to
sculpture what Aeschylus was to tragic poetry, sublime and grand. He was
born four hundred and eighty-four years before Christ, and was the pupil
of Ageladas. He stands at the head of the ancient sculptors, not from
what _we_ know of him, for his masterpieces have perished, but from
the estimation in which he was held by the greatest critics of
antiquity. It was to him that Pericles intrusted the adornment of the
Parthenon, and the numerous and beautiful sculptures of the frieze and
the pediment were the work of artists whom he directed. _His_ great
work in that wonderful edifice was the statue of the goddess Minerva
herself, made of gold and ivory, forty feet in height, standing
victorious with a spear in her left hand and an image of victory in her
right; girded with the aegis, with helmet on her head, and her shield
resting by her side. The cost of this statue may be estimated when the
gold alone of which it was composed was valued at forty-four talents.
[Footnote: This sum was equal to $500,000 of our money, an immense sum
in that age. Some critics suppose that this statue was overloaded with
ornament, but all antiquity was unanimous in its admiration. The
exactness and finish of detail were as remarkable as the grandeur of the
proportions.] Another of his famous works was a colossal bronze statue
of Athena Promachus, sixty feet in height, on the Acropolis, between the
Propylaea and the Parthenon. But both of these yielded to the colossal
statue of Zeus in his great temple at Olympia, represented in a sitting
posture, forty feet high, on a pedestal of twenty. In this, his greatest
work, the artist sought to embody the idea of majesty and repose,--of a
supreme deity no longer engaged in war with Titans and Giants, but
enthroned as a conqueror, ruling with a nod the subject world, and
giving his blessing to those victories which gave glory to the Greeks.
[Footnote: The god was seated on a throne. Ebony, gold, ivory, and
precious stones formed, with a multitude of sculptured and painted
figures, the wonderful composition of this throne.] So famous was this
statue, which was regarded as the masterpiece of Grecian art, that it
was considered a calamity to die without seeing it; and this served for
a model for all subsequent representations of majesty and power in
repose among the ancients. It was removed to Constantinople by
Theodosius I., and was destroyed by fire in the year 475. Phidias
executed various other famous works, which have perished; but even those
that were executed under his superintendence, that have come down to our
times, like the statues which ornamented the pediment of the Parthenon,
are among the finest specimens of art which exist, and exhibit the most
graceful and appropriate forms which could have been selected, uniting
grandeur with simplicity, and beauty with accuracy of anatomical
structure. His distinguishing excellence was ideal beauty, and that of
the sublimest order. [Footnote: Muller, _De Phidiae Vita_.]

[Sidenote: Colossal statues of ivory and gold.]

Of all the wonders and mysteries of ancient art, the colossal statues of
ivory and gold were perhaps the most remarkable, and the difficulty of
executing them has been set forth by the ablest of modern critics, like
Winkelmann, Heyne, and De Quincy. "The grandeur of their dimensions, the
perfection of their workmanship, the richness of their materials; their
majesty, beauty, and ideal truth; the splendor of the architecture and
pictorial decoration with which they were associated, all conspired to
impress the beholder with wonder and awe, and induce a belief of the
actual presence of the god."

[Sidenote: The school of Praxiteles.]

After the Peloponnesian War, a new school of art arose in Athens, which
appealed more to the passions. Of this school was Praxiteles, who aimed
to please, without seeking to elevate or instruct. No one has probably
ever surpassed him in execution. He wrought in bronze and marble, and
was one of the artists who adorned the Mausoleum of Artemisia. Without
attempting the sublime impersonation of the deity, in which Phidias
excelled, he was unsurpassed in the softer graces and beauties of the
human form, especially in female figures. His most famous work was an
undraped statue of Venus, for his native town of Cnidus, which was so
remarkable that people flocked from all parts of Greece to see it. He
did not aim at ideal majesty so much as ideal gracefulness, and his
works were imitated from the most beautiful living models, and hence
expressed only the ideal of sensual charms. It is probable that the
Venus de Medici of Cleomenes was a mere copy of the Aphrodite of
Praxiteles, which was so highly extolled by the ancient authors. It was
of Parian marble, and modeled from the celebrated Phryne. His statues of
Dionysus also expressed the most consummate physical beauty,
representing the god as a beautiful youth, crowned with ivy, engirt with
a nebris, and expressing tender and dreamy emotions. Praxiteles
sculptured several figures of Eros, or the god of love, of which that at
Thespiae attracted visitors to the city in the time of Cicero. It was
subsequently carried to Rome, and perished by a conflagration in the
time of Titus. One of the most celebrated statues of this artist was an
Apollo, many copies of which still exist. His works were very numerous,
but chiefly from the circle of Dionysus, Aphrodite, and Eros, in which
adoration for corporeal attractions is the most marked peculiarity, and
for which the artist was fitted by his life with the hetaerae.

[Sidenote: Scopas.]

Scopas was his contemporary, and was the author of the celebrated group
of Niobe, which is one of the chief ornaments of the gallery of
sculpture at Florence. He flourished about three hundred and fifty years
before Christ, and wrought chiefly in marble. He was employed in
decorating the Mausoleum which Artemisia erected to her husband, one of
the wonders of the world. His masterpiece is said to have been a group
representing Achilles conducted to the island of Leuce by the divinities
of the sea, which ornamented the shrine of Domitius in the Flaminian
Circus. In this, tender grace, heroic grandeur, daring power, and
luxurious fullness of life were combined with wonderful harmony.
[Footnote: Muller, 125.] Like the other great artists of this school,
there was the grandeur and sublimity for which Phidias was celebrated,
but a greater refinement and luxury, and skill in the use of drapery.

[Sidenote: Lysippus.]

[Sidenote: The works of Lysippus.]

Sculpture in Greece culminated, as an art, in Lysippus, who worked
chiefly in bronze. He is said to have executed fifteen hundred statues,
and was much esteemed by Alexander the Great, by whom he was extensively
patronized. He represented men, not as they were, but as they appeared
to be; and, if he exaggerated, he displayed great energy of action. He
aimed to idealize merely human beauty, and his imitation of Nature was
carried out in the minutest details. None of his works are extant; but
as he alone was permitted to make the statue of Alexander, we infer that
he had no equals. The Emperor Tiberius transferred one of his statues,
that of an athlete, from the baths of Agrippa to his own chamber, which
so incensed the people that he was obliged to restore it. His favorite
subject was Hercules, and a colossal statue of this god was carried to
Rome by Fabius Maximus, when he took Tarentum, and afterwards was
transferred to Constantinople. The Farnese Hercules and the Belvidere
Torso are probably copies of this work. He left many eminent scholars,
among whom were Chares, who executed the famous Colossus of Rhodes,
Agesander, Polydorus, and Athenodorus, who sculptured the group of the
"Laocoon." The Rhodian School was the immediate offshoot from the school
of Lysippus at Sicyon, and from this small island of Rhodes the Romans,
when they conquered it, carried away three thousand statues. The
Colossus was one of the wonders of the world, seventy cubits in height,
and the Laocoon is a perfect miracle of art, in which group pathos is
exhibited in the highest degree ever attained in sculpture. It was
discovered in 1506 near the baths of Titus, and is one of the choicest
remains of ancient plastic art.

The great artists of antiquity did not confine themselves to the
representation of man; but they also carved animals with exceeding
accuracy and beauty. Nicias was famous for his dogs, Myron for his cows,
and Lysippus for his horses. Praxiteles composed his celebrated lion
after a living animal. "The horses of the frieze of the Elgin Marbles
appear to live and move; to roll their eyes, to gallop, prance, and
curvet; the veins of their faces and legs seem distended with
circulation. The beholder is charmed with the deer-like lightness and
elegance of their make; and although the relief is not above an inch
from the back-ground, and they are so much smaller than nature, we can
scarcely suffer reason to persuade us they are not alive." [Footnote:
Flaxman, _Lectures on Sculpture_.]

[Sidenote: Cameos and medals.]

The Greeks also carved gems, cameos, medals, and vases, with
unapproachable excellence. Very few specimens have come down to our
times, but those which we possess show great beauty both in design and
execution.

[Sidenote: Sack of the Grecian cities.]

Grecian statuary commenced with ideal representations of deities, and
was carried to the greatest perfection by Phidias in his statues of
Jupiter and Minerva. Then succeeded the school of Praxiteles, in which
the figures of gods and goddesses were still represented, but in mortal
forms. The school of Lysippus was famous for the statues of celebrated
men, especially in cities where Macedonian rulers resided. Artists were
expected henceforth to glorify kings and powerful nobles and rulers by
portrait statues. The plastic art then degenerated. Nor were works of
original genius produced, but rather copies or varieties from the three
great schools to which allusion has been made. Sculpture may have
multiplied, but not new creations; although some imitations of great
merit were produced, like the "Hermaphrodite," the "Torso," the Farnese
"Hercules," and the "Fighting Gladiator." When Corinth was sacked by
Mummius, some of the finest statues of Greece were carried to Rome, and
after the civil war between Caesar and Pompey the Greek artists emigrated
to Italy. The fall of Syracuse introduced many works of priceless value
into Rome; but it was from Athens, Delphi, Corinth, Elis, and other
great centres of art, that the richest treasures were brought. Greece
was despoiled to ornament Italy. The Romans did not create a school of
sculpture. They borrowed wholly from the Greeks, yet made, especially in
the time of Hadrian, many beautiful statues. They were fond of this art,
and all eminent men had statues erected to their memory. The busts of
emperors were found in every great city, and Rome was filled with
statues. The monuments of the Romans were even more numerous than those
of the Greeks, and among them some admirable portraits are found. These
sculptures did not express that consummation of beauty and grace, of
refinement and sentiment, which marked the Greeks; but the imitations
were good. Art had reached its perfection under Lysippus; there was
nothing more to learn. Genius in that department could soar no higher.
It will never rise to loftier heights.

[Sidenote: Degeneracy of art among the Romans.]

It is noteworthy that the purest forms of Grecian art arose in its
earlier stages. In a moral point of view, sculpture declined from the
time of Phidias. It was prostituted at Rome under the emperors. The
specimens which have often been found among the ruins of ancient baths
make us blush for human nature. The skill of execution did not decline
for several centuries; but the lofty ideal was lost sight of, and gross
appeals to human passions were made by those who sought to please
corrupt leaders of society in an effeminate age. The turgidity and
luxuriance of art gradually passed into tameness and poverty. The
reliefs on the Arch of Constantine are rude and clumsy compared with
those on the Column of Marcus Aurelius.

[Sidenote: Imitation of ancient art.]

But I do not wish to describe the decline of art, or enumerate the names
of the celebrated masters who exalted sculpture in the palmy days of
Pericles, or even Alexander. I simply allude to sculpture as an art
which reached a great perfection among the Greeks and Romans, as we have
a right to infer from the specimens which have been preserved. How many
more must have perished, we may infer from the criticisms of the ancient
authors! The finest productions of our own age are in a measure
reproductions. They cannot be called creations, like the statue of the
Olympian Jove. Even the Moses of Michael Angelo is a Grecian god, and
the Greek Slave a copy of an ancient Venus. The very tints which have
been admired in some of the works of modern sculptors are borrowed from
Praxiteles, who succeeded in giving an appearance of living flesh. The
Museum of the Vatican alone contains several thousand specimens of
ancient sculpture which have been found among the debris of former
magnificence, many of which are the productions of Grecian artists
transported to Rome. Among them are antique copies of the Cupid and the
Faun of Praxiteles, the statue of Demosthenes, the Minerva Medica, the
Athlete of Lysippus, the Torso Belvidere, sculptured by Apollonius, the
Belvidere Antinous, of faultless anatomy and a study for Domenichino,
the Laocoon, so panegyrized by Pliny, the Apollo Belvidere the work of
Agasias of Ephesus, the Sleepy Ariadne, with numerous other statues of
gods and goddesses, emperors, philosophers, poets, and statesmen of
antiquity. The Dying Gladiator, which ornaments the capitol, alone is a
magnificent proof of the perfection to which sculpture was brought
centuries after the art had culminated at Athens. And these are only a
few which stand out among the twenty thousand recovered statues which
now embellish Italy, to say nothing of those which are scattered over
Europe. We have the names of hundreds of artists who were famous in
their day. Not merely the figures of men are chiseled, but animals and
plants. Nature, in all her forms, was imitated; and not merely Nature,
but the dresses of the ancients are perpetuated in marble. No modern
sculptor has equaled, in delicacy of finish, the draperies even of those
ancient statues, as they appear to us after the exposure and accidents
of two thousand years. No one, after a careful study of the museums of
Europe, can question that, of all the nations who have claimed to be
civilized, the ancient Greek and Roman deserve a proud preeminence in an
art which is still regarded as among the highest triumphs of human
genius. All these matchless productions of antiquity, it should be
remembered, are the result of native genius alone, without the aid of
Christian ideas. Nor, with the aid of Christianity, are we sure that any
nation will ever soar to loftier heights than did the Greeks in that
proud realm which was consecrated to Paganism.



We are not so certain in regard to the excellence of the ancients in the
art of painting as we are in reference to sculpture and architecture,
since so few specimens have been preserved. We have only the testimony
of the ancients themselves; and as they had so severe a taste and so
great susceptibility to beauty in all its forms, we cannot suppose that
their notions were crude in this great art which the moderns have
carried to so great perfection. In this art the moderns may be superior,
especially in perspective and drawing, and light and shade. No age, we
fancy, can surpass Italy in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, when
the genius of Raphael, Correggio, and Domenichino blazed with such
wonderful brilliancy.

Nevertheless, we read of celebrated schools among the ancients, all of
which recognized _form_ as the great principle and basis of the
art, even like the moderns. The schools of Sicyon, Corinth, Athens, and
Rhodes were indebted for their renown, like those of Bologna, Florence,
and Rome, to their strict observance of this fundamental law.

[Sidenote: Antiquity of painting.]

[Sidenote: Painting among the Egyptians.]

Painting, in some form, is very ancient, though not so ancient as the
temples of the gods and the statues which were erected to their worship.
It arose with the susceptibility to beauty of form and color, and with
the view of conveying thoughts and emotions of the soul by imitation.
The walls of Babylon were painted after Nature with different species of
animals and combats. Semiramis was represented on horseback, striking a
leopard with a dart, and her husband Ninus wounding a lion. Ezekiel
(viii. 10) represents various idols and beasts portrayed upon the walls,
and even princes, painted in vermilion, with girdles around their loins
(xxiii. 14, 15). In ages almost fabulous there were some rude attempts
in this art, which probably arose from the coloring of statues and
reliefs. The wooden chests of Egyptian mummies are painted and written
with religious subjects, but the colors were laid without regard to
light and shade. The Egyptians did not seek to represent the passions
and emotions which agitate the soul, but rather to authenticate events
and actions; and hence their paintings, like hieroglyphics, are
inscriptions. It was their great festivals and religious rites which
they sought to perpetuate, not ideas of beauty or grace. Hence their
paintings abound with dismembered animals, plants, and flowers, censers,
entrails,--whatever was used in their religious worship. In Greece,
also, the original painting consisted in coloring statues and reliefs of
wood and clay. At Corinth, painting was early united with the
fabrication of vases, on which were rudely painted figures of men and
animals. Among the Etruscans, before Rome was founded, it is said there
were beautiful paintings, and it is probable they were advanced in art
before the Greeks. There were paintings in some of the old Etruscan
cities which the Roman emperors wished to remove, so much admired were
they even in the days of the greatest splendor. The ancient Etruscan
vases are famous for designs which have never been exceeded in purity of
form, but it is probable that these were copied from the Greeks.

[Sidenote: Cimon of Cleona.]

But whether the Greeks or the Etruscans were the first to paint, the art
was certainly carried to the greatest perfection among the former. The
development of it was, like all arts, very gradual. It probably
commenced by drawing the outline of a shadow, without intermediate
markings; the next step was the complete outline with the inner
markings, such as are represented on the ancient vases, or like the
designs of Flaxman. They were originally practiced on a white ground.
Then light and shade were introduced, and then the application of colors
in accordance with Nature. We read of a great painting by Bularchus, of
the battle of Magnete, purchased by a king of Lydia seven hundred and
eighteen years before Christ. And as the subject was a battle, it must
have represented the movement of figures, although we know nothing of
the coloring, or of the real excellence of the work, except that the
artist was paid munificently. Cimon of Cleona is the first great name
connected with the art in Greece, and is praised by Pliny, to whom we
owe the history of ancient painting more than to any other author. He
was contemporary with Dionysius in the eightieth Olympiad. He was not
satisfied with drawing simply the outlines of his figures, such as we
see in the oldest painted vases, but he also represented limbs, and
folds of garments. He invented the art of foreshortening, or the various
positions of figures, as they appear when looking upward or downward and
sideways, and hence is the first painter of perspective. He first made
muscular articulations, indicated the veins, and gave natural folds to
drapery. [Footnote: Pliny, xxxv. 34.]

[Sidenote: Greatness of Polygnotus and his school.]

A much greater painter than he was Polygnotus of Thasos, the
contemporary of Phidias, who came to Athens about the year 463 B.C., one
of the greatest geniuses of any age, and one of the most magnanimous;
and had the good fortune to live in an age of exceeding intellectual
activity. He was employed on the public buildings of Athens, and on the
great temple of Delphi, the hall of which he painted gratuitously. He
also decorated the Propylaea, which was erected under the superintendence
of Phidias. His greatness lay in statuesque painting, which he brought
nearly to perfection by the ideal expression, the accurate drawing, and
improved coloring. He used but few colors, and softened the rigidity of
his predecessors by making the mouth of beauty smile. He was the first
who painted woman with brilliant drapery and variegated head-dresses. He
gave great expression to the face and figure, and his pictures were
models of excellence for the beauty of the eyebrows, the blush upon the
cheeks, and the gracefulness of the draperies. He was a great epic
painter, as Phidias was a sculptor, and Homer a poet, since he expressed
not passion and emotion only, but ideal character. He imitated the
personages and the subjects of the old mythology, and treated them in an
epic spirit. He strove, like Phidias, to express character in repose.
His subjects were almost invariably taken from Homer and the Epic cycle.
His pictures had nothing of that elaborate grouping, aided by the powers
of perspective, so much admired in modern art. His figures were grouped
in regular lines, as in the bas-reliefs upon a frieze. He painted on
panels which were afterward let into the walls. He used the pencil,
instead of painting in encaustic with the cestrum.

Among the works of Polygnotus, as mentioned by Pliny, [Footnote: H. N.
xxx. 9, s. 35.] are his paintings in the Temple at Delphi, in the
Portico called Poecile at Athens, in the Propylaea of the Acropolis, in
the Temple of Theseus, and in the Temple of the Dioscuri at Athens. He
took his subjects from the whole range of Epic poetry, but we know
nothing of them except from the praises of his contemporaries.
[Footnote: Pausanias, x. 25-31.] His great merit is said to have
consisted in accurate drawing, and in giving grace and charm to his
female figures. He painted in a truly religious spirit, and upon
symmetrical principles, with great grandeur and freedom, resembling
Michael Angelo more than any other modern artist. Like the Greeks, he
painted with wax, resins, and in water colors, to which the proper
consistency was given with gum and glue. The use of oil was unknown. The
artists painted upon wood, clay, plaster, stone, parchment, but not upon
canvas, which was not used till the time of Nero. They painted upon
tablets or panels, and not upon the walls. These panels were framed and
encased in the walls. The style or cestrum used in drawing, and for
spreading the wax colors, was pointed on one end and flat on the other,
and generally made of metal. Wax was prepared by purifying and
bleaching, and then mixed with colors. When painting was practiced in
water colors, glue was used with the white of an egg or with gums, but
wax and resins were also worked with water, with certain preparations.
This latter was called encaustic, and was, according to Plutarch, the
most durable of all methods. It was not generally adopted till the time
of Alexander the Great. Wax was a most essential ingredient, since it
prevented the colors from cracking. Encaustic painting was practiced
both with the cestrum and the pencil, and the colors were also burnt in.
Fresco was used for coloring walls, which were divided into compartments
or panels. The Fresco composition of the stucco, and the method of
painting, preparing the walls for painting, is described by the ancient
writers: "They first covered the walls with a layer of ordinary plaster,
over which, when dry, were successively added three other layers of a
finer quality, mixed with sand. Above these were placed three layers of
a composition of chalk and marble-dust, the upper one being laid on
before the under one was dry, by which process the different layers were
so bound together that the whole mass formed one beautiful and solid
slab, resembling marble, and was capable of being detached from the wall
and transported in a wooden frame to any distance. The colors were
applied when the composition was still wet. The fresco wall, when
painted, was covered with an encaustic varnish, both to heighten the
color and preserve it from the effects of the sun or the weather. But
this process required so much care, and was attended with so much
expense, that it was used only in the better houses and palaces." The
later discoveries at Pompeii show the same correctness of design in
painting as in sculpture, and also considerable perfection in coloring.
The great artists of Greece were both sculptors and painters, like
Michael Angelo. Phidias and Euphranor, Zeuxis and Protogenes, Polygnotus
and Lysippus, were both. And the ancient writers praise the paintings of
these great artists as much as their sculpture. The Aldobrandini
Marriage, found on the Esquiline Mount, during the pontificate of
Clement VIII., and placed in the Vatican by Pius VII., is admired both
for drawing and color. Polygnotus was praised by Aristotle for his
designs and by Lucian for his color. [Footnote: _Poetica of
Aristotle_, c. 286. _Imagines of Lucian_, c. 7.]

[Sidenote: Contemporaries of Polygnotus.]

Dionysius and Micon were the great contemporaries of Polygnotus, the
former of whom was celebrated for his portraits. His pictures were
deficient in the ideal, but were remarkable for expression and elegant
drawing. [Footnote: Plutarch, _Timol._ 36.] Micon was particularly
skilled in painting horses, and was the first who used for a color the
light Attic ochre, and the black made from burnt vine twigs. He painted
three of the walls of the Temple of Theseus, and also the walls of the
Temple of the Dioscuri.

[Sidenote: The school of Apollodorus.]

With Apollodorus, of Athens, a new development was made in the art of
painting. Through his labors, about 408 B.C., dramatic effect was added
to the style of Polygnotus, without departing from his pictures as
models. "The acuteness of his taste," says Fuseli, "led him to discover
that, as all men were connected by one general form, so they were
separated each by some predominant power, which fixed character and
bound them to a class. Thence he drew his line of imitation and
personified the central form of the class to which his object belonged,
and to which the rest of its qualities administered, without being
absorbed; agility was not suffered to destroy firmness, solidity, or
weight; nor strength and weight agility; elegance did not degenerate to
effeminacy, nor grandeur swell to hugeness." [Footnote: Fuseli, Lect.
I.] His aim was to deceive the eye of the spectator by the semblance of
reality. He painted men and things as they really appeared. He also made
a great advance in coloring. He invented chiaro-oscuro. Other painters
had given attention to the proper gradation of light and shade; he
heightened this effect by the gradation of tints, and thus obtained what
the moderns call _tone_. He was the first who conferred due honor
on the pencil--"primusque gloriam penicillo jure contulit." [Footnote:
Pliny, H. N. xxxv. 11.]

[Sidenote: Peculiarities of Zeuxis as a painter.]

This great painter prepared the way for Zeuxis, [Footnote: Born 455
B.C.] who belonged to his school, but who surpassed him in the power to
give ideal form to rich effects. He began his great career four hundred
and twenty-four years before Christ, and was most remarkable for his
female figures. His "Helen," painted from five of the most beautiful
women of Croton, was one of the most renowned productions of antiquity,
to see which the painter demanded money. He gave away his pictures,
because, with an artist's pride, he maintained that their price could
not be estimated. There is a tradition that Zeuxis laughed himself to
death over an old woman painted by him. He arrived at illusion of the
senses, regarded as a high attainment in art, as in the instance
recorded of his grapes. He belonged to the Asiatic school, whose head-
quarters were at Ephesus, the peculiarities of which were accuracy of
imitation, the exhibition of sensual charms, and the gratification of
sensual tastes. He went to Athens about the time that the sculpture of
Phidias was completed, which modified his style. His marvelous powers
were displayed in the contrast of light and shade which he learned from
Apollodorus. He gave ideal beauty to his figures, but it was in form
rather than in expression. He taught the true method of grouping, by
making each figure the perfect representation of the class to which it
belonged. His works were deficient in those qualities which elevate the
feelings and the character. He was the Euripides rather than the Homer
of his art. He exactly imitated natural objects, which are incapable of
ideal representation. His works were not so numerous as they were
perfect in their way, in some of which, as in the Infant Hercules
strangling the Serpent, he displayed great dramatic power. [Footnote:
Lucian _on Zeuxis_.] Lucian highly praises his Female Centaur as
one of the most remarkable paintings of the world, in which he showed
great ingenuity in his contrasts. His Jupiter Enthroned is also extolled
by Pliny, as one of his finest works. He acquired a great fortune, and
lived ostentatiously.

[Sidenote: Parrhasius of Ephesus.]

Contemporaneous with him, and equal in fame, was Parrhasius, a native of
Ephesus, whose skill lay in accuracy of drawing, and power of
expression. He gave to painting true proportion, and attended to minute
details of the countenance and the hair. In his gods and heroes, he did
for painting what Phidias did in sculpture. His outlines were so perfect
as to indicate those parts of the figure which they did not express. He
established a rule of proportion which was followed by all succeeding
artists. While many of his pieces were of a lofty character, some were
demoralizing. Zeuxis yielded the palm to him, since he painted a curtain
which deceived his rival, whereas Zeuxis painted grapes which deceived
only birds. He was exceedingly arrogant and luxurious, and boasted of
having reached the utmost limits of his art. He combined the magic tone
of Apollodorus with the exquisite design of Zeuxis, and the classic
expression of Polygnotus.

[Sidenote: Contemporaries of Zeuxis.]

Many were the eminent painters that adorned the fifth century before
Christ, not only in Athens, but the Ionian cities of Asia. Timanthes of
Sicyon was distinguished for invention, and Eupompus of the same city
founded a school. His advice to Lysippus is memorable--"Let Nature, not
an artist, be your model." Protogenes was celebrated for his high
finish. His Talissus took him seven years to complete. Pamphilus was
celebrated for composition, Antiphilus for facility, Theon of Samos for
prolific fancy, Apelles for grace, Pausias for his chiaro-oscuro,
Nicomachus for his bold and rapid pencil, Aristides for depth of
expression.

[Sidenote: Art culminates in Apelles.]

[Sidenote: The Venus of Apelles.]

The art probably culminated in Apelles, the Titian of his age, who
united the rich coloring and sensual charms of the Ionian with the
scientific severity of the Sicyonian school. He was contemporaneous with
Alexander, and was alone allowed to paint the picture of the great
conqueror. He was a native of Ephesus, studied under Pamphilus of
Amphipolis, and when he had gained reputation he went to Sicyon and took
lessons from Melanthius. He spent the best part of his life at the court
of Philip and Alexander, and painted many portraits of these great men
and of their generals. He excelled in portraits, and labored so
assiduously to perfect himself in drawing that he never spent a day
without practicing. [Footnote: Pliny, xxxv. 12.] He made great
improvement in the mechanical part of his art, and also was the first
who covered his picture with a thin varnish, both to preserve it and
bring out the colors. He invented ivory black. His distinguishing
excellence was grace, "that artless balance of motion and repose,
springing from character, founded on propriety, which neither falls
short of the demands nor overleaps the modesty of Nature." [Footnote:
Fuseli, Lect. I.] His great contemporaries may have equaled him in
perspective, accuracy, and finish; but he added a grace of conception
and refinement of taste which placed him, by the general consent of
ancient authors, at the head of all the painters of the world. His
greatest work was his Venus Anadyomene, or Venus rising out of the sea,
in which female grace was personified. The falling drops of water from
her hair form a transparent silver veil over her form. It cost one
hundred talents, [Footnote: 243 pounds x 100 = 24300 pounds x 5 =
$121,500.] and was painted for the Temple of Aesculapius at Cos,
and afterwards placed by Augustus in the temple which he dedicated
to Julius Caesar. The lower part of it becoming injured, no one could
be found to repair it. Nor was there an artist who could complete
an unfinished picture which he left. He was a man who courted
criticism, and who was unenvious of the fame of rivals. He was
a great admirer and friend of Protogenes of Rhodes, who was his
equal in finish, but who never knew, as Apelles did, when to
cease correcting. [Footnote: Cicero, _Brut._ 18; _De Orat._
iii. 7. Martial, xxx. 9. Ovid, _Art. Anc._ iii. 403. Pliny, xxxv.
37.]

[Sidenote: Introduction of pictures into Rome.]

After Apelles, the art of painting declined, although great painters
occasionally appeared, especially from the school of Sicyon, which was
renowned for nearly two hundred years. The destruction of Corinth by
Mummius, B.C. 146, gave a severe blow to Grecian art. He carried to Rome
more works, or destroyed them, than all his predecessors combined.
Sylla, when he spoiled Athens, inflicted a still greater injury, and,
from that time, artists resorted to Rome and Alexandria and other
flourishing cities for patronage and remuneration. The masterpieces of
famous artists brought enormous prices, and Greece and Asia were
ransacked for old pictures. The paintings which Aemilius Paulus brought
from Greece required two hundred and fifty wagons to carry them in the
triumphal procession. With the spoliation of Greece, the migration of
artists commenced, and this spoliation of Greece and Asia and Sicily
continued for two centuries; and such was the wealth of Rhodes in works
of art that three thousand statues were found for the conquerors. Nor
could there have been less at Athens, Olympia, or Delphi. Scaurus had
all the public pictures of Sicyon transported to Rome. Verres plundered
every temple and public building in Sicily.

[Sidenote: High value placed by them on painting.]

Thus Rome was possessed of the finest paintings of the world, without
the slightest claim to the advancement of the art. And if the opinion of
Sir Joshua Reynolds is correct, art could soar no higher in the realm of
painting, as well as of statuary. Yet the Romans learned to place as
high value on the works of Grecian genius as the English do on the
paintings of the old masters of Italy and Flanders. And if they did not
add to the art, they gave such encouragement that, under the emperors,
it may be said to have been flourishing. Varro had a gallery of seven
hundred portraits of eminent men. [Footnote: Pliny, H. N. xxx. 2.] The
portraits as well as the statues of the great were placed in the
temples, libraries, and public buildings. The baths especially were
filled with paintings.

[Sidenote: Subjects among the Greeks.]

The great masterpieces of the Greeks were either historical or
mythological. Paintings of gods and heroes, groups of men and women, in
which character and passion could be delineated, were the most highly
prized. It was in the expression given to the human figure--in beauty of
form and countenance, in which all the emotions of the soul as well as
the graces of the body were portrayed--that the Greek artists sought to
reach the ideal, and to gain immortality. And they painted for people
who naturally had taste and sensibility.

[Sidenote: Landscape Painting.]

Among the Romans, portrait, decorative, and scene painting engrossed the
art, much to the regret of such critics as Pliny and Vitruvius. Nothing
could be in more execrable taste than a colossal painting of Nero, one
hundred and twenty feet high. From the time of Augustus, landscape
decorations were common, and were carried out with every species of
license. Among the Greeks we do not read of landscape painting. This has
been reserved for our age, and is much admired, as it was at Rome in its
latter days. Mosaic gradually superseded painting in Rome. It was first
used for floors, but finally walls and ceilings were ornamented with it,
like St. Peter's at Rome. Many ancient mosaics have been preserved which
attest beauty of design of the highest character, like the Battle of
Issus, lately discovered at Pompeii.

In fact, neither statuary nor painting was advanced by the Romans. They
had no sensibility, or conception of ideal beauty. The divine spark of
genius animated the Greeks alone. Still the wonders of Grecian art were
possessed by the Romans, and were made to adorn those grand
architectural monuments for which they had a taste. Greek productions
were not merely matters of property, they were copied and reproduced in
all the cities of the Mediterranean; and though no artist of original
genius arose from Augustus to Constantine, galleries of art existed
everywhere in which the masterpieces of Polygnotus, Pausias, Aristides,
Timanthes, Zeuxis, Parrhasius, Pamphilus, Euphranor, Protogenes,
Apelles, Timomachus, and of other illustrious men, were objects of as
much praise as the galleries of Dresden and Florence.

[Sidenote: Probable perfection of the ancients in painting.]

"The glorious art of these masters, as far as regards tone, light, and
local color," says Muller, "is lost to us, and we know nothing of it
except from obscure notices and later imitations; on the contrary, the
pictures on vases give us the most exalted idea of the progress and
achievements of the arts of design." [Footnote: Muller, Ancient Art,
143.] It is surprising that, with four colors, the Greeks should have
achieved such miracles of beauty and finish as are represented by the
greatest cities of antiquity. The great wonders of the schools of
Ephesus, Athens, and Sicyon have perished, and we cannot judge of their
merits as we can of the statues which have fortunately been preserved.
Whether Polygnotus was equal to Michael Angelo, Zeuxis to Raphael, and
Apelles to Titian, we have no means of settling. But it is scarcely to
be questioned that critics like the Greeks, whose opinions respecting
architecture and sculpture coincide with our own, could have erred in
their verdicts respecting those great paintings which extorted the
admiration of the world, and were held, even in the decline of art, in
such high value, not merely in the cities where they were painted, but
in those to which they were transferred. What _has_ descended to
our times, like the mural decorations of Pompeii and the designs on
vases, go to prove the perfection which was attained in painting, as
well as sculpture and architecture.

[Sidenote: Perfection of art among the ancients.]

And thus, in all those arts of which modern civilization is proudest,
and in which the genius of man has soared to the loftiest heights, the
ancients were not merely our equals: they were our superiors. It is
greater to originate than to copy. In architecture, in sculpture, and in
painting the Greeks attained absolute perfection. Any architect of our
time, who should build an edifice in different proportions than those
which were recognized in the great cities of antiquity, would make a
mistake. Who can improve upon the Doric columns of the Parthenon, or the
Corinthian capitals of the Temple of Jupiter? Indeed, it is in
proportion as we accurately copy the faultless models of the age of
Pericles that excellence with us is attained. When we differ from them
we furnish grounds of just criticism. So, in sculpture, the Greek Slave
is a reproduction of an ancient Venus, and the Moses of Michael Angelo
is a Jupiter in repose. It is only when the artist seeks to bring out
the purest and loftiest sentiments of the soul, and such as only
Christianity can inspire, that he may hope to surpass the sculpture of
antiquity in one department of the art alone--in expression, rather than
beauty of form, on which no improvement can be made. And if we possessed
the Venus of Apelles, as we can boast of having the sculptured Venus of
Cleomenes, we should probably discover greater richness of coloring, as
well as grace of figure, than in that famous Titian which is one of the
proudest ornaments of the galleries of Florence, and one of the greatest
marvels of Italian art.



REFERENCES.--Winckelmann's History of Ancient Art; Muller's Remains of
Ancient Art; A. J. Guattani, Antiq. de la Grande Grece; Mazois, Antiq.
de Pomp.; Sir W. Gill, Pompeiana; Donaldson's Antiquities of Athens;
Vitruvius, Stuart, Chandler, Clarke, Dodwell, Cleghorn, De Quincey.
These are some of the innumerable authorities on Architecture among the
ancients.

In Sculpture, Pliny and Cicero are the most noted critics. There is a
fine article in the Encyclopedia Britannica on this subject. In Smith's
Dictionary are the lives and works of the most noted masters. Muller's
Ancient Art alludes to the leading masterpieces. Montfaucon's Antiquite
expliquee en Figures; Specimens of Ancient Sculpture, by the Society of
Diettanti, London, 1809; Ancient Marbles of the British Museum, by
Taylor Combe; Millin, Introduction a l'etude des Monumens Antiques;
Monumens Inedits d'Antiquite figuree, recuellis et publies par Raoul-
Rochette; Gerhard's Archaol. Zeit.; David's Essai sur le Classement
Chronol. des Sculpteurs Grecs les plus celebres.

In Painting, see Caylus, Memoires de l'ac des Inscr. Levesque, sur les
Progres successifs de la Peinture chez les Grecs; I. I. Grund, Mahlerei
der Griechen; Meyer's Kunstgischichte; Muller, Hist, of Ancient Art;
Article on Painting, Ency. Brit., Article "Pictura," Smith's Dict.;
Fuseli's Lectures; Sir Joshua Reynolds' Lectures. Lanzi's History of
Painting refers to the revival of the art. Vitruvius speaks at some
length on ancient wall paintings. The finest specimens of ancient
painting are found in catacombs, the baths, and the ruins of Pompeii. On
this subject, Winckelmann is the great authority.




CHAPTER V.

THE ROMAN CONSTITUTION.


[Sidenote: The Roman creators of civilization.]

[Sidenote: The Romans sought to govern.]

[Sidenote: The Romans sought to govern through laws.]

[Sidenote: Roman sense of justice.]

It is not from a survey of the material grandeur, or the arts, or the
military prowess of Rome that we get the highest idea of her
civilization. These indicate strength and even genius; but the checks
and balances which were gradually introduced into the government of the
city and empire, by which society was kept together, and a great
prosperity secured for centuries, also show great foresight and
practical wisdom. A State which favored individual development while it
promoted law and order; which secured liberty, while it made the
government stable and respectable; which guaranteed rights to the poorer
citizens, while it placed power in the hands of those who were most
capable of wielding it for the general good, is well worth our
contemplation. The idea of aggrandizement was, it must be confessed, the
most powerful which entered into the Roman mind; but the principles of
national unity, the welfare of citizens, the reign of law, the security
of property, the network of trades and professions, also received
attention there. The aspirations for liberty and national prosperity
never left the Roman mind. The Romans were great creators of
civilization, though in a different sense from the Greeks. What the
principles of art were to the Greeks, those of government were to the
Romans. If the Greeks made statues, the Romans made laws. If the former
speculated on the beautiful, or the good, or the true, the latter
realized the boast of Diogenes--the power to govern men. The passion for
government was the most powerful which a Roman citizen felt, next to the
passion for war. For five hundred years after the expulsion of the
kings, there was the most perfect system of checks and balances in the
government of the state known in the ancient world, and which is
scarcely rivaled in the modern. Power was so wisely distributed that not
even a successful general was able to gain a dangerous preeminence.
Every citizen was a politician, and every Senator a statesman. For five
hundred years there was neither anarchy nor military despotism. If every
citizen knew how to fight, every citizen also knew how to govern, to
submit. No consul dared to exceed his trust; no general, till Caesar,
ventured to cross the Rubicon. The Roman Senate never lost its dignity--
a supreme body which controlled all public interests. The Romans were
sufficiently wise to bend to circumstances. Though proud, the patricians
made concessions to plebeians whenever it was necessary. The right of
citizenship was gradually extended throughout the Empire. Paul lived in
a remote city of Asia Minor, but, by virtue of his citizenship, could
appeal to a higher court than that of the governor. The Romans
succeeded, by their wisdom, in extending their institutions over the
countries they had conquered; and every part of the Empire was well
governed even when military despotism had overturned the ancient
constitution. There were, of course, cases of extortion and injustice,
and most governors made large fortunes; yet the provinces were better
administered, and the rule was more in accordance with justice than
under the native princes. Throughout the vast limits of the Empire, life
and property were safe, and the roads were free of robbers; nor were
there riots in the cities, except on very rare occasions, in which they
were put down with merciless severity. Yet a few hundred men were enough
to preserve order in the largest cities, and a few thousand in the most
extensive provinces. Even under the most tyrannical emperors, justice
and order were enforced. The government was never better administered
than by Tiberius, and further, was never better administered than when
he was abandoned to pleasure in his guarded villa at Capri. There was
the passion to govern the world, but in accordance with laws. The rule
of the Romans was not that of brute force, even when the army was at the
control of the Emperors. The citizens, to the last, enjoyed great social
and political rights. They had great immunities, in reference to
marriage, and the making of wills, and the possession of property. Their
persons were secured from the disgrace of corporal punishment; they
could appeal from the decision of magistrates; they were eligible to
public offices; they were exempted from many oppressive taxes which
still grind down the people in the most civilized states of Europe. The
government of Octavius was the mildest despotism ever known to the
ancient world. That Ulysses of state craft exercised the most extensive
powers under the ancient forms, and all the early emperors disguised
rather than paraded their powers. Contented with real power, the Roman
was careless of its display. He had the tact to rule without seeming to
rule; but rule he must, though not until he had first learned to obey--
obedience to laws and domination were inseparably connected. This made
the Roman yoke endurable, because it was not offensive or unjust. The
Romans were masters of the world by conquest, yet ruled the world they
had subdued by arms in accordance with laws based on the principles of
equity. This sense of justice, in the enjoyment of unbounded domination,
undoubtedly gave permanence to their government. The centurion was ever
present to enforce a decree, but the decree was in accordance with
justice. This was the idea, the recognized principle of government,
although often abused. Paul appealed to Caesar. He might have been
released by the governor, had he not appealed. Here was justice to Paul
in allowing the appeal; and still greater justice in keeping him in
bonds until acquitted by Caesar himself. [Sidenote: Degeneracy under
emperors.]

[Sidenote: Skill of the Romans for government.]

[Sidenote: On what the prosperity was based.]

[Sidenote: Government the great art and science of the Romans.]

[Sidenote: Prosperity of the government.]

It must, however, be confessed that, after the Caesars were fairly
established on their throne, a great indifference to public affairs
ensued. Every office was then, directly or indirectly, in the hands of
the emperor. Cicero expressed the popular sentiment of his day when he
said, "that was the most perfect government which was a combination of
popular and aristocratic authority;"--but in the eighth century of the
city, the system of checks and balances would have fallen to pieces in
the hands of a degenerate people. A constitutional monarchy even was no
longer possible. The vices of the oligarchy, and the fierce reactions of
the democracy, had destroyed all the dreams of the earlier patriots. The
mass of the people had long been passive under the sway of factions and
political intriguers, and they resigned themselves to the despotism of
the emperor without a struggle. But even in this degradation the power
of government remained among the leading classes. The governors of
provinces, taken generally from the Senate and the nobles, were skillful
in their administration of public affairs. They were enlightened in all
political duties. The traditional ideas of government survived for
several generations, even as the mechanism of the army made it powerful
after all real spirit had fled. The Roman still regarded himself as the
favorite of the gods, destined to achieve a vast mission, even the
reduction of the world to political unity. Augustus made every effort,
while he reigned, in the ruin of political institutions, to revive the
forms and traditions of other days. The patricians were favored and
honored, and the Senate still was made to appear august, with a
prostrate world at its feet, to which it was bound to dictate laws and
institutions. Political unity was the grand idea of the Romans, and this
idea has survived to our own times. It was one of the great elements of
Roman civilization. Universal empire was based, in the better days of
the Republic, on public morality, in the iron discipline of families, in
a marvelously well-trained soldiery, in a military system which made the
civil society an army almost ready for the field, in a recognition of
public rights and duties, in a wise system of colonization, in
conciliatory conduct to the conquered races, and in a central power as
the dispenser of all honor and emoluments. The civil wars broke up, in a
measure, this wise and considerate policy; still citizenship extended to
all parts of the empire, even when it was manifest it must soon fall
into the hands of barbarians. And as for the administration of justice,
it was probably better conducted under the emperors than under the
supreme rule of the Senate. Even bad emperors knew how to govern. To the
Roman mind every thing was subordinate to the art of government. And
every characteristic fitted the Romans to govern--energy of will,
practical good sense, the conception of justice, an unyielding pride,
fortitude, courage, and lust of power. And the spirit of domination was
carried out into every thing. It was made a science, an art. Whatever
would contribute to the ascendency of the state was remorselessly
adopted; whatever would interfere with it was abandoned or swept away.
Fierce and tolerant by turns, and as circumstances prompted--such was
the Roman. With submission life was easy, and the government was mild.
And the supreme government rarely entrusted power except to faithful,
capable, and patriotic rulers. The wisest and best were selected for
important offices. The governors of provinces were men of great
experience; they were generals and senators who had passed their term of
active service. They easily made great mistakes. They carried out the
policy of the State. They were acquainted with laws, and the customs of
the people whom they ruled. They were versed in the literature of their
day. They were men of dignity and fortune. They were moderate,
conciliatory, and firm. They were models for rulers for all subsequent
ages. There were, of course, exceptions, but the small number of riots
and rebellions shows the contentment of the people, for they were not
ground down by oppressive laws and exactions, until their spirit was
broken. How munificent were the emperors to such cities as Athens and
Alexandria! Athens was the seat of learning and culture, to the very end
of the empire. Arts and literature and science were fostered in all the
cities. They were adopted as parts of the empire, not treated like
conquered territories. After the destruction of Carthage, the Romans had
no jealousy of cities that once were equals. Their arts were made to
subserve Roman greatness, indeed, but they were left free to develop
their resources. The development of resources was a vital principle of
the Roman government. Spain, Syria, and Egypt, were never more
prosperous than under the imperial rule. All the provinces were more
thriving under the emperors than they had been under their ancient
kings, until the era of barbaric invasions. If war had been the mission
of the republic, peace was the pride of the empire. There were no wars
of importance for three hundred years, except those of necessity. The
end of the emperors was to govern, to preserve peace, and secure
obedience to the laws.

[Sidenote: The aristocracy the real rulers of the state.]

[Sidenote: Defects of Democratic ascendency.]

[Sidenote: The people unfit to govern when unenlightened.]

[Sidenote: Popular element in the Roman state.]

[Sidenote: Rich Plebeians had a great influence in the government.]

But we must bear in mind that, whatever were the popular rights enjoyed
in the republican era, and however vast were the powers wielded by the
emperors after liberty had fled, yet the constitution of Roman society
was essentially aristocratic. All the great conquests were made under
the rule of patricians, and all the leading men under the emperors were
nobles. The government was virtually, from first to last, in the hands
of the aristocracy. Still there was an important popular element,
especially in the latter days of the republic, to which revolutionary
leaders appealed, like the Gracchi, Marius, Catiline, and Caesar. One of
the most humiliating lessons which we learn of antiquity, we are forced
to own, was the signal incapacity of the people to govern themselves,
when they had obtained a greater share of power than the old
constitution had allowed. The republic did not long survive when
successful generals and eloquent demagogues were sustained by the
people. Had Rome been a democracy, as some suppose, the empire never
could have been established. We comfort ourselves, however, by the
reflection, that when the people surrendered themselves to factions and
demagogues and tyrants, they were both ignorant and depraved. Self-
government has never yet succeeded, because there have never been virtue
and intelligence among the masses. So long as we can boast of virtue and
intelligence among the people, we need not despair with the government
in their hands. An enlightened self-interest will suggest the wisest
policy. We only despair of the government of the people when they are
ignorant, brutal, and wicked. As there was no period in the ancient
world when they were not unenlightened, we are reconciled to the fact
that a wise and vigorous administration of public affairs was always
conducted by kings or nobles who had intelligence and patriotism, if
they were proud and imperious. Whatever faith we may justly cherish in
reference to popular sovereignty, grounded on the principles of natural
justice, and the hopes which are held out as the fruit of Christian
ideas, still, as a fact, there is but little in the history of the Roman
commonwealth which reflects much glory on the people, except when
controlled and marshalled by the aristocracy. Just so far as the popular
element prevailed, the state was hurried on to ruin. The aristocratical
element had the ascendency when Rome was most prosperous and most
respected. Yet, while the Roman constitution was essentially
aristocratic for five hundred years, it had a strong popular element
mingled with it. The patricians had the chief power, but they were not
lords and masters in so absolute a sense as to trample on the people
with impunity, nor were they able to deprive them of their rights, or of
all share in the government. They were not feudal nobles, nor a Venetian
oligarchy. And yet it were a mistake to suppose that the distinction
between the classes implied that the aristocratic power was lodged with
the patricians alone. The patricians were not necessarily aristocrats,
nor the plebeians a rabble. The political distinctions passed away
without destroying social inequalities. There were great families among
the plebeians which really belonged to the aristocratic class, at least
in the time of Cicero. Aristocracy may have been based on birth, as in
England, but it was sustained by wealth, as in that country. A very rich
man gained, ultimately, admission to the noble class, as Rothschild has
in London. Without wealth to uphold distinctions, any aristocracy soon
becomes contemptible. That organization of society is most aristocratic
which confers great political and social privileges on a few men, and
retains these privileges from generation to generation, as in France
during the reign of Louis XV. The state of society at Rome under the
republic, favored the monopoly of offices among powerful families. It
was considered very remarkable for even Cicero to rise to the highest
honors of the state with his magnificent genius, character, attainments,
and services; but he shared the consulship with a man of very ordinary
capacity. The great offices were all in the hands of the aristocracy,
from the expulsion of the kings to the times of Julius Caesar. Even the
tribunes of the people ultimately were selected from powerful families.

[Sidenote: The Patricians.]

[Sidenote: The Roman _Gens_.]

The Roman people--_Romanus populus_--under the kings, the original
citizens, were the warriors who built Rome, and conquered the
surrounding cities and districts. They were called _patres_, which
is synonymous with Patricians. [Footnote: Cicero, _De Repub._, ii.
12 Liv., i. 8.] They were united among themselves by kindred and by
political and religious ties. They supported themselves by agriculture
although engaged continually in war. They consisted originally of three
tribes, which gradually were united into the sovereign people. The first
tribe was a Latin colony, and settled on the Palatine Hill; the second
were Sabine settlers on the Quirinal; the third were Etruscans, who
occupied the Caelian. They were distinct, at first, and were not united
fully till the time of Tarquinius Priscus, himself an Etruscan.
[Footnote: Dionys., ii. 62.] As there were no other Roman citizens but
these patricians, they had no exclusive rights under the kings, and
hence there was then no aristocracy of birth. Each of these three tribes
of citizens consisted of ten curiae, and each curia of ten decuries, or
gentes. The three tribes, therefore, contained three hundred gentes. A
gens was a family, and the gentes were aggregates of kindred families.
[Footnote: Nieb., Lect. V.] The name of a gens was generally
characterized by the termination _eia_ or _ia_, as Julia, Cornelia,
and it is to be presumed that each gens had a common ancestor.
But with the growth of the city it came to pass that a gens often
included a great number of families; we read of three hundred Fabii
forming the gens Fabia in the year 275. These families composed,
ultimately, the aristocracy. They were the people who filled all
offices, and alone had the right of voting in the assemblies. As the
gentes were subdivisions of the three ancient tribes, the _populus_
alone had _gentes_, so that to be a patrician and to have a gens
were synonymous. With the growth of Rome new gentes or families were
added which did not claim descent from the ancient tribes. The powerful
gens of the Claudia came to Rome with Atta Claudius, their head, after
the expulsion of the kings. Tullus Hostilius incorporated the Julii,
Servilii and other gentes with the patricians. This ruling class, the
descendants of the conquerors, became a powerful aristocracy, and
ultimately learned to value pride of blood. There are very few names in
Roman history, until the time of Marius, which did not belong to this
noble class. What proud families were the Servilii, the Claudii, the
Julii, the Cornelii, the Fabii, the Valerii, the Sempronii, the Octavii,
the Sergii, and others. [Footnote: Liv., i. 33. Dionys., iii. 31.]

The _Equites_ were originally elected from the patricians, and were
cavalry soldiers, and did not form a distinct class till the time of the
Gracchi. They were composed of rich citizens, whose wealth enabled them
to become judices. They had the privilege of wearing a gold ring, and
had seats reserved for them, like the Senate, at the theatre and circus.
They increased in number with the increase of wealth, and formed an
honorable corps from which the highest officers of the army and the
civil magistrates were chosen. Admission to this body was an
introduction to public life, and was a test of social position. It was
composed of rich plebeians as well as patricians, and was based wholly
on wealth. Pliny says, "It became the third order in the state, and to
the title of _Senatus Populusque Romanus_, there began to be added,
_et Equestris ordo_."

[Sidenote: The Roman plebs.]

[Sidenote: The tribunes.]

[Sidenote: Gradual increase of their power.]

[Sidenote: Their usurpations.]

Beside this _Romanus populus_, which constituted the ruling class
under kings, was another body, made up of conquered people. In early
times their number was small, nor did they appear as a distinct class
until the reign of Tullus Hostilius. After the subjection of Alba, the
head of the Latin Confederacy, great numbers were transferred to Rome,
and received settlements on the Caelian Hill, and were kept under
submission to the patricians. As the Roman conquests extended, their
numbers increased, until they formed the larger part of the population.
They were called _plebs_, or commonalty, and had no political
privileges whatever. They had not even the right of suffrage; but they
were enrolled in the army, [Footnote: Liv., i. 33. Dionys., iii. 31. ]
and made to bear the expenses of the state. At first they were not
allowed to intermarry with the patricians. Their oppression provoked
resistance. The struggle which ensued is one of the most memorable in
Roman history. The haughty oligarchy were obliged gradually to concede
rights. These rights the _plebs_ retained. First they gained a law
which prevented patricians from taking usurious interest. They secured
the appointment of tribunes for their protection. Soon after they had
the right of summoning before their own _Comitia tributa_ any one
who violated their rights. In 449 they had influence sufficient to
establish the Connubium, by which they could intermarry with patricians.
In 421 the plebeians were admitted to the quaestorship. Then, after a
fierce contest, they were made decemvirs. Their next right was the
dignity of the consulship, and led to the dictatorship. In 351 they
secured the censorship, and in 336 the praetorship. Political
distinctions now vanished. The possession of a share of the great
offices created powerful families, and these were incorporated with the
aristocracy. The great privilege of securing tribunes was the first step
to political power, and the most important in the constitutional history
of the state. And it was the tribunes who gradually usurped the greatest
powers. They assumed the right, in 456, of convoking even the Senate.
They also had the right to be present in the deliberations of the
Senate; as their persons were inviolable, they interceded against any
action which a magistrate might undertake during his term of office, and
even a command issued by a praetor. They could compel the Senate to
submit a question to a fresh consultation, and ultimately compelled the
consuls to appoint a dictator. Their power grew to such a height that
they acquired the right of proposing to the _Comitia tributa_, or
the Senate, measures on nearly all the important affairs of the state,
and finally were elected from among the Senators themselves.

[Sidenote: Advancement of Plebeians.]

Through the institution of tribunes, and other circumstances, especially
the increase of wealth, the plebeians, originally so unimportant and
insignificant that they could not obtain admission into the Senate, nor
the high offices of state, nor the occupancy of the public lands,
ultimately obtained all the rights of the patricians, so that gradually
the political distinctions between patricians and plebeians vanished
altogether, 286 B.C., and the term _populus_ was applied to them as
well as to the patricians. [Footnote: Liv., iv. 44; v. 11,12. Cicero
_de Repub._, ii. 37.]

[Sidenote: Gradual increase of their power.]

These rights were only secured by bitter and fierce contests. The
plebeians, during their long struggle, did not seek power to gratify
their ambition, but to protect themselves from oppression. Nor was the
power which they obtained abused until near the close of the Republic.

But while they ultimately were blended, politically, with the
patricians, still the latter monopolized most of the great offices of
the state until the time of Cicero, and socially, always were
preeminent. Yet there were many noble plebeian families who were blended
with the aristocratic class. Aristocracy survived, after the political
distinctions between the two classes were abrogated. Rome was never a
democracy. Great families, whether patrician or plebeian, controlled the
State, either by their wealth or social connections. The Roman nobility
was really composed of all the families rendered illustrious by the
offices they had filled. And as the great officers were taken generally
from the Senate, that body was particularly august.

[Sidenote: The Senate.]

[Sidenote: The prerogative of Senators.]

Until the usurpation of Caesar, the Senate was the great controlling
power of the republic. It not only had peculiar privileges and powers,
but a monopoly of offices. It always remained powerful, in spite of the
victories of the plebeians. The laws proclaimed equality, but for fifty-
nine years after the plebeians had the right of appointment as military
tribunes, only eighteen were plebeians, [Footnote: _Hist. Julius
Caesar_, by Napoleon; chap. ii. 5.] while two hundred and forty-six
were patricians; and while the right of admission to the Senate was
acknowledged on principle, yet no one could enter it without having
obtained a decree of the censor, or exercised a curule magistracy,--
favors almost always reserved for the aristocracy. The Senate was a
judicial and legislative body, and numbered for several centuries but
three hundred men, selected from the patricians. At first they were
appointed by the kings, afterwards by the consuls, and subsequently by
the censors. But as all those who had been appointed by the
_populus_ to the great offices had admission into this body, the
people, that is, the patricians, virtually nominated the candidates for
the Senate. But all magistrates were not necessarily members of the
Senate, only those whom the censors selected from among them, and the
curule magistrates during their office. It was from these curule
magistrates that vacancies were filled up. The office of senator was for
life. When the plebeians obtained the great offices, the Senate of
course represented the whole people, as it formerly had represented the
_populus_. But it was never a democratic assembly, for all its
members belonged to the nobles. It required, under Augustus, 1,200,000
sesterces to support the senatorial dignity. Only a rich man could be,
therefore, a senator. Nor could he carry on any mercantile business. The
Senate was ever composed of men who had rendered great public services,
or who were distinguished for wealth and talents. It was probably the
most dignified and the proudest body of men ever assembled. The powers
of the Senate were enormous. It had the general superintendence of
matters of religion and foreign relations; it commanded the levies of
troops; it regulated duties and taxes; it gave audience to ambassadors;
it proposed, for a long time, the candidates for office to the
_Comitia_; it determined upon the way that war should be conducted;
it decreed to what provinces the consuls and praetors should be sent; it
appointed governors of provinces; it sent out embassies to foreign
states; it carried on the negotiations with foreign ambassadors; it
declared martial law in the appointment of dictators, and it decreed
triumphs to fortunate generals. In short it was the supreme power in the
state, and was the medium through which all the affairs of government
passed. It was neither an hereditary, nor a popular body, yet
represented the state--at first the patrician order, and finally the
whole people, retaining to the end its aristocratic character. The
senators wore on their tunics a broad purple stripe,--a badge of
distinction, like a modern decoration,--and they had the exclusive
rights of the orchestra at theatres and amphitheatres. [Footnote: See
article in Smith's _Dict. of Ant._, by Dr. Schmitz.] Under the
emperors, the Senate was degraded, and was made entirely subservient to
their will, and a mouth-piece; still it survived all the changes of the
constitution, and was always a dignified and privileged body. It
combined, in its glory, more functions than the English Parliament; it
was convoked by the curule magistrates, and finally by the tribunes. The
most ancient place of assembly was the Curia Hostilia, though
subsequently many temples were used. The majority of votes decided a
question, and the order in which senators spoke and voted was determined
by their rank, in the following order: president of the Senate, consuls,
censors, praetors, aediles, tribunes, quaestors. Their decisions, called
_Senatus Consulta_, were laws--_leges_--and were entrusted to
the care of aediles and tribunes. [Footnote: Nieb. _Roman Hist._,
viii. p. 264.]

[Sidenote: The Senate composed of patricians and plebeians.]

[Sidenote: The Senate hold the great offices of state.]

Such was the Roman Senate--an assembly of nobles, whether patrician or
plebeian. The descendants of all who had filled curule magistracies were
_nobiles_, and had the privilege of placing in the atrium of the
house the images and titles of their ancestors--an heraldic distinction
in substance. And as the patricians carried back their pedigree to the
remotest historical period, there was great pride of blood. Few
plebeians could boast of a remote and illustrious ancestry, and every
plebeian who obtained a curule office, was the founder of his family's
nobility, like Cicero--a _novus homo_. This nobility contrived to
keep possession of all the great offices, and it was difficult for a new
man to get access to their ranks. The distinction of Patrician
and Plebeian was secondary, after the _Gracchi_ to that of
_Nobilitas_, yet it was rare to find a patrician gens the families
of which had not enjoyed the highest honors many times over. Thus the
aristocracy was composed of the families of those who had held the
highest offices of the state; but as these offices were controlled by
the Senate and enjoyed by the patricians chiefly, it was difficult to
determine whether nobility was the result of patrician blood, or the
possession of great offices. A man could scarcely be a patrician who had
not held a great office; nor could he often hold a great office unless
he were a patrician. The great offices were held in succession by the
members of the Senate. The two consuls, the ten tribunes, the eight
praetors in the time of Sulla--the twenty quaestors, together with the
governors of provinces, and the generals who were selected from the
Senate, or belonged to it, would necessarily compose a large part of the
nobility, when their term of office lasted but a limited time, so that a
senator with any ability was sure, in the course of his life, of the
highest honors of the state.

[Sidenote: But only those who had distinguished themselves.]

The great executive officers, therefore, belonged to the noble class,
not of necessity, but as a general thing. Cicero was a _novus
homo_, and yet rose by his talents to the highest dignities. It was
rare, however, to confer the highest offices on those who had not
distinguished themselves in war. Military fame, after all, gave the
greatest prestige to the Roman name. Consuls commanded armies, but they
would not have been chosen consuls except for military, as well as
political, talent.

[Sidenote: The Consuls.]

The consul was, after the abolition of the monarchy, the highest officer
of the state. It was not till the year 366 B.C. that a plebeian obtained
this dignity. The powers of consuls were virtually those of the old
kings, with the exception of priestly authority. They convened the
Senate, introduced ambassadors, called together the people, conducted
elections, commanded the armies and never appeared in public without
lictors. Nor were they shorn of their powers till Julius Caesar assumed
the dictatorship. The whole internal machinery of the state was under
their control. But their term of office lasted only a single year. Their
election took place in the _Comitia Centuriata_.

[Sidenote: The censors.]

The censors were next in dignity, and like the consuls, there were two,
and elected in the same manner under the presidency of a consul; only
men of consular rank were chosen to this high office, and hence it was
really higher than the consulship. The censors were chosen for a longer
term than the consuls, and had the oversight of the public morals, the
care of the census, and the administration of the finances. They could
brand with ignominy the highest persons of the state, and could elect to
the Senate, and exclude from it unworthy men. They had, with the aediles,
the control of the public buildings and all public works. They could
take away from a knight his horse, and punish extravagance in living, or
the improper dissolution of the marriage rite. They were held in the
greatest reverence, and when they died were honored with magnificent
funerals.

[Sidenote: The praetors.]

Next in rank were the praetors, at first two in number, and ultimately
sixteen. They exercised the judicial power, both in civil and criminal
cases.

[Sidenote: The aediles.]

The aediles were also curule magistrates, and to them was entrusted the
care of the public buildings, and the superintendence of public
festivals. They were the keepers of the decrees of the Senate, and of
the plebiscita. They superintended the distribution of water, the care
of the streets, the drainage of the city, and the distribution of corn
to the people. It was their business to see that no new deities were
introduced, and they had the general superintendence of the police, and
the inspection of baths. Their office entailed large expenses, and they
were forced into great extravagance to gain popularity, as in the case
of Julius Caesar and Aemilius Scaurus; but the aediles exercised extensive
powers, which, however, were essentially diminished under the emperors.

[Sidenote: The tribunes.]

Allusion has already been made to the tribunes, in connection with the
development of the plebeian power. At first they were only two, then in
creased to five, and finally to ten. It was their business to protect
the plebs from the oppression of nobles, but their authority was so much
increased in the time of Julius Caesar that they could veto an ordinance
of the Senate. [Footnote: Caesar, _De Beil Civ_., 1, 2.] They not
only could stop a magistrate in his proceedings, but command their
viatores to seize a consul or a censor, to imprison him, or throw him
from the Tarpeian rock. [Footnote: Liv. ii. 56, iv. 26; Cicero, _De
Legibus_, iii. 9.] The college of tribunes had the power of making
edicts. After the passage of the Hortensian law, there was no power
equal to theirs, and they could dictate even to the Senate itself. In
the latter days of the republic, the tribunes were generally elected
from among the senators. It was the vast influence which the people had
obtained through the tribunes which led to the usurpation of Caesar; for
he, as well as Marius, rose into power by courting them against the
interests of the aristocracy.

[Sidenote: The quaestors.]

The last of the great magistrates whose office entitled them to a seat
in the Senate were the quaestors, who had charge of the public money.
Originally only two in number, they were raised by Sulla to twenty, and
by Caesar to forty, for political influence. As the Senate had the
supreme direction of the finances they were merely its agents or
paymasters. The proconsul or praetor, who had the administration of a
province, was attended with a quaestor to regulate the collection of the
revenues. The quaestors also were the paymasters of the army.

Such were the great executive officers of the state, having a seat in
the Senate, and belonging to the noble class by their official position
as well as by birth. No one could be consul until he had passed through
all these offices successively, except the censorship.

[Sidenote: Pontifex maximus.]

There was, however, another great Roman dignitary who held his office
for life, which was one of transcendent importance. He was at the head
of the college of priests, which had the superintendence of all matters
of religion. The college of pontiffs, of which, under Julius Caesar,
there were sixteen, were not priests, but stood above all priests, and
regulated the worship of the gods, and punished offenses against
religion. The chief pontiff lived in a public palace in the Via Sacra,
and might also hold other offices. It is a great proof of the talents of
Caesar and of the estimation in which he was held, that, at the age of
thirty-seven, he was chosen to this high dignity, against the powerful
opposition of Catulus, prince of the Senate, and when he had only
reached the aedileship.

[Sidenote: Assemblies of the people.]

[Sidenote: The Comitia Cenuriata.]

In regard to the assemblies of the people, where they voted for the
great officers of state, it must be borne in mind that they were not
made up of the rabble, but of the populus or the patricians till nearly
the close of the republic. Each of the thirty curia had its building for
the discussion of political and legal questions. They had also
collectively an assembly, called _Comitia Curiata_, where the
people voted on the measures proposed by the magistrates. The votes were
given by the curiae, each curia having one collective vote. The assembly
originated nothing, but decided upon the life of Roman citizens, upon
peace and war, and the election of magistrates. This was the primitive
form under the kings. But Servius Tullius instituted the _Comitia
Centuriata_, and hence divided the populus into six property classes,
and one hundred and ninety-three centuriae. The first class was composed
of ninety-eight centuriae, with a property qualification of one hundred
thousand asses; the second of twenty-two centuriae with seventy-five
thousand asses; the third of twenty, with fifty thousand asses; the
fourth of twenty-two, with twenty-five thousand asses; the fifth of
thirty, with eleven thousand asses; and the sixth of any one of those
below twelve and a half minae. Yet this class was the most numerous. The
wealthier classes voted first, and when a majority of the centuries was
obtained the voting stopped. Hence the power was virtually in the hands
of the rich; for, united, they made a majority before the poorer classes
were called upon to vote. The _Comitia Centuriata_ elected the
magistrates and made laws, and formed the highest court of appeal, but
all its decisions had to be sanctioned by the curiae, although in course
of time the curia was a formality. The centuries met in the Campus
Martius, and were presided over by the consuls, who read the names of
the candidates. In the assemblies by centuries, the vote of the first
class prevailed over all the others; in the _comitia_ by curiae the
patricians were supreme.

[Sidenote: The Comitia Tributa.]

[Sidenote: Decline of power of the comitia.]

The _Comitia Tributa_ represented the thirty Roman tribes according
to the Servian constitution, to whom was originally given the right to
elect inferior magistrates. This was a plebian assembly, and had very
insignificant powers, chiefly relating to the local affairs of the
tribes. But when these tribes began to be real representatives of the
people, with the increase of the plebeian classes, matters affecting the
whole state were brought before them by the tribunes. This gave to the
assembly the initiative of measures, which was sanctioned by a law of L.
Valerius Publicola, B.C. 449. This law gave to the decrees passed by the
tribes the power of a real _lex_, binding upon the whole people,
provided it had the sanction of the Senate and the populus in the
_Comitia Centuriata_. In 287 B.C. the Hortensian law made the
plebiscita independent of the sanction of the Senate. When the plebeians
began to be recognized as an essential element in the state, it was
found inconvenient to have the first class, which included the equites,
so greatly preponderant in the comitia of the centuries; and it was
designed to blend the _Comitia Centuriata_ and _the Tributa_
in such a manner as to make only one assembly. This took place after the
completion of the thirty-five tribes, B.C. 241. The citizens of each
tribe were divided into five property classes, and each tribe into ten
centuries, making three hundred and fifty centuries. This comitia was
far more democratic than the comitia of the centuries, and was guided by
the tribunes. When all the Italians were incorporated with the thirty-
five tribes, violence and bribery became the order of the day. Sulla
took away the jurisdiction of the people, and Julius Caesar encroached
still more on popular rights when he decided upon peace and war in
connection-with the Senate--which great question was formerly settled by
the comitia alone. The people retained nothing under him but the
election of magistrates, which amounted to little, since Caesar had the
right to appoint half the magistrates himself, with the exception of the
consuls. After the death of Caesar, the comitia continued to be held, but
was always controlled by the rulers, whose unlimited powers were
ultimately complied with without resistance. Finally the comitia became
a mere farce, and all legislation passed away forever, and was
completely in the hands of the emperor and Senate.

[Sidenote: The nobles retain the chief ascendency.]

[Sidenote: The dictator.]

[Sidenote: The idea of popular government.]

[Sidenote: The Senate retains all real power.]

Thus it would appear that the Roman constitution was essentially
aristocratic, especially for three hundred years after the expulsion
of kings. The _Senate_ and the _populus_ had the whole power.
Gradually, as wealth increased, the _equites_ became an influential
order, not less aristocratical than the patricians. The _plebs_
were not of much consideration till the time of the Gracchi, and always
obtained office with difficulty. It was two hundred years after the
expulsion of kings before the plebeians could even obtain a share of the
public lands. So long as the aristocracy preserved their virtue and
patriotism, the state was most ably administered, and continually
increased in wealth and power. The conquest of Italy was entirely under
the regime of nobles, and even when wealthy plebeian families mingled
with the ancient patricians there was still great difficulty in reaching
preferment, without the advantages of birth. [Footnote: Mommsen,
_Roman Hist_., i. p. 241.] In fourteen years, from 399 to 412, the
patricians allowed only six plebeians to reach the consulship. The lives
of the citizens were protected by the laws, but public opinion remained
powerless at the assassination of those who incurred the hatred of the
Senate. The comitia were free, but the Senate had at its disposal either
the veto of the tribunes or the religious scruples of the people, for a
consul could prevent the meeting of the assemblies, and the augurs could
cut short their deliberations. Even the dictatorship was often a means
of oppressing the plebs, and was a lever in the hands of the
aristocracy, since the dictator was appointed by the consuls under the
direction of the Senate. [Footnote: Liv., viii. 23.] He was a patrician
as a matter of course, until the political distinctions between
patrician and plebeian were removed, and had absolute authority for six
months. He was not held responsible for his acts while in office,
[Footnote: Becker, _Handbuch der Romanisch Alterthumer_, vii. p. 2;
Nieb. _History of Rome_. vol. i. p. 563.] nor was there any appeal
from his decisions. He was preceded by twenty-four lictors, and was
virtually supreme. Between 390 and 416 there were eighteen dictators.
The Senate thus remained all-powerful, in spite of the victories of the
plebeians, and such were its patriotism and intelligence that it
preserved its preponderance. It was during the conquest of Italy that
aristocratic power shone in all its splendor, and the most able men were
entrusted with public affairs. Every thing was sacrificed to patriotism,
and discipline was enforced with cruelty. The most powerful patricians
readily exposed their lives in battle, and a town became a people which
ultimately embraced the world. When the plebeians had grown to be a
power the decline of the republic commenced, and a new organization was
necessary. Great chieftains became dictators for life, and the imperial
sceptre was seized by an unscrupulous but enlightened general. The Roman
_populus_ in an important sense carried out the great idea of self-
government, but, strictly speaking, self-government, as applied to the
people generally, never existed in the Roman Commonwealth. But the idea
was advanced which gave birth to future republics. Nor did the fall of
the old patrician oligarchy divest the Roman commonwealth of its
aristocratic character, for a new aristocracy arose. When the plebeian
families obtained the consulate and other high offices of state, they
were put on a level with the old patrician families, and were allowed
the privilege of placing the wax images of their illustrious ancestors
in the family hall, and to have these images carried in the funeral
procession. As curule magistrates, they had a seat in the Senate, and
wore the insignia of rank--the gold finger-ring and the purple border on
the toga. "The result of the Licinian laws," says Mommsen, "in reality,
only amounted to what we now call the creation of a new batch of
officers." [Footnote: Mommsen, B. III. c. xi.] As all the descendants of
those who had enjoyed the curule magistracy were entitled to the
privilege of these distinctions, the nobility became hereditary. And as
the great officers of state were generally selected from this class,
since they controlled the comitia, the nobility was not merely
hereditary, but it was a _governing_ nobility. The nobility had the
possession of the Senate itself. It monopolized the great offices of
state. The stability of the Roman aristocracy is seen in the fact, that,
from the year 388 to 581, when the consulate was held by one patrician
and one plebeian, one hundred and forty of the consuls, out of the three
hundred and eighty-six, belonged to sixteen great houses. The Cornelii
furnished thirty consuls in one hundred and ninety-three years, the
Valerii eighteen, the Claudii twelve, the Aemilii fifteen, the Fabii
twelve, the Manlii ten, the Postumii eight, the Servilii seven, the
Sulpicii eight, the Papirii four, to say nothing of other curule
offices. Thus the nobility was not composed exclusively of patrician
families, although these were the most numerous, but of old plebeian
families also, in the same way that the English House of Lords is
composed of families which trace their origin to Saxons as well as
Normans, although the Normans, for several centuries, were the governing
class. And as the House of Lords has accessions occasionally from the
ranks of the people, in consequence of great wealth, or political
interest, or eminent genius, or signal success in war, so the Roman
nobility was increased, as old families died out, by the successful
generals who gained the great offices of state. Marius arose from the
people, but his exploits in the field of battle insured his entrance
among the nobility in consequence of the offices he held, even as the
Lord Chancellors of England, who have been eminent lawyers merely, are
made herditary peers in consequence of their judicial position.

[Sidenote: Roman citizens.]

The Roman burgesses again were any thing but a rabble. They were
composed of men of standing and wealth. If they did not compose the
motive-power, they constituted a firm foundation of the state. They had
a clear conception of the common good, and a sagacity in the election of
rulers, and a spirit of sacrifice for the general interests. They had a
lofty patriotism that nothing could seduce. The rabble of Rome were of
no account until the enormous wealth of the senatorial houses raised up
clients and parasites. And when this rabble, who were merely the
dependents of the rich, obtained the privilege of voting, then the
decline of liberties was rapid and fearful, since they were merely the
tools of powerful demagogues.

[Sidenote: Balance of power.]

Thus among the Romans, until the prostration of their liberties, the
powers of government were not in the hands of kings, as among the
Orientals, nor in those of the aristocracy, exclusively, nor in those of
the people; but in all combined, one class acting as a check against
another class. They were shared between the Senate, the magistrates, and
the people in their assemblies. Theoretically, the _populus_ was
the real sovereign by whom power was delegated; but, for several
centuries, the _populus_ meant the patricians, who alone could take
part in the assemblies. The preponderating influence was exercised by
the Senate. The judicial, the legislative, and the executive authority
were as clearly defined as in our times. The magistrates were all
elected by the Senate or the people, and sometimes proposed by the one
and confirmed by the other. No case, involving the life of a Roman
citizen, could be decided except by the _Comitia Centuriata_. The
election of a magistrate, or the passing of a law, though made on the
ground of a _senatus consultum_, yet required the sanction of the
curiae. In legislative measures, a _senatus consultum_ was brought
before the people by the consul, or the senator who originated the
measure, after it had previously been exhibited in public for seventeen
days. The inferior magistrates, whose office it was to superintend
affairs of local interest, were elected by the _Comitia Tributa_.
All the magistrates, however great their power, could, at the expiration
of their office, be punished for transcending their trust. No person was
above the authority of the laws. No one class could subvert the
liberties and prerogatives of another. The Senate had the most power,
but it could not ride over the Constitution. The consuls were not the
creatures of the Senate; they were elected by the centuries, and
presided over the Senate, as well as the assembly of the people. The
abuse of power by a consul was prevented by his colleague, and by the
certainty of being called to account on the expiration of his office.
His power was also limited by the Senate, since he was dependent upon
it. There was no absolute power exercised at Rome, except by the
dictators, but they were appointed only in a national crisis, and then
only for six months. Unless their power were perpetuated, not even they
could overturn the constitution. The senators again, the most powerful
body in the state, were not entirely independent. They could not elect
members of their own body, nor keep them in office. The censors had the
right of electing the senators from among the ex-magistrates and the
equites, and of excluding such as they deemed unworthy. And as the
Senate was thus composed wholly of men who had held the highest offices
or had great wealth, it was a body of great experience and wisdom. Yet
even this august assembly was obliged to submit to the introduction of
any subject of discussion by the tribune. What a counterpoise to the
authority of this powerful body were the tribunes! From their right of
appearing in the Senate, and of taking part in its discussions, and from
their being the representatives of the whole people, in whom power was
supposed primarily to be lodged, they gradually obtained the right of
intercession against any action which a magistrate might undertake
during the time of his office, and without giving a reason. They could
not only prevent a consul from convening the Senate, but could veto an
ordinance of the Senate itself. They could even seize a consul and a
censor and imprison him. Thus was power marvelously distributed, even
while it remained in the hands of the higher classes. The people were
not powerless when their assemblies could make laws and appoint
magistrates, and when their tribunes could veto the most important
measures. The consuls could not remain in office long enough to be
dangerous, and the senators could be ejected from their high position
when flagrantly unworthy. "The _nobiles_ had no legal privileges
like a feudal aristocracy, but they were bound together by a common
distinction derived from a legal title, and by a common interest; and
their common interest was to endeavor to confine the election to all the
high magistracies to the members of their own body." The term
_nobilitas_ implied that some one of a man's ancestors had filled a
curule magistracy, and it also implied the possession of wealth.
Theoretically it would seem that the _nobiles_ were very numerous,
since so many people can ordinarily boast of an illustrious ancestor;
but practically the class was not so large as we might expect. A noble
might be poor, but still, like Sulla, he remained noble. The distinction
of patrician was, long before the reforms of the Gracchi, of secondary
importance; that of _nobilitas_ remained to the close of the
republic. The nobility kept themselves exclusive and powerful from the
possession of the great offices of state from generation to generation;
they prevented their own extinction by admitting into their ranks those
who distinguished themselves to an eminent degree.

[Sidenote: The reign of demagogues.]

But this state of things applied only to the republic in its palmy days.
When democratical influences favored the ascendency of demagogues,--thus
far in the history of our world, the inevitable consequence of a greater
extension of popular liberties than what the people are prepared for,--
then wholesome restraints were removed, and the people were the most
enslaved, when they thought themselves most free. There is no more
melancholy slavery than the slavery of the passions. Ignorant self-
indulgent people are led by their passions; they are rarely influenced
by reason or by enlightened self-interest. Those who most skillfully and
unscrupulously appeal to popular passions, when the people have power,
have necessarily the ascendency in the community. The people, deceived,
flattered, headstrong, follow them willingly. In times of war, and
especially among a martial people, military chieftains, by inflaming the
warlike passions, by holding out exaggerated notions of glory, by
appealing to vanity and patriotism mingled, have ever had a most
extraordinary influence in republics. They have also great influence in
monarchies, when the monarch is crazed by the passion of military
success. Monarchs, with the passions of the people, are led by men who
flatter them even as the people are led. Hence the reign of favorites
with kings. The ascendency of favorites, with sovereigns like Louis
XIII., or even like Louis XIV., is maintained by the same policy as that
which animated Marius and Caesar, or animates the popular favorites of
our times. And this ascendency may be for the better or the worse,
according to the character of the demagogue rulers, or royal favorites.
When a Richelieu or a Cavour holds the reins, a country may be
indirectly benefited by the wisdom of their public acts. When a
Buckingham or a Catiline prevails, a nation suffers a calamity. In
either case, the power which is conceded to be legitimate becomes a
mockery. With Caesar, the popular power is a mere name, even, as with
Richelieu, the kingly is a shadow. In the better days of the Roman
republic, the executive power was kept in a healthy state by the great
authority of the Senate, and the senatorial influence was prevented from
undue encroachment by the watchfulness of the tribunes. And when the
aristocratical ascendency was most marked, the aristocratical body had
too much virtue and ability to be enslaved by ambitious and able men of
their own number. Had the Roman Senate, in the height of its power, been
composed of ignorant, inexperienced, selfish, unpatriotic members, then
it would have been easy for a great intellect among them, whether
accompanied by virtue or not, by appealing perpetually to their pride,
to their rank, to their privileges, to their peculiar passions, to have
led them, as Pitt led the House of Commons. The real rulers of our world
are few, in any community, or under any form of government. They are
always dangerous, when there is a low degree of virtue or intelligence
among those whom they represent. Certain it is, that their power is
nearly absolute when they are sustained by passion or prejudice. The
representative of a fanatical constituency has no continued power,
unless he perpetually flatters those whom, in his heart, he knows to be
lost to the control of reason. And his influence is greater or less,
according to the strength of the popular passions which he inflames, or
in which, as is often the case, he shares. The honest representative of
fanatics is himself a fanatic. Thus Cromwell had so great an ascendency
with his party, because he felt more strongly than they in matters where
they sympathized. But the liberties of Rome were not overturned by
fanatical rulers, but by those who availed themselves of the passions
which they themselves did not feel, in order to compass their selfish
ends. And that is the greater danger in republics--that bad men rise by
the suffrage of foolish people whom they deceive, by affecting to fall
in with their wishes, like Napoleon and Caesar, rather than that honest
men climb to power by the very excess of their enthusiasm, like
Cromwell, or Peter the Hermit. Hence a Mirabeau is more dangerous than a
Robespierre. The former would have betrayed the people he led; the
latter would have urged them on to consistent courses, even if the way
was lined with death. Had Mirabeau lived, and retained his power, he
would have compromised the Revolution, of which Napoleon was the
product, and the work would have had to be done over. But Robespierre
pushed his principles to their utmost logical sequence, and the nation
was satisfied with their folly, in a practical point of view. Napoleon
arose to rebuke anarchy as well as feudal kings, and though maddened and
intoxicated by war, so that his name is a Moloch, he never dreamed of
restoring the unequal privileges which the Revolution swept away.

[Sidenote: Greatness of the constitution.]

The Roman constitution, as gradually developed by the necessities and
crises which arose, is a wonderful monument of human wisdom. The people
were not ground down. They had rights which they never relinquished; and
they constantly gained new privileges, as they were prepared to
appreciate them, or as they were in danger of subjection by the
governing classes. They never had the ascendency, but they enjoyed
renewed and increasing power, until they were strong enough to tempt
aristocratic demagogues and successful generals. When Caesar condescended
to flatter the people, they had become a power, but a power incapable of
holding its own, or using it for the welfare of the state. Then it was
subverted, as Napoleon rode into absolute dominion over the bridge which
the Revolution had built. And the Roman constitution was remarkable, not
only because it prevented a degrading subjection of the masses, even
while it refused them the rights of government, but because it
maintained a balance among the governing classes themselves, and
restricted the usurpations of powerful families, as well as military
heroes. For nearly five hundred years, not a man arose whom the Romans
feared, or whom they could not control--whom they could not at any time
have hurled from the Tarpeian rock had he contemplated the subversion, I
will not say of the liberties of the people, but of the constitution
which made the aristocracy supreme. There were ambitious and
unscrupulous men, doubtless, among those fortunate generals whom the
Senate snubbed, and whom the people adored. But, great as they were in
war, and powerful from family interest and vast wealth, no one of them
ever dared to make himself supreme until Caesar passed the Rubicon--not
Scipio, crowned with the laurels which he had taken from the head of
Hannibal; not Marius, fresh from his great victories over the barbaric
hosts of northern Europe; not even Sulla, after his magnificent
conquests in the east, and his triumph over all the parties and factions
which democracy raised against him. Pompey may have contemplated what it
was the fortune of Caesar to secure. But that pompous magnate could have
succeeded only by using the watchwords and practicing the acts to which
none but a demagogue could have stooped. Before his time, at least for
fifty years, there were too many men in the Senate who had the spirit of
Cato, of Cicero, and of Brutus.

[Sidenote: The Revolution.]

[Sidenote: Effects of imperial rule.]

But, _tempora mutantur_. When the Senate was made up of men whom
great generals selected, whether aristocratic sycophants or rich
plebeians; when the tribunes played into the hands of the very men whom
they were created to oppose; when the high priest of a people,
originally religious, was chosen without regard to either moral or
religious considerations, but purely political; when the high offices of
the state were filled by senators who had never seen military life
except for some brief campaign; when factions and parties set old
customs aside; when the most aristocratic nobles sought entrance into
plebeian ranks in order, like Mirabeau, to steal the few offices which
the people controlled, and when the people, mad and fierce from
demoralizing spectacles, raised mobs and subverted law, then the
constitution, under which the Romans had advanced to the conquest of the
world, became subverted. Under the emperors, there was no constitution.
They controlled the Senate, the army, the tribunals of the law, the
distant provinces, the city itself, and regulated taxes and imposed
burdens, and appointed to high offices whomever they wished. The Senate
lost its independence, the courts their justice, the army its spirit,
and the people their hopes. Yet the old form remained. The Senate met as
in the days of the Gracchi. There were consuls and praetors still. But it
was merely equites or rich men who filled the senatorial benches--tools
of the emperor, as were all the officers of the state. The government of
nobles was succeeded by the government of emperors who, in their turn,
were too often the tools of favorites, or of praetorian guards, until the
assassin's dagger cut short their days.

[Sidenote: The rule of emperors a necessity.]

This is not the place to speculate on the good or evil which resulted
from this change in the Roman government. Most historians and
philosophers agree that the change was inevitable, and proved, on the
whole, benignant. It was simply the question whether the Romans should
have civil wars and anarchies and factions, which decimated the people,
and kept society in a state of fear and insecurity, and prevented the
triumph of law, or whether they should submit to an absolute ruler, who
had unbounded means of doing good, and whom interest and duty alike
prompted to secure the public welfare. The people wanted, above all
things, safety, and the means of prosecuting their various interests.
Under the emperors they obtained the greatest boons possible, when the
condition of society was hollow and rotten to the core. The people were
governed, sometimes wisely, sometimes recklessly, but there were order
and law for three hundred years. It little mattered to the vast
population of the empire who was supreme master, provided they were not
oppressed. The proud _Imperator_, the title and praenomen of all the
Roman monarchs, and which had been invented for Octavian, remained the
fountain of law, the arbiter of all interests, the undisputed ruler of
the world. The old offices nominally remained, but, by virtue of the
censorship, the emperor had the power of excluding persons from the
Senate, and of calling others into it. Thus the august body which was,
under the republic, the counterpoise to executive authority, was
rendered dependent on the imperial will. There was no Senate, but in
name, when it could be controlled by the government. It became a mere
form, or an instrument in the hands of the administration, to facilitate
business. By obtaining the proconsular power over the whole of the Roman
Empire, Octavian made the provincial governors his vicegerents. The
_tribunicia potestas_ which he also enjoyed, enabled him to annul
any decree of the Senate, and of interfering in all the acts of the
magistrates. An appeal was open to him, as tribune, from all the courts
of justice; he had a right to convoke the Senate, and to put any subject
under consideration to the vote of senators. Augustus even seized the
pontificate, which office, that of Pontifex Maximus, put into his hands
all the ecclesiastical courts. As tribune and censor, he also controlled
the treasury, so that all the powers of the state were concentrated in
him alone--that of consul, tribune, censor, praetor, and high priest.
What a power to be exercised by one man in so great an empire! The Roman
constitution was subverted when one man usurped the offices which were
formerly shared by many. No sovereign was ever so absolute as the Roman
Imperator, since he combined all the judicial, the executive, and the
legislative branches of the government; that is, he controlled them all.

[Sidenote: The old forms of government preserved.]

Yet the old machinery was kept up, the old forms, the old offices in
name, otherwise even Augustus might not have been secure on his throne.
The Comitia still elected magistrates, but only such as were proposed by
the government. The Senate assembled as usual, but it was composed of
rich men, merely to register the decrees of the Imperator. The consuls
were elected as before, but they were mere shadows in authority. The
only respectable part of the magistracy was that which interpreted the
laws. The only final authority was the edict of the emperor, who not
only controlled all the great offices of state, but was possessed of
enormous and almost unlimited private property. They owned whole
principalities. Augustus changed the whole registration of property in
Gaul on his own responsibility, without consulting any one. [Footnote:
Niebuhr, Lecture 105.] His power was so unlimited that soldiers took the
oath of allegiance to him, as they once did to the _imperium populi
Romani_. His armies, his fleets, and his officers were everywhere,
and no one dreamed of resisting a power which absorbed everything into
itself.

[Sidenote: The imperial power unable to save the state.]

It is altogether another question whether the prosperity of the state
was greater or less after the subversion of the constitution. For three
hundred years the state was probably kept together by the ancient
mechanism controlled by one central will. The change from civil war and
party faction to imperial centralized power, considering the demoralized
condition of society, was doubtless beneficial. The emperor could rule;
he could not, however, conserve the empire. Doubtless, in most cases, he
ruled well, since he ruled by the of great experience and ability. It is
peculiarly the interest of despots to have able men as ministers. They
never select those whom they deem to be weak and corrupt; they are
simply deceived in their estimate of ability and fidelity. For several
generations, the provinces had experienced governors, the armies had
able generals, the courts of law learned judges. The provinces were not
so inexorably robbed as in the time of Cicero. The people had their
pleasures and spectacles and baths. Property was secure, unless enormous
fortunes tempted the cupidity of the emperors. Justice was well
administered. Cities were rebuilt and adorned. Rome owed its greatest
monuments of art to the emperors. There was a cold and remorseless
despotism; but the unnoticed millions toiled in peace. Literature did
not thrive, since that can only live with freedom, but art received
great encouragement, and genius, in the useful professions, did not go
unrewarded. The empire did not fall till luxury and prosperity enervated
the people and rendered them unable to cope with the barbarian hosts.
Rome was never so rich as when she fell into the hands of Goths and
Vandals. But the empire, under the old constitution, might have
protected itself against external enemies. The mortal wound to Roman
power and glory was inflicted by traitors.



AUTHORITIES.--Niebuhr, Lectures on the History of Rome; Mommsen, History
of Rome; Arnold, History of Rome; Merivale, History of the Romans;
Gibbon, Decline and Fall; Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman
Antiquities gives the details, and points out the old classical
authorities, as does Napoleon's Life of Caesar. Dionysius, Polybius,
Livy, Plutarch, Cicero, Sallust, all shed light on important points. See
also Gottling, _Gesch der Rom. Staat_. A large catalogue of writers
could be mentioned, but allusion is only made to those most accessible
to American readers.




CHAPTER VI.

ROMAN JURISPRUDENCE.


If the Romans showed great practical sagacity in distributing political
power among different classes and persons, their laws evince still
greater wisdom. Jurisprudence is generally considered to be their
indigenous science. It is for this they were most distinguished, and by
this they have given the greatest impulse to civilization. Their laws
were most admirably adapted for the government of mankind, but they had
a still higher merit; they were framed, to a considerable degree, upon
the principles of equity or natural justice, and hence are adapted for
all ages and nations, and have indeed been reproduced by modern
lawgivers, and so extensively, as to have formed the basis of many
modern codes. Hence it is by their laws that the Romans have had the
greatest influence on modern times, and these constitute a wonderful
monument of human genius. If the Romans had bequeathed nothing but laws
to posterity, they would not have lived in vain. These have more
powerfully affected the interests of civilization than the arts of
Greece. They are as permanent in their effects as any thing can be in
this world--more so than palaces and marbles. The latter crumble away,
but the legacy of Gaius, of Ulpian, of Paulus, of Tribonian, will be
prized to the remotest ages, not only as a wonderful work of genius, but
for its practical utility. The enduring influence of Moses is chiefly
seen in his legislation, for this has entered into the Christian codes,
and is also founded on the principles of justice. It is for this chiefly
that he ranks with the greatest intellects of earth, whether he was
divinely instructed or not.

[Sidenote: Object for which laws are made.]

Roman laws were first made in reference to the political exigencies and
changes of the state, and afterwards to the relations of the state with
individuals, or of individuals with individuals. The former pertain more
properly to constitutional history; the latter belong to what is called
the science of jurisprudence, and only fall in with the scope of this
chapter. The laws enacted by the Roman people in their centuries, or by
the Senate, pertaining to political rights and privileges--those by
which power passed from the hands of patricians to plebeians, or from
the _populus_ to great executive officers--are highly important
and interesting in an historical or political sense. But the genius of
the Romans was most strikingly seen in the government of mankind; and it
therefore the relations between the governing and the governed, the laws
created for the general good, pertaining to property and crime and
individual rights, which, in this chapter, it is my chief object to
show.

[Sidenote: Greeks inferior to the Romans in jurisprudence.]

The Greeks, with all their genius, their great creation in literature,
philosophy, and art, did very little for civilization, which we can
trace, in the science of jurisprudence. They were too speculative for
such a practical science. Nevertheless their speculative wisdom was made
use of by Roman jurists. It was only so far as philosophy modified laws,
that the influence of Greece was of much account.

[Sidenote: Jurisprudence culminates with emperors.]

Nor did Roman jurisprudence culminate in its serene majesty till the
time of the emperors. It was not perfectly developed, until Justinian
consolidated it in the Code, the Pandects, and the Institutes. The
classical jurists may have laid the foundation; the superstructure was
raised under the auspices of those whom we regard as despots.

[Sidenote: Early legislation.]

[Sidenote: The Twelve Tables.]

Ingenious writers, like Vico and Niebuhr, have extended their researches
to the government of the kings, and advanced many plausible
speculations; but the earliest legislation worthy of notice, was the
celebrated code called the Twelve Tables, framed from the reports of the
commissioners whom the Romans sent to Athens and other Greek states, to
collect what was most useful in their legal systems. But scarcely any
part of the civil law contained in the Twelve Tables has come down to
us. All we know with certainty, is that it was the intention of the
decemviral legislation to bring the estates into closer connection, and
to equalize the laws for both. Nor do the provisions of the decemviral
code, with which we are acquainted, show that enlightened regard to
natural justice which characterized jurisprudence in its subsequent
development. It allowed insolvent debtors to be treated with great
cruelty; they could be imprisoned for sixty days, loaded with chains,
and then might be sold into foreign slavery. It sanctioned a barbarous
retaliation--an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. But it gave a
redress for lampoons or libels, allowed an appeal from the magistrate to
the people, and forbid capital punishment except by a decision of the
centuries. [Footnote: Lord Mackenzie, part 6.] Niebuhr maintains,
[Footnote: Lecture 25.] in his lectures on the History of Rome, that the
Twelve Tables conceded the right to every _pater familias_ of
making a will, by which regulation the child of a plebeian, by a
patrician mother, could succeed to his father's property, which was of
great importance, and a great step in natural justice. It is supposed
that the most important part of the decemviral legislation was
the _jus publicum_, [Footnote: Cicero, _De Legibus_.] or that
which refers to the Roman constitution. The Twelve Tables obtained among
the Romans a peculiar reverence; they were committed to memory by the
young; they were transcribed with the greatest care, and were considered
as the fountain of right. They were approved by the _comitia
centuriata_, which was the supreme authority, and in the time of
Appius Claudius was composed of patricians alone. If Niebuhr is right in
his statement that the power of making wills was given to plebeians, it
shows a greater liberality on the part of patricians than what they
generally have had credit for, and is hardly to be reconciled with the
statement of Lord Mackenzie, that all marriages between patricians and
plebeians were prohibited by the new code.

[Sidenote: The Twelve Tables the basis of Roman law.]

[Sidenote: Progress of Roman Law.]

The laws of the Twelve Tables were the basis of all the laws, civil and
religious. But the edicts of the praetors, who were the great equity
judges, as well as the common-law magistrates, [Footnote: Maine's
_Ancient Law_, p. 67.] proclaimed certain changes which custom and
the practice of the courts had introduced, and these, added to the
_leges populi_ or laws proposed by the consul and passed by the
centuries, the _plebiscita_ or laws proposed by the tribunes and
passed by the tribes, and the _senatus consulta_, gradually swelled
the laws to a great number. Three thousand plates of brass, containing
these various laws, were deposited in the capitol. [Footnote: Suetonius,
_In Vespa_.] Subtleties and fictions were introduced by the lawyers
to defeat the written statutes, and jurisprudence became complicated,
even in the time of Cicero. The opinions of eminent lawyers were even
adopted by the legal profession, and were recognized by the courts. The
evils of a complicated jurisprudence were so evident in the seventh
century of the city, that Q. Mucius Scaevola, a great lawyer, when
consul, published a scientific elaboration of the civil law. Cicero
studied law under him, and his contemporaries, Alfenus Varus and Aeulius
Gallus, wrote learned treatises, from which extracts appear in the
Digest. Caesar contemplated a complete revision of the laws, but did not
live long enough to carry out his intentions. His legislation, so far as
he directed his mind to it, was very just. Among other laws was one
which ordained that creditors should accept lands as payment for their
outstanding debts, according to the value determined by commissioners.
In his time, the relative value of money had changed, and was greatly
diminished. The most important law of Augustus, was the _lex oelia
sentia_, deserving of all praise, which related to the manumission of
slaves. But he did not interfere with the social relations of the people
after he had deprived them of political liberty. He once attempted, by
his _Lex Julia et Papia Poppaea_, to counteract the custom which
then prevailed, of abstaining from legal marriage and substituting
concubinage instead, by which the free population declined; but this
attempt to improve the morals of the people met with such opposition
from the tribes or centuries, that the next emperor abolished popular
assemblies altogether, which Augustus feared to do. The Senate, in the
time of the emperors, composed chiefly of lawyers and magistrates, and
entirely dependent upon them, became the great fountain of law. By the
original constitution, the people were the source of power, and the
Senate merely gave or refused its approbation to the laws proposed, but
under the emperors the comitia disappeared, and the Senate passed
decrees, which have the force of laws, subject to the veto of the
emperor. It was not until the time of Septimus Severus and Caracalla,
that the legislative action of the Senate ceased, and the edicts and
rescripts of emperors took the place of all legislation.

[Sidenote: Q. Mucius Scaevola.]

The golden age of Roman jurisprudence was from the birth of Cicero to
the reign of Alexander Severus. Before this period it was an occult
science, confined to praetors, pontiffs, and patrician lawyers. There
were no books nor schools to teach its principles. But in the latter
days of the republic law became the fashionable study of Roman youth,
and eminent masters arose. The first great lawyer who left behind him
important works, was the teacher of Cicero, Q. Mucius Scaevola, who wrote
a treatise in eighteen books on the civil law. "He was," [Footnote:
Cicero, _De Or._ i. 39.] says Cicero, "the most eloquent of
jurists, and the most learned of orators." This work, George Long
thinks, had a great influence on contemporaries and on subsequent
jurists, who followed it as a model. It is the oldest work from which
there are any excerpts in the Digest.

[Sidenote: Servius Sulpicius.]

[Sidenote: Labeo.]

[Sidenote: Gaius.]

[Sidenote: Papinian.]

[Sidenote: Paulus.]

Servius Sulpicius, the friend of Cicero, and fellow-student of oratory,
surpassed his teachers Balbus and Gallus, and was the equal in
reputation of the great Mucius Scaevola, the Pontifex Maximus, who said
it was disgraceful for a patrician and a noble to be ignorant of the law
with which he had to do. Cicero ascribes his great superiority as a
lawyer to the study of philosophy, which disciplined and developed his
mind, and enabled him to deduce his conclusions from his premises with
logical precision. He left behind him one hundred and eighty treatises,
and had numerous pupils, among whom A. Ofilius and Alfenus Varus, Cato,
Caesar, Antony, and Cicero, were great lawyers. Labeo, in the time of
Augustus, wrote four hundred books on jurisprudence, spending six months
in the year in giving instruction to his pupils, and in answering legal
questions, and the other six months in the country in writing books.
Like all the great Roman jurists, he was versed in literature and
philosophy, and so devoted to his profession that he refused political
office. His rival, Capito, was equally learned in all departments of the
law, and left behind him as many treatises as Labeo. These two jurists
were the founders of celebrated schools, like the ancient philosophers,
and each had distinguished followers. Masurius Sabinus Gaius and
Pomponius, were of the school of Capito. M. Cocceius Nerva, Sempronius
Proculus, and Juventius Celsus, were of the school of Labeo. Gaius, who
flourished in the time of the Antonines, was a great legal authority;
and the recent discovery of his Institutes has revealed the least
mutilated fragment of Roman jurisprudence which exists, and one of the
most valuable, and sheds great light on ancient Roman law. It was found
in the library of Verona. No Roman jurist had a higher reputation than
Papinian, who was _praefectus praetorio_ under Septimius Severus, an
office which made him only secondary to the emperor--a sort of grand
vizier--whose power extended over all departments of the state. He was
beheaded by Caracalla. The great commentator Cujacius, declares that he
was the first of all lawyers who have been, or who are to be; that no
one ever surpassed him in legal knowledge, and no one will ever equal
him. Paulus was his contemporary, and held the same office as Papinian.
He was the most fertile of Roman law-writers, and there is more taken
from him in the Digest than from any other jurist, except Ulpian. There
are two thousand and eighty-three excerpts from this writer, one sixth
of the whole Digest. No legal writer, ancient or modern, has handled so
many subjects. In perspicuity, he is said to be inferior to Ulpian, one
of the most famous of jurists, who was his contemporary. He has
exercised a great influence on modern jurisprudence from the copious
extracts of his writings in Justinian's Digest. He was the chief adviser
of Alexander Severus, and like Paulus was _praefectus praetorio_. The
number of excerpts in the Digest from him, is said to be two thousand
four hundred and sixty-two, and they form a third part of it. Some
fragments of his writings remain. The last of the great civilians
associated with Gaius, Papinian, Paulus, and Ulpian, as oracles of
jurisprudence, was Modestinus, who was a pupil of Ulpian. He wrote both
in Greek and Latin. There are three hundred and forty-five excerpts in
the Digest from his writings, the titles of which show the extent and
variety of his labors. [Footnote: These facts are drawn from the
different articles of George Long, in _Smith's Dictionary_.]

[Sidenote: The profession of law.]

These great lawyers shed great glory on the Roman civilization. In the
earliest times men sought distinction on the fields of battle, but in
the latter days of the republic honor was conferred for forensic
ability. The first pleaders of Rome were not jurisconsults, but
aristocratic patrons looked after their clients. But when law became
complicated, a class of men arose to interpret it, and these men were
held in great honor, and reached, by their services, the highest
offices--like Cicero and Hortensius. No remuneration was given
originally for forensic pleading, beyond the services which the client
gave to a patron, but gradually the practice of the law became
lucrative. Hortensius, as well as Cicero, gained an immense fortune. He
had several villas, a gallery of paintings, a large stock of wines,
parks, fish-ponds, and aviaries. Cicero had villas in all parts of
Italy; a house on the Palatine with columns of Numidian marble, and a
fortune of twenty millions of sesterces, equal to $800,000. Most of the
great statesmen of Rome, in the time of Cicero, were either lawyers or
generals. Crassus, Pompey, P. Sextus, M. Marcellus, P. Clodius,
Calidius, Messala Niger, Asinius Pollio, C. Cicero, M. Antonius, Caesar,
Calvus, Caelius, Brutus, Catulus, Messala Cervirus, were all celebrated
for their forensic efforts. Candidates for the bar studied four years
under a distinguished jurist, and were required to pass a rigorous
examination. The judges were chosen from members of the bar, as well as,
in later times, the senators. The great lawyers were not only learned in
the law, but possessed great accomplishments. Varro was a lawyer, and
was the most learned man that Rome produced. But, under the emperors,
the lawyers were chiefly distinguished for their legal attainments, like
Paulus and Ulpian.

[Sidenote: Roman jurists.]

During this golden age of Roman jurisprudence, many commentaries were
written on the Twelve Tables, the Perpetual Edict, the Laws of the
People, and the Decrees of the Senate, as well as a vast mass of
treatises on every department of the law, most of which have perished.
The Institutes of Gaius, which have reached us nearly in their original
form, are the most valuable which remain, and have thrown great light on
some important branches previously involved in obscurity. Their use in
explaining the Institutes of Justinian, is spoken of very highly by
Mackenzie, since the latter are mainly founded on the long lost work of
Gaius. A treatise of Ulpian, preserved in the Vatican, entitled
"_Tituli ex corpore Ulpiani_" also contains valuable information,
as well as the "_Receptae Sententiae_" of Julius Paulus, his great
contemporary, both of which works, as well as others of inferior
importance, were lately published at Rome by Dr. Gneist, called
"_Corpus Juris Romani Antejustinianii_." [Footnote: Mackenzie, p.
16.] The great lawyers who flourished from Trajan to Alexander Severus,
like Gaius, Ulpian, Paulus, Papinian, and Modestinus, had no successors
who can be compared with them, and their works became standard
authorities in the courts of law.

After the death of Alexander Severus no great accession was made to
Roman law, until Theodosius II. caused the constitutions, from
Constantine to his own time, to be collected and arranged in sixteen
books. This was called the Theodosian Code, which in the West was held
in high esteem, although superseded shortly after in the East by the
Justinian Code.

[Sidenote: Justinian labors.]

To Justinian belongs the immortal glory of reforming the jurisprudence
of the Romans. "In the space of ten centuries," says Gibbon, "the
infinite variety of laws and legal opinions had filled many thousand
volumes, which no fortune could purchase, and no capacity could digest.
Books could not easily be found and the judges, poor in the midst of
riches, were reduced to the exercise of their illiterate discretion."
[Footnote: Gibbon, ch. 44.] Justinian determined to unite in one body
all the rules of law, whatever may have been their origin, and in the
year 528, appointed ten jurisconsults, among whom was the celebrated
Tribonian, to select and arrange the imperial constitutions, leaving out
what was obsolete or useless or contradictory, and to make such
alterations as the circumstances required. This was called the
_Code_, divided into twelve books, and comprising the constitutions
from Hadrian to Justinian. This was published in fourteen months after
it was undertaken.

[Sidenote: Tribonian.]

[Sidenote: The code of Pandects.]

Justinian authorized Tribonian, then quaestor, "_vir magnificus
magisteria dignitate inter agentes decoratus_," for great titles were
now given to the officers of the crown, to prepare, with the assistance
of seventeen associates, a collection of extracts from the writings of
the most eminent jurists, so as to form a body of law for the government
of the empire, with power to select and omit and alter; and this immense
work was done in three years, and published under the title of Digest or
Pandects. "All the judicial learning of former times," says Lord
Mackenzie, "was laid under contribution by Tribonian and his colleagues.
Selections from the works of thirty-nine of the ablest lawyers,
scattered over two thousand separate treatises, were collected in one
volume; and care was taken to inform posterity that three millions of
lines were abridged and reduced, in these extracts, to the modest number
of one hundred and fifty thousand. Among the selected jurists, only
three names belonged to the age of the republic; the civilians who
flourished under the first emperors are seldom appealed to; so that most
of the writers, whose works have contributed to the Pandects, lived
within a period of one hundred years. More than a third of the whole
Pandects is from Ulpian, and next to him, the principal writers are
Paulus, Papinian, Salvius Julianus, Pomponius, Q. Cervidius Scaevola, and
Gaius. Though the variety of subjects is immense, the Digest has no
claims to scientific arrangement. It is a vast cyclopedia of
heterogeneous law badly arranged; every thing is there, but every thing
is not in its proper place." [Footnote: Mackenzie, p. 25.]

[Sidenote: The Institutes.]

But neither the Digest nor the Code was adapted to elementary
instruction. It was necessary to prepare a treatise on the principles of
Roman law. This was entrusted to Tribonian, and two professors,
Theophilus and Dorotheus. It is probable that Tribonian merely
superintended the work, which was founded chiefly on the Institutes of
Gains, and was divided into four books, and has been universally admired
for its method and elegant precision. It was intended merely as an
introduction to the Pandects and the Code.

[Sidenote: The Novels of Justinian.]

The _Novels of Justinian_ were subsequently published, being the
new ordinances of the emperor, and the changes he thought proper to
make, and are therefore a high authority.

The Code, Pandects, Institutes, and Novels of Justinian, comprise the
Roman law, as received in Europe, in the form given by the school of
Bologna, and is called the "_Corpus Juris Civilis_." "It was in
that form," says Savigny, "that the Roman law became the common law of
Europe; and when, four centuries later, other sources came to be added
to it, the _Corpus Juris_ of the school of Bologna had been so
universally received, and so long established as a basis of practice,
that the new discoveries remained in the domain of science, and served
only for the theory of the law. For the same reason, the Anti-Justinian
law is excluded from practice." [Footnote: Savigny, _Droit Romani_,
vol. i. p. 68.] After Justinian, the old texts were left to moulder as
useless though venerable, and they have nearly all disappeared. The
Code, the Pandects, and the Institutes, were declared to be the only
legitimate authority and alone were admitted to the tribunals or taught
in the schools. The rescripts of the early emperors recognized too many
popular rights to suit the despotic character of Justinian, and the
older jurists, like the Scaevolas, Sulpicius, and Labeo, were distasteful
from their sympathy with free institutions. Different opinions have been
expressed by the jurisconsults as to the merits of the Justinian
collection. By some it is regarded as a vast mass of legal lumber; by
others, as a beautiful monument of human labor. After the lapse of so
many centuries, it is certain that a large portion of it is of no
practical utility, since it is not applicable to modern wants. But
again, no one doubts that it has exercised a great and good influence on
moral and political science, and introduced many enlightened views
concerning the administration of justice, as well as the nature of civil
government, and thus has modified the codes of the Teutonic nations,
which sprang up on the ruins of the old Roman world. It was used in the
Greek empire until the fall of Constantinople. It never entirely lost
authority in Italy, although it remained buried till the discovery of
the Florentine copy of the Pandects at the siege of Amalfi in 1135.
Peter Valence, in the eleventh century, made use of it in a law-book
which he published. With the rise of the Italian cities, the study of
Roman law revived, and Bologna became the seat from which it spread over
Europe. In the sixteenth century, the science of theoretical law passed
from Italy to France, under the auspices of Francis I., when Cujas or
Cujacius became the great ornament of the school of Bourges, and the
greatest commentator on Roman law until Dumoulin appeared. Grotius, in
Holland, excited the same interest in civil law that Dumoulin did in
France, followed by eminent professors in Leyden and the German
universities. It was reserved for Pothier, in the middle of the
eighteenth century, to reduce the Roman law to systematic order--one of
the most gigantic tasks which ever taxed the industry of man. The recent
discoveries, especially that made by Niebuhr, of the long lost work of
Gaius have given a great impulse to the study of Roman law in Germany,
and to this impulse no one has contributed so greatly as Savigny of
Berlin.

The great importance of the subject demands a more minute notice of the
principles of the Roman law, than what the limits of this work should
properly allow. I shall therefore endeavor to abridge what has been
written by the more eminent authorities, taking as a basis the late work
of Lord Mackenzie and the learned and interesting essay of Professor
Maine.

[Sidenote: Law of persons.]

The Institutes of Justinian commenced with the law of persons,
recognizing the distinction of ranks. All persons are capable of
enjoying civil rights, but not all in the same degree. Greater
privileges are allowed to men than to women, to freemen than to slaves,
to fathers than to children.

[Sidenote: Equality of citizens.]

In the eye of the law all Roman citizens were equal, wherever they
lived, whether in the capital or the provinces. Citizenship embraced
both political and civil rights. The political rights had reference to
the right of voting in the comitia, but this was not considered the
essence of citizenship, which was the enjoyment of the _connubium_
and _commercium_. By the former the citizen could contract a valid
marriage, and acquire the rights resulting from it, particularly the
paternal power; by the latter he could acquire and dispose of property.
Citizenship was acquired by birth and by manumission; it was lost when a
Roman became a prisoner of war, or had been exiled for crime, or became
a citizen of another state. An unsullied reputation was necessary for a
citizen to exercise his rights to their full extent.

[Sidenote: Slaves.]

The Roman jurists acknowledged all persons originally free by natural
law; and, while they recognized slavery, ascribed the power of masters
entirely to the law and custom of nations. Persons taken in war were
considered at the absolute control of their captors, and were therefore,
_de facto_, slaves; and the children of a female slave followed the
condition of their mother, and belonged to her master. But masters could
manumit their slaves, who thus became Roman citizens, with some
restrictions. Until the time of Justinian, they were not allowed to wear
the gold ring, the distinguishing symbol of a man born free. This
emperor removed all restrictions between freedmen and citizens.
Previously, after the emancipation of a slave, he was bound to render
certain services to his former master as patron, and if the freedman
died intestate his property reverted to his patron.

[Sidenote: Marriage.]

Marriage was contracted by the simple consent of the parties, though in
early times, equality of condition was required. The _lex
Canuleia_, A. U. C. 309, authorized connubium between patricians and
plebeians, and the _lex Julia_, A. U. C. 757, allowed it between
freedmen and freeborn. By the _conventio in manum_, a wife passed
out of her family into that of her husband, who acquired all her
property; without it, the woman remained in the power of her father, and
retained the free disposition of her property. Poligamy was not
permitted; and relationship within certain degrees rendered the parties
incapable of contracting marriage, and these rules as to forbidden
degrees have been substantially adopted in England. Celibacy was
discouraged. The law of Augustus _Julia et Papia Poppaea_ contained
some seven regulations against it, which were abolished by Constantine.
Concubinage was allowed, if a man had not a wife, and provided the
concubine was not the wife of another man. This heathenish custom was
abrogated by Justinian. [Footnote: D. 25. 7. C. 5, 26.] The wife was
entitled to protection and support from her husband, and she retained
her property independent of her husband, when the _conventio_ was
abandoned, as it was ultimately. The father gave his daughter, on her
marriage, a dowry in proportion to his means, the management of which,
with its fruits during marriage, belonged to the husband; but he could
not alienate real estate without the wife's consent, and on the
dissolution of marriage the _dos_ reverted to the wife. Divorce
existed in all ages at Rome, and was very common at the commencement of
the empire. To check its prevalence, laws were passed inflicting severe
penalties on those whose bad conduct led to it. Every man, whether
married or not, could adopt children, under certain restrictions, and
they passed entirely under paternal power. But the marriage relation
among the Romans did not accord after all with those principles of
justice which we see in other parts of their legislative code. The Roman
husband, like the father, was a tyrant. The facility of divorce
destroyed mutual confidence, and inflamed every trifling dispute, for a
word, or a message, or a letter, or the mandate of a freedman, was quite
sufficient to secure a separation. It was not until Christianity became
the religion of the empire, that divorce could not be easily effected
without a just cause.

[Sidenote: Paternal power.]

Nothing is more remarkable in the Roman laws than the extent of paternal
power. It was unjust, and bears the image of a barbarous age. Moreover,
it seems to have been coeval with the foundation of the city. A father
could chastise his children by stripes, by imprisonment, by exile, by
sending them to the country with chains on their feet. He was even armed
with the power of life and death. "Neither age nor rank, nor the
consular office, could exempt the most illustrious citizen from the
bonds of filial subjection. Without fear, though not without danger of
abuse, the Roman legislators had reposed unbounded confidence in the
sentiments of paternal love, and the oppression was tempered by the
assurance that each generation must succeed in its turn to the awful
dignity of parent and master." [Footnote: Gibbon, c. xliv.] By an
express law of the Twelve Tables a father could sell his children as
slaves. But the abuse of paternal power was checked in the republic by
the censors, and afterwards by emperors. Alexander Severus limited the
right of the father to simple correction, and Constantine declared the
father who should kill his son to be guilty of murder. [Footnote: Ch.
iv. 17.] The rigor of parents in reference to the disposition of the
property of children, was also gradually relaxed. Under Augustus, the
son could keep absolute possession of what he had acquired in war. Under
Constantine, he could retain any property acquired in the civil service,
and all property inherited from the mother could also be retained. In
later times, a father could not give his son or daughter to another by
adoption without their consent. Thus this _patria potestas_ was
gradually relaxed as civilization advanced, though it remained a
peculiarity of Roman law to the latest times, and severer than is ever
seen in the modern world. [Footnote: Maine, _Ancient Law_, p. 143.]
No one but a Roman citizen could exercise this awful paternal power, nor
did it cease until the father died, or the daughter had entered into
marriage with the _conventio in manum_. Illegitimate children were
treated as if they had no father, and the mother was bound to support
them until Justinian gave to natural children a right to demand aliment
from their father. [Footnote: N. 89, ch. xii.] Fathers were bound to
maintain their children when they had no separate means to supply their
wants, and children were also bound to maintain their parents in want.
These reciprocal duties, creditable to the Roman law-givers, are
recognized in the French Code, but not in the English, which also
recognizes the right of a father to bequeath his whole estate to
strangers, which the Roman fathers had not power to do. [Footnote: Lord
Mackenzie, p. 142.] The age when children attain majority among the
Romans, was twenty-five years. Women were condemned to the perpetual
tutelage of parents, husbands, or guardians, as it was supposed they
never could attain to the age of reason and experience. The relation of
guardian and ward was strictly observed by the Romans. They made a
distinction between the right to govern a person, and the right to
manage his estate, although the tutor could do both. If the pupil was an
infant, the tutor could act without the intervention of the pupil; if
the pupil was above seven years of age, he was considered to have an
imperfect will. The tutor managed the estate of the pupil, but was
liable for loss occasioned by bad management. He could sell movable
property when expedient, but not real estate, without judicial
authority. The tutor named by the father was preferred to all others.

[Sidenote: Real rights.]

The Institutes of Justinian pass from persons to things, or the law
relating to real rights; in other words, that which pertains to
property. Some things, common to all, like air, light, the ocean, and
things sacred, like temples and churches, are not classed as property.
Originally, the Romans divided things into _res mancipi_, and
_res nec mancipi_. The former comprehended houses, lands, slaves,
and beasts of burden, and could only be acquired by certain solemn
forms, which, if not observed, the property was not legally transferred.
The latter included all other things, and admitted of being transferred
by simple tradition.

[Sidenote: Occupancy.]

Occupancy, one of the original modes of acquiring property, was applied
to goods and persons taken in war; to things lost by negligence, or
chance, or thrown away by necessity; to pearls, shells, and precious
stones found on the sea-shore; to wild animals, to fish, to hidden
treasure.

Acquisition, by accession, pertained to the natural and industrial
fruits of the land, the rents of houses, interest on money, the increase
of animals, lands gained from the sea, and movables.

[Sidenote: Transfer of property.]

[Sidenote: Testaments and legacies.]

[Sidenote: Laws of succession.]

[Sidenote: The laws in inheritance.]

Two things were required for the transfer of property, for it is the
essence of property that the owner of a thing should have the right to
transfer it,--first, the consent of the former owner to transfer the
thing upon some just ground; and secondly, the actual delivery of the
thing to the person who is to acquire it. Movables were presumed to be
the property of the possessors, until positive evidence was produced to
the contrary. A prescriptive title to movables was acquired by
possession for one year, and to immovables by possession for two years.
Undisturbed possession for thirty years constituted in general a valid
title. When a Roman died, his heirs succeeded to all his property, by
hereditary right. If he left no will, his estate devolved upon his
relations in a certain order prescribed by law. The power of making a
testament only belonged to citizens above puberty. Children under the
paternal power could not make a will. Males above fourteen, and females
above twelve, when not under power, could make wills without the
authority of their guardian; but pupils, lunatics, prisoners of war,
criminals, and various other persons, were incapable of making a
testament. The testator could divide his property among his heirs in
such proportions as he saw fit; but if there was no distribution, all
the heirs participated equally. A man could disinherit either of his
children by declaring his intentions in his will, but only for grave
reasons, such as grievously injuring his person or character or
feelings, or attempting his life. No will was effectual unless one or
more persons were appointed heirs to represent the deceased. Wills were
required to be signed by the testator, or some person for him, in the
presence of seven witnesses who were Roman citizens. If a will was made
by a parent for distributing his property solely among his children, no
witnesses were required, and the ordinary formalities were dispensed
with among soldiers in actual service, and during the prevalence of
pestilence. The testament was opened in the presence of the witnesses,
or a majority of them; and after they had acknowledged their seals, a
copy was made, and the original was deposited in the public archives.
According to the Twelve Tables, the powers of a testator in disposing of
his property were unlimited, but in process of time laws were enacted to
restrain immoderate or unnatural bequests. By the Falcidian law, in the
time of Augustus, no one could leave in legacies more than three fourths
of his estate, so that the heirs could inherit at least one fourth.
Again a law was passed, by which the descendants were entitled to one
third of the succession, and to one half if there were more than four.
In France if a man die leaving one lawful child, he can only dispose of
half of his estate by will; if he leaves two children, the third; if he
leaves three or more, the fourth. [Footnote: _Code Civil_, Art.
913.] In England a man can cut off both his wife and children.
[Footnote: Williams, _Exec._, p. 3.] The Romans recognized bequests
in trust, besides testaments, by which property descended directly to
the heir. The person charged with a trust was bound to restore the
subject at the time appointed by the testator. The trustee could not
alienate an estate without the consent of all the parties interested,
except for the payment of debts. All persons capable of making a will
could leave legacies, real or personal, but these were not due if the
testator died insolvent. When a man died intestate, the succession
devolved on the descendants of the deceased; but, these failing, the
nearest ascendants were called; if there were brothers and sisters, they
were entitled to succeed together along with the ascendants in the same
class. Children succeeded to property, if their father died intestate,
in equal portions, without distinction of sex, and if there was only one
child he took the whole estate. A descendant of either sex, or any
degree, was preferred to all ascendants and collaterals. The descendants
of a son or daughter, who had predeceased, took the same share of the
succession that their parent would have done had he been alive. In
England, if all the children are dead, and only grandchildren exist,
they all take, not by families, but _per capita_, equal shares in
their own right as next of kin, and Mackenzie thinks this arrangement is
more equitable than the Roman. [Footnote: Mackenzie, p. 288] If there
were no descendants, the Roman father and mother, and other ascendants,
excluded all collaterals from the succession except brothers and sisters
of the whole blood, and the children of deceased brothers and sisters.
When ascendants stood alone, the father and mother succeeded in equal
portions, and if only one survived, he or she succeeded to the whole, so
that grandparents were excluded. If there were brothers and sisters of
the whole blood, the estate was divided among them _in capita_,
according to the number of persons, including the father and mother. The
children of a deceased brother were not admitted to the succession along
with ascendants and surviving brothers and sisters. [Footnote:
_Ibid._ 290] If a person died leaving neither ascendants nor
descendants, his brothers and sisters succeeded to his estate in equal
shares. And if the intestate left also nephews and nieces by a deceased
brother or sister, these succeeded, along with their uncles and aunts,
to the share their parent would have taken. On the failure of brothers
and sisters by the whole blood, the brother and sisters by the half
blood succeeded, and if any of these brothers and sisters have died
leaving children, the right of representation was extended to them also,
just as in the case of children of brothers-german. When husband or wife
died, without leaving relations, the survivor was called to the
succession. A widow who was poor and unprovided for had a right to share
in the succession of her deceased husband. When he left more than three
descendants, she was entitled to participate with them equally. If there
were only three or fewer, she was entitled to one fourth of the estate.
If she had children by the deceased, she had only the usufruct of her
portion during her life, and was bound to preserve it for them. If a man
had no legitimate children, he could leave his whole inheritance to his
natural children, or to their mother; but if he had lawful children, he
could leave only one twelfth to the natural children and their mother.
If the father died intestate, without leaving a lawful wife or issue,
his natural children and their mother were entitled to one sixth of the
succession, and the rest was divided among the lawful heirs.

[Sidenote: Contracts.]

In the matter of contracts, the Roman law was especially comprehensive,
and the laws of France and Scotland are substantially based upon the
Roman system. The Institutes of Gaius and Justinian distinguish
four sorts of obligation,--aut _re_, aut _verbis_, aut _literis_,
aut _consenser_. Gibbon, in his learned chapter, prefers to consider
the specific obligations of men to each other under promises, benefits,
and injuries. Lord Mackenzie treats the subject in the order of the
Institutes.

"Obligations contracted _re_--by the intervention of things--are
called by the moderns real contracts, because they are not perfected
till something has passed from one party to another. Of this description
are the contracts of loan, deposit, and pledge. Till the subject is
actually lent, deposited, or pledged, it does not form the special
contract of loan, deposit, or pledge." [Footnote: Mackenzie.]

[Sidenote: Loans.]

In regard to loans, the borrower was obliged to take care of it as if it
were his own. _In rebus commodatis tails diligentia proestanda est,
qualem quisque diligentissimus paterfamilias suis rebus adhibet_.
[Footnote: D. 13, 6, 1 pr.] He could only use a thing for the purpose for
which it was lent; he could not keep it beyond the time agreed upon, nor
detain it as a set-off against any debt. He was bound to restore the
article in the same condition as received, subject only to the
deterioration arising from reasonable use, whether a horse, a house, or
a carriage. And he was required to make good all injuries caused by his
own fault or negligence. If the article perished, without any blame or
neglect, the loss fell on the owner. If the loan was for consumption,
which was called _mutuum_, like corn, or oil, or wine, the borrower
was required to return as much of the same kind and quality, whether the
price of the commodity had risen or fallen. In a loan of money, under
_mutuum_, the borrower was not required to pay interest. Interest
was only due _ex lege_, or by agreement. The rate varied at
different times; generally, it was eight and one third per cent., and
even more than this in the latter years of the republic. Justinian
introduced a scale which varied with different classes of society.
Persons of illustrious rank could lend money at four per cent., ordinary
people at six, and for maritime risks twelve; but it was unlawful to
charge interest upon interest. [Footnote: C. 4, 32, 26, Section 1.]
Property would double, at eight and one third, in twelve years, not so
rapidly as by our system of compound interest, especially at the rate of
seven per cent. In England the usury laws of different monarchs limited
interest from ten per cent, to five; but these were repealed in 1854.
Only five per cent. can now be recovered upon any contract.

[Sidenote: Deposits.]

A deposit differed from a loan in this,--that the depositary was not
entitled to any use of a thing deposited, and was bound to preserve it
with reasonable care, and restore it on demand. As he derived no
advantage, he was entitled to be reimbursed for all necessary charges.
Ship-masters, innkeepers, and stablers, were responsible for the luggage
and effects of travellers intrusted to their care, which policy is now
adopted in both Europe and America, on the ground that if they were not
held strictly to their charge, being not a very reputable class of men
in ancient times, they might be in league with thieves. An innkeeper was
therefore held responsible for loss, or damage, or theft, to secure the
protection of travellers, whose patronage was a compensation. In case of
robbery, when goods were taken by superior force, he was not
responsible, nor was he for loss occasioned by inevitable accident.

[Sidenote: Pledges and securities.]

At Rome, pledges were customary, as a security for money due, on
condition of their restoration after the payment of a debt. Real
property, like houses and lands, as well as movables, were the subject
of pledge. [Footnote: D. 20, 1.] The creditor was bound to bestow
ordinary care and diligence in the preservation of the subject, but he
could not use it, or take the profits of it, without a special contract.
By the _pactum antichresis_, the creditor was allowed to take the
profits in lieu of the interest on his debt; by the _lex
commissoria_, the thing pledged became the absolute property of the
creditor if the debt was not paid at the time agreed on. But as this
condition was found to be a source of oppression, it was prohibited by a
law of Constantine. [Footnote: C, 7, 35.] When the debt, interest, and
all necessary expenses were paid, the debtor was entitled to have his
pledge restored to him. After the time of payment was passed, the
creditor had a right to sell the pledge, and retain his debt out of the
produce of the sale; if there was a deficiency, the balance could be
recovered by an action; if there was a surplus, the debtor was entitled
to it. The Roman pledge was of the nature of the modern business of
pawnbroking and of a mortgage.

[Sidenote: Verbal Contracts.]

Next to the perfection of contracts by the intervention of things
_re_, were obligations contracted by _verbis_--solemn words--
and by _literis_ or writing. The _verborum obligatio_ was contracted
by uttering certain formal words of style, an interrogation
being put by one party and an answer given by the other. These
stipulations were binding. In England all guarantees must be in writing.

[Sidenote: Written obligations.]

The _obligatio literis_ was a written acknowledgment of debt
chiefly employed when money was borrowed, but the creditor could not sue
upon the note within two years from its date, without being called upon
also to prove that the money was in fact paid to the debtor.

[Sidenote: Sales.]

Contracts perfected by consent--_consenses_--had reference to sale,
hiring, partnership, and mandate. All contracts of sale were good
without writing. When an article was sold and delivered, the market
price, as fixed by custom, determined the price, if nothing had been
said about it. The seller was bound to warrant that the thing sold was
free from defects, and when the subject did not answer this implied
warranty, the sale might be set aside. But the seller could stipulate
that he should not be held to warrant against defects. Property was not
transferred without actual delivery. When the sale was completed, all
the risks of the thing sold passed to the purchaser. In the case of
commodities sold by weight, number, or measure, the contract was not
completed until the goods were weighed, counted, or measured, which
sometimes caused considerable difficulty. After delivery, the seller was
bound to warrant the title to the buyer, and to indemnify him for any
loss. [Footnote: D. 22, 2. C. 8, 45.]

[Sidenote: Leases.]

[Sidenote: Agents and Partners.]

In regard to hiring, all sorts of things, which were the subject of
commerce, may be let for hire. Leases of land and houses come under this
head. They were generally given for five years, and unless there was an
express stipulation, the lessee might sublet to another. The lessor was
required to deliver the subject in a good state of repair, and maintain
it in that condition, and to guarantee its peaceable enjoyment; the
lessee was bound to use the subject well, to put it to no use except
that for which it was let, to preserve it in good condition, and restore
it at the end of the term. He was bound also to pay the rent at the
stipulated period, and when two years' rent were in arrear, the tenant
could be ejected. The tenant of a farm was entitled to a remission of
his rent if his crop was destroyed by an unforeseen accident or
calamity. A contractor who agreed to undertake a piece of work was
required to finish it in a proper manner, and if from negligence or
ignorance the work was defective, he was liable to damages. In a
partnership, if there were no express agreement, the shares of profit
and loss were divided equally. Each partner was bound to exercise the
same care for the joint concern as if it were his own. The acts of one
partner were not binding on another, if he acted beyond the scope of the
partnership. If one of the partners advanced money on account of the
partnership, each of the partners were bound to contribute to the
indemnity in proportion to his share of the concern; and if any of them
became insolvent, the solvent shareholders were obliged to make up the
deficiency. [Footnote: D. 17, 2, 67.] An agent could be employed to
transact business for another, but was required to act strictly
according to his orders, and the mandant, who gave the orders, was bound
to ratify what was done by the mandatary, and to reimburse him for all
advances and expenses incurred in executing the commission. By the Roman
law agents were not remunerated. Donations could not be made beyond a
certain maximum. Justinian ordered that when gifts exceeded five hundred
solidi, a formal act stating the particulars of the donation should be
inscribed in a public register.

When a person spontaneously assumed the management of the affairs of
another in his absence, and without any mandate, this was called
_negotiorum gestio_, and the person was bound to perform any act
which he had begun, as if he held a proper mandate, and strictly account
for his management, while the principal was bound to indemnify him for
all advances and expenses.

When money was paid through error it could be recovered, under certain
circumstances. But this point is a matter concerning which the jurists
differ.

[Sidenote: Libels.]

[Sidenote: Damages.]

Acts which caused damage to another obliged the wrongdoer to make
reparation, and this responsibility extended to damages arising not only
from positive acts, but from negligence or imprudence. In an action of
libel or slander, the truth of the allegation might be pleaded in
justification. [Footnote: D. 47, 10, 18.] In all cases it was necessary
to show that an injury had been committed maliciously. But if damage
arose in the exercise of a right, as killing a slave in self-defense, no
claim for reparation could be maintained. If any one exercised a
profession or trade for which he was not qualified, he was liable to all
the damage his want of skill or knowledge might occasion. When any
damage was done by a slave or an animal, the owner of the same was
liable for the loss, though the mischief was done without his knowledge
and against his will. If any thing was thrown from a window of a house
near the public thoroughfare, so as to injure any one by the fall, the
occupier was bound to repair the damage, though done by a stranger.
Claims arising under obligations might be transferred to a third person,
by sale, exchange, or donation; but to prevent speculators from
purchasing debts at low prices, it was ordered that the assignee should
not be entitled to exact from the debtor more than he himself had paid
to acquire the debt with interest,--a wise and just regulation which it
would be well for us to copy. In regard to the extinction of obligations
the creditor is not bound to accept of payments by instalments, or any
thing short of proper payment at the time and place agreed upon. When
several debts were due, the debtor, in making payment, could appropriate
it to any one he pleased. [Footnote: D. 46, 3, 1.] When performance
became impossible, without any fault of the debtor, such as when the
specific subject had perished by unavoidable accident, the obligation
was extinguished; but if the impossibility was caused by the fault of
the debtor, he was still liable. This was a great modification of the
severity of the ancient code, when a debtor could be sold into slavery
for his debt. As certain contracts are formed by consent alone, so they
could be extinguished by the mutual consent of the contracting parties,
without performance on either side. In some cases the mere lapse of time
extinguished an obligation, as in accordance with the modern system of
outlawry.

[Sidenote: Law of actions.]

The next great department of Roman jurisprudence pertained to actions
and procedure. The state conferred on a magistrate or judge jurisdiction
to determine questions according to law. Civil jurisdiction pertains to
questions of private right; criminal jurisdiction takes cognizance of
crimes. When jurisdiction was conferred on a Roman magistrate, he
acquired all the powers necessary to exercise it. The _imperium
merum_ gave the power to inflict punishment; the _imperium
mixtum_ was the power to carry civil decrees into execution. A
_real action_ was directed against a person in the territory where
the subject in dispute was located.

By the ancient constitution, the king had the prerogative of determining
civil causes. The right then devolved on the consuls, afterwards on the
praetor, and in certain cases on the curule and plebeian ediles, who
were charged with the internal police of the city.

[Sidenote: The Praetors.]

The praetor, a magistrate next in dignity to the consuls, acted as
supreme judge of the civil courts, assisted by a council of
jurisconsults to determine questions in law. At first one praetor was
sufficient, but as the limits of the city and empire extended, he was
joined by a colleague. After the conquest of Sicily, Sardinia, and the
two Spains, new praetors were appointed to administer justice in the
provinces. The praetor held his court in the comitium, wore a robe
bordered with purple, sat in a curule chair, and was attended by
lictors.

[Sidenote: Other judges.]

The praetor delegated his power to judges, called Judex, Arbiter, and
Recuperatores. When parties were at issue about facts, it was the custom
for the praetor to fix the question of law upon which the action turned,
and then to remit to a delegate to inquire into the facts and pronounce
judgment according to them. In the time of Augustus there were four
thousand judices, who were merely private citizens, generally senators
or men of consideration. The judex was invested by the magistrate with a
judicial commission for a single case only. After being sworn to duty,
he received from the praetor a formula containing a summary of all the
points under litigation, from which he was not allowed to depart. He was
required not merely to investigate facts, but to give sentence. And as
law questions were more or less mixed up with the case, he was allowed
to consult one or more jurisconsults. If the case was beyond his power
to decide, he could decline to give judgment. The arbiter, like the
judex, received a formula from the praetor, and seemed to have more
extensive power. The recuperatores heard and determined cases, but the
number appointed for each case was usually three or five.

[Sidenote: The centumvirs.]

The centumvirs constituted a permanent tribunal composed of members
annually elected, in equal numbers, from each tribe, and this tribunal
was presided over by the praetor, and divided into four chambers, which,
under the republic, was placed under the ancient quaestors. The
centumvirs decided questions of property, embracing a wide range of
subjects. [Footnote: _Cicero de Orat_., i. 38.] The Romans had no
class of men like the judges of modern times. The superior magistrates
were changed annually, and political duties were mixed with judicial.
The evil was partially remedied by the institution of legal assessors,
selected from the most learned jurisconsults. Under the empire, the
praetors were greatly increased. Under Tiberius, there were sixteen who
administered justice, beside the consuls, six ediles, and ten tribunes
of the people. The emperor himself became the supreme judge, and he was
assisted in the discharge of his judicial duties by a council composed
of the consuls, a magistrate of each grade, and fifteen senators. The
Praetorian prefects, although, at first, their duties were purely
military, finally discharged important judicial functions. The prefect
of the city, in the time of the emperors, was a great judicial
personage, who heard appeals from the praetors themselves.

[Sidenote: Witnesses.]

In all cases brought before the courts, the burden of proof was with the
party asserting an affirmative fact. Proof by writing was generally
considered most certain, but proof by witnesses was also admitted.
Pupils, lunatics, infamous persons, interested parties, near relations,
and slaves, could not bear evidence, or any person who had a strong
enmity against the party. The witnesses were required to give their
testimony on oath. Two witnesses were enough to prove a fact, in most
instances. When witnesses gave conflicting testimony, the judge regarded
those who were worthy of credit rather than numbers. In the English
courts, the custom used to be as with the Romans, of refusing testimony
from those who were interested, but this has been removed. On the
failure of regular proof, the Roman law allowed a party to refer the
facts in a civil action to the oath of his adversary.

[Sidenote: Condition of debtors.]

Under the empire every judgment was reduced to writing and signed by the
judge, and then entered upon a register. [Footnote: C. vii. 45, 12.]
After the sentence, the debtor was allowed thirty days for the payment
of his debt, after which he was assigned over to the creditor and kept
in chains for sixty days, during which he was publicly exposed for three
market days, and if no one released him by paying the debt, he could be
sold as a slave. Justinian extended the period to four months for the
payment of a judgment debt, after which, if the debt was not paid, the
debtor could be imprisoned, but not, as formerly, in the creditor's
house. At first the goods of the debtor were sold in favor of any one
who offered to pay the largest dividend, but in process of time, the
goods of the debtor were sold in detail, and all creditors were paid a
ratable dividend. In no respect are modern codes superior to the Roman,
so much as in reference to imprisonment for debt. In the United States
it has practically ceased, and in England no one can be imprisoned for a
debt under 20 pounds, and in France under 8 pounds.

[Sidenote: Appeal.]

Under the Roman republic, there was no appeal in civil suits, but under
the emperors a regular system was established. Under Augustus, there was
an appeal from all the magistrates to the prefect of the city, and from
him to the Praetorian prefect or emperor. In the provinces there was an
appeal from the municipal magistrates to the governors, and from them to
the emperor. Under Justinian, no appeal was allowed from a suit which
did not involve at least twenty pounds in gold.

[Sidenote: Criminal courts.]

In regard to criminal courts, among the Romans, during the republic, the
only body which had absolute power of life and death was the _comitia
centuriata_. The Senate had no jurisdiction in criminal cases, so far
as Roman citizens were concerned. It was only in extraordinary
emergencies that the Senate, with the consuls, assumed the
responsibility of inflicting summary punishment. Under the emperors, the
Senate was armed with the power of criminal jurisdiction. And as the
Senate was the tool of the imperator, he could crush whomsoever he
pleased.

As it was inconvenient, when Rome had become a very great city, to
convene the comitia for the trial of offenders, the expedient was
adopted of delegating the jurisdiction of the people to persons invested
with temporary authority, called _quaesitores_. These were
established at length into regular and permanent courts, called
_quaestiones perpetuae_. Every case submitted to these courts was
tried by a judge and jury. It was the duty of the judge to preside and
regulate proceedings according to law; and it was the duty of the jury,
after hearing the evidence and pleadings, to decide upon the guilt or
innocence of the accused. As many as fifty persons frequently composed
the jury, whose names were drawn out of an urn. Each party had a right
to challenge a certain number, and the verdict was decided by a majority
of votes. At first the judices were chosen from the Senate, and
afterwards from the Equestrians, and then again from both orders. But in
process of time the _quaestiones perpetuae_ gave place to imperial
magistrates. The accused defended himself in person or by counsel.

[Sidenote: Crimes.]

The Romans divided _crimes_ into public and private. Private crimes
could only be prosecuted by the party injured, and were generally
punished by pecuniary fines, as among the old Germanic nations.

[Sidenote: Treason.]

Of public crimes, the _crimen loesoe majestatis_, or treason, was
regarded as the greatest, and this was punished with death, and with
confiscation of goods, [Footnote: I. 4, 18, 3.] while the memory of the
offender was declared infamous. Greater severity could scarcely be
visited on a culprit. Treason comprehended conspiracy against the
government, assisting the enemies of Rome, and misconduct in the command
of armies. Thus Manlius, in spite of his magnificent services, was
hurled from the Tarpeian Rock, because he was convicted of an intention
to seize upon the government. Under the empire, not only any attempt on
the life of the emperor was treason, but disrespectful words or acts.
The criminal was even tried after death, [Footnote: C. 9, 8, 6.] that
his memory might become infamous, and this barbarous practice existed
even in France and Scotland, as late as the beginning of the seventeenth
century. In England, men have been executed for treasonable words.
Beside treason there were other crimes against the state, such as a
breach of the peace, extortion on the part of provincial governors,
embezzlement of public property, stealing sacred things, bribery, most
of which offenses were punished by pecuniary penalties.

[Sidenote: Capital punishments.]

[Sidenote: Criminal law gradually ameliorated.]

But there were also crimes against individuals which were punished with
the death penalty. Willful murder, poisoning, parricide, were capitally
punished. Adultery was punished by banishment, beside a forfeiture of
considerable property. [Footnote: D, 48, 5.] Constantine made it a
capital offense. The Romans made adultery to consist in sexual
intercourse with another man's wife, but not with a woman who was not
married, even if he were married. Rape was punished with death
[Footnote: C. 9, 13.] and confiscation of goods, as in England till a
late period, when transportation for life became the penalty. The
punishments inflicted for forgery, coining base money, and perjury, were
arbitrary. Robbery, theft, patrimonial damage, and injury to person and
property, were private trespasses, and not punished by the state. After
a lapse of twenty years, without accusation, crimes were supposed to be
extinguished. The Cornelian, Pompeian, and Julian laws formed the
foundation of criminal jurisprudence, which never attained the
perfection that was seen in the Civil Code. It was in this that the full
maturity of wisdom was seen. The emperors greatly increased the severity
of punishments, as probably necessary in a corrupt state of society.
After the decemviral laws fell into disuse, the Romans, in the days of
the republic, passed from extreme rigor to great lenity, as is
observable in the transition from the Puritan regime to our times in the
United States. Capital punishment for several centuries was exceedingly
rare, and this was prevented by voluntary exile. Under the empire,
public executions were frequent and revolting.

[Sidenote: Fines.]

[Sidenote: Exile.]

Fines were a common mode of punishment with the Romans, as with the
early Germans. Imprisonment in a public jail was also rare, the custom
of bail being in general use. Although retaliation was authorized by the
Twelve Tables for bodily injuries, it was seldom exacted, since
pecuniary compensation was taken in lieu. Corporal punishments were
inflicted upon slaves, but rarely upon citizens, except for military
crimes. But Roman citizens could be sold into slavery for various
offenses, chiefly military, and criminals were often condemned to labor
in the mines or upon public works. Banishment was common--_aquae et
ignis interdictio_--and this was equivalent to the deprivation of the
necessities of life, and incapacitating a person from exercising the
rights of citizenship. Under the emperors, persons were confined often
on the rocky islands off the coast, or a compulsory residence in a
particular place assigned. Thus Chrysostom was sent to a dreary place on
the banks of the Euxine. Ovid was banished to Tomi. Death, when
inflicted, was by hanging, scourging, and beheading, also by strangling
in prison. Slaves were often crucified, and were compelled to carry
their cross to the place of execution. This was the most ignominious and
lingering of all deaths. It was abolished by Constantine from reverence
to the sacred symbol. Under the emperors, execution took place also by
burning alive and exposure to wild beasts. It was thus the early
Christians were tormented, since their offense was associated with
treason. Persons of distinction were treated with more favor than the
lower classes, and the punishment was less cruel and ignominious. Thus
Seneca, condemned for privity to treason, was allowed to choose his mode
of death. The criminal laws of modern European states followed too often
the barbarous custom of the emperors until a recent date. Since the
French Revolution, the severity of the penal codes has been much
modified.

[Sidenote: Excellence of laws pertaining to property.]

[Sidenote: Rights of citizens.]

The penal statutes of Rome, as Gibbon emphatically remarks, "formed a
very small portion of the Code and the Pandects; and in all judicial
proceedings, the life or death of the citizen was determined with less
caution and delay than the most ordinary question of covenant or
inheritance." This was owing to the complicated relations of society, by
which obligations are created or annulled, while duties to the state are
explicit and well known, being inscribed not only on tables of brass,
but on the conscience itself. It was natural, with the growth and
development of commerce and dominion, that questions would arise which
could not be ordinarily settled by ancient customs, and the practice of
lawyers and the decisions of judges continually raised new difficulties,
to be met only by new edicts. It is a pleasing fact to record that
jurisprudence became more just and enlightened as it became more
intricate. The principles of equity were more regarded under the
emperors than in the time of Cato. It is in the application of these
principles that the laws of the Romans have obtained so high
consideration. Their abuse consisted in the expense of litigation, and
the advantages which the rich thus obtained over the poor. But if delays
and forms led to an expensive and vexatious administration of justice,
these were more than compensated by the checks which a complicated
jurisprudence gave to hasty or partial decisions. It was in the
minuteness and precision of the forms of law, and in the foresight with
which questions were anticipated in the various transactions of
business, that prove that the Romans, in their civil and social
relations, were very much on a level with modern times. And it would be
difficult to find, in the most enlightened of modern codes, greater
wisdom and foresight than what appear in the legacy of Justinian, as to
all questions pertaining to the nature, the acquisition, the possession,
the use, and the transfer of property. Civil obligations are most
admirably defined, and all contracts are determined by the wisest
application of the natural principles of justice. What can be more
enlightened than the laws which relate to leases, to sales, to
partnerships, to damages, to pledges, to hiring of work, and to quasi
contracts! How clear the laws pertaining to the succession to property,
to the duties of guardians, to the rights of wards, to legacies, to
bequests in trust, and to the general limitation of testamentary powers!
How wise the regulations in reference to intestate succession, and to
the division of property among males and females. We find no laws of
entail, no unequal rights, no absurd distinctions between brothers, no
peculiar privileges given to males over females, or to older sons. In
the Institutes of Justinian, we see on every page a regard to the
principles of natural justice. We discover that the property of the wife
cannot be alienated nor mortgaged by a prodigal husband; that wards are
to be protected from the cupidity of guardians; that property could be
bequeathed by will, and that wills are sacred; that all promises are to
be fulfilled; that he who is intrusted with the property of another is
bound to restitution by the most imperative obligations; that usury
should be restrained; that all injuries should be repaired; that cattle
and slaves should be protected from malice and negligence; that
atrocious cruelties in punishment should not be inflicted; that
malicious witnesses should be punished; that corrupt judges should be
visited with severe penalties; that libels and satires should subject
their authors to severe chastisement; that every culprit should be
considered innocent until his guilt was proved. In short, every thing
pertaining to property and contracts and wills is guarded with the most
zealous care. A man was sure of possessing his own, and of transmitting
it to his children. No infringement on personal rights could be
tolerated. A citizen was free to go where he pleased, to do whatsoever
he would, if he did not trespass on the rights of another; to seek his
pleasure unobstructed, and pursue his business without vexatious
incumbrances. If he was injured or cheated, he was sure of redress. Nor
could he be easily defrauded with the sanction of the laws. A rigorous
police guarded his person, his house, and his property. He was supreme
and uncontrolled within his family. And this security to property and
life and personal rights was guaranteed by the greatest tyrants. The
fullest personal liberty was enjoyed under the emperors, and it was
under their sanction that jurisprudence, in some of the most important
departments of life, reached perfection. If injustice was suffered, it
was not on account of the laws, but the depravity of men, the venality
of the rich, and the tricks of lawyers. But the laws were wise and
equal. The civil jurisprudence could be copied with safety by the most
enlightened of European states. And, indeed, it is the foundation of
their civil codes, especially in France and Germany.

[Sidenote: Abuse of paternal power.]

That there were some features in the Roman laws which we, in these
Christian times, cannot indorse, and which we reprehend, cannot be
denied. Under the republic, there was not sufficient limit to paternal
power, and the _paterfamilias_ was necessarily a tyrant. It was
unjust that the father should control the property of his son, and cruel
that he was allowed such absolute control, not only over his children,
but his wife. But the limits of paternal power were more and more
curtailed, so that under the latter emperors, fathers were not allowed
to have more authority than was perhaps expedient.

[Sidenote: Evils of slavery.]

The recognition of slavery as a domestic institution was another blot,
and slaves could be treated with the grossest cruelty and injustice
without redress. But here the Romans were not sinners beyond all other
nations, and our modern times have witnessed a parallel.

It was not the existence of slavery which was the greatest evil, but the
facility by which slaves could be made. The laws pertaining to debt were
severe, and it was most disgraceful to doom a debtor to the absolute
power of a creditor. To subject men of the same blood to slavery for
trifling debts, which they could not discharge, was the great defect of
the Roman laws. But even these cruel regulations were modified, so that
in the corrupt times of the empire, there was no greater practical
severity than what was common in England one hundred years ago. The
temptations to fraud were enormous in a wicked state of society, and
demanded a severe remedy. It is possible that future ages may see too
great leniency shown to debtors, who are not merely unfortunate but
dishonest, in these our times; and the problem is not yet solved,
whether men should be severely handled who are guilty of reckless and
unprincipled speculations and unscrupulous dealings, or whether they
should be allowed immunity to prosecute their dangerous and disgraceful
courses.

[Sidenote: Evils of divorce.]

The facility of divorce was another stigma on the Roman laws, and the
degradation of woman was the principal consequence. But woman never was
honored in any pagan land. Her condition at Rome was better than it was
at Athens. She always was regarded as a possession rather than as a free
person. Her virtue was mistrusted, and her aspirations were scorned. She
was hampered and guarded more like a slave than the equal companion of
man. But the whole progress of legislation was in her favor, and she
continued to gain new privileges to the fall of the empire.

[Sidenote: Severity of penal law.]

[Sidenote: Certainty of punishment.]

Moreover, the penal code of the Romans, in reference to breaches of
trust, or carelessness, or ignorance, by which property was lost or
squandered, may have been too severe, as is the case in England in
reference to hunting game on another's grounds. It was hard to doom a
man to death who drove away his neighbor's cattle, or entered in the
night his neighbor's house. But severe penalties alone will keep men
from crimes where there is a low state of virtue and religion, and
society becomes impossible when there is no efficient protection to
property. If sheep can be killed by dogs, if orchards can be stripped of
their fruit, and jewelry be appropriated by servants with impunity, a
great stimulus to honest industry is taken away, and men will be forced
to seek more distant homes where they can reap the fruits of toil, or
will give up in despair. Society was never more secure and happy in
England than when vagabonds could be arrested, and when petty larcenies
were visited with certain retribution. Every traveler in France and
England feels that in regard to the punishment of crime, those old
countries, restricted as are political privileges, are vastly superior
to our own. The Romans lost, under the emperors, their political rights;
but they gained protection and safety in their relations with society.
And where quiet and industrious citizens feel safe in their homes, and
are protected in their dealings from scoundrels, and have ample scope
for industrial enterprise, and are free to choose their private
pleasures, they resign themselves to the loss of electing their rulers
without great unhappiness. There are greater evils in the world than the
deprivation of the elective franchise, great and glorious as is this
privilege. The arbitrary rule of the emperors was fatal to political
aspirations and rights, but the evils of political slavery were
qualified and set off by the excellence of the civil code, and the
privileges of social freedom.

[Sidenote: Intricacy and uncertainty of the law.]

The great practical evil connected with Roman jurisprudence was the
intricacy and perplexity and uncertainty of the laws, together with the
expense involved in litigation. The class of lawyers was large, and
their gains were extortionate. Justice was not always to be found on the
side of right. The law was uncertain as well as costly. The most learned
counsel could only be employed by the rich, and even judges were venal.
So that the poor did not easily find adequate redress, and the good
became an evil. But all this is the necessary attendant on a factitious
state of society. Material civilization will lead to an undue estimate
of money. And when money purchases all that artificial people desire,
then all classes will prostitute themselves for its possession, and
justice, dignity, and elevation of sentiment are forced to retreat, as
hermits sought a solitude, when society had reached its lowest
degradation, out of pure despair of its renovation.



The authorities for this chapter are very numerous. Since the Institutes
of Gaius have been recovered, very many eminent writers on Roman law
have appeared, especially in Germany and France. Among those who could
be cited, are Beaufort, Histoire de la Republique Romaine; Colquhoun,
Summary of the Roman Civil Law; De Fresquet, Traite Elementaire de Droit
Romain; Ducaurroy (A. M. Professor of Roman Law at Paris), Les
Institutes de Justinien nouvellement expliquees; Gneist (Dr. Reed),
Institutionum et Regularum Juris Romani; Halifax (Dr. Samuel), Analysis
of the Roman Civil Law; Heineccius (Jo. Gott.), Elementa Juris Civilis
Secundum Ordinem Institutionum; Laboulaye, Essai sur les Lois
Criminelles des Remains; Long's Articles on Roman Law in Dr. Smith's
Dictionary; Maine's Ancient Law; Gaius, Institutionum Commentarii
Quatuor; Marezole (Theodore, Professor at Leipsic), Lebruch der
Institutionem des Romischen Rechts; Maynz (Charles, Professor of Law at
Brussels), Elements du Droit Romain; Ortolan (M., Professor at Paris),
Explication Historique des Institutes de l'Empereur Justinien;
Phillimore, Introduction to the Study and History of Roman Law; Pothier,
Pandectae Justinianae in Novum Ordinem Digestae; Savigny, Geschichte des
Rom. Rechts; Walter, Histoire de la Procedure Civile Chez Romains.

I have found the late work of Lord Mackenzie, on Roman Law, together
with the articles of George Long, in Smith's Dictionary, the most useful
in compiling this notice of Roman jurisprudence. Mr. Maine's Treatise on
Roman Law is exceedingly interesting and valuable. Gibbon's famous
chapter should also be read by every student. There is a fine
translation of the Institutes of Justinian, which is quite accessible,
by Dr. Harris of Oxford. The Code, Pandects, Institutes, and Novels,
are, of course, the original authority, with the long-lost Institutes of
Gaius.

In connection with the study of the Roman law, it would be well to read
Sir George Bowyer's Commentaries on the Modern Civil Law; Irving,
Introduction to the Study of the Civil Law; Lindley, Introduction to the
Study of Jurisprudence; and Wheaton's Elements of International Law;
Vattel, Le Droit des Gens.




CHAPTER VII.

ROMAN LITERATURE.


If the ancient civilization rivaled the modern in the realm of
_art_, it was equally remarkable in the field of letters. It is not
my object to show that it was equal, or superior, or inferior to modern
literature, either in original genius or artistic excellence. That point
would be difficult to settle, and unprofitable to discuss. There is no
doubt as to the superior advantage which the modern world derives in
consequence of the invention of printing, and the consequent diffusion
of knowledge. But the question is in reference to the height which was
attained by the ancient pagan intellect, unaided by Christianity. I
simply wish to show that the ancients were distinguished in all
departments of literature, and that some of the masterpieces of genius
were created by them.

Nor is it my object to write a summary of the literature of antiquity.
It would be as dull as a catalogue, or a dictionary, or a compendium of
universal history for the use of schools in a single volume. And it
would be as profitless. My aim is simply to show that the old
civilization can boast of its glories in literature, as well as in art,
and that the mind of man never more nobly asserted its power than in
Greece and Rome. Our present civilization delights in those
philosophers, poets, and historians, who caught their inspiration from
the great pagan models which have survived the wreck of material
greatness. The human intellect achieved some of its greatest feats
before Christianity was born. The inborn dignity of the mind and soul
was never more nobly asserted than by Plato and Aristotle, by Thucydides
and Tacitus, by Homer and Virgil, by Demosthenes and Cicero. In
attestation, therefore, of the glory of the ancient civilization, in the
realm of literature, it is quite sufficient for our purpose to point out
some of those great lights which, after the lapse of two thousand years
or more, still continue to shine, and which are objects of hopeless
imitation, even as they are of universal admiration. If we can show that
the great heights were reached, even by a few, we prove the extent of
civilization. If genius can soar, under Pagan, as well as under
Christian influences, it would appear that civilization, in an
intellectual point of view, may be the work of man, unaided by
inspiration. It is the triumph of the native intellect of man which I
wish to show.

[Sidenote: Romans borrow from the Greeks.]

Although it is my chief aim to present the magnificent civilization of
the Roman empire under the emperors, I must cite the examples of Grecian
as well as Roman genius, since Greece became a part of that grand
empire, and since Grecian and Roman culture is mixed up and blended
together. Roman youth were trained in the Grecian schools. Young men
were sent to Athens and Rhodes after they had finished their education
in the capital. Athens continued to be, for several hundred years after
her political glory had passed away, the great university city of the
world. Educated Romans were as familiar with the Greek classics as they
were with those of their own country, and could talk Greek as modern
Germans can talk French. The poems which kindled the enthusiasm of Roman
youth are as worthy of notice as the statues which the conquerors
brought from the Ionian cities, to ornament their palaces and baths.
They equally attest the richness of the old civilization. And as it is
the triumph of the pagan intellect which I wish to show, it matters but
little whether we draw our illustrations from Greece or Rome. Without
the aid of Greece, Rome could never have reached the height she
attained.

[Sidenote: Richness of Greek Poetry.]

[Sidenote: The Homeric poems.]

Now how rich in poetry was classical antiquity, whether sung in the
Greek or Latin languages. In all those qualities which give immortality,
it has never been surpassed, whether in simplicity, in passion, in
fervor, in fidelity to nature, in wit, or in imagination. It existed
from the early ages, and continued to within a brief period of the fall
of the empire. With the rich accumulation of ages, the Romans were
familiar. They knew nothing indeed of the solitary grandeur of the
Jewish muse, or the mythological myths of the Ante-Homeric songsters;
but they possessed the Iliad and the Odyssey, with their wonderful
truthfulness, and clear portraiture of character, their absence of all
affectation, their serenity and cheerfulness, their good sense and
healthful sentiments, yet so original that the germ of almost every
character which has since figured in epic poetry can be found in them.
We see in Homer [Footnote: Born probably at Smyrna, an Ionian city,
about one hundred and fifty years after the Trojan War.] a poet of the
first class, holding the same place in literature that Plato does in
philosophy, or Newton in science, and exercising a mighty influence on
all the ages which have succeeded him. For nearly three thousand years
his immortal creations have been the delight and the inspiration of men
of genius, and they are as marvelous to us as they were to the
Athenians, since they are exponents of the learning, as well as of the
consecrated sentiments of the heroic ages. We see no pomp of words, no
far-fetched thoughts, no theatrical turgidity, no ambitious
speculations, no indefinite longings; but we read the manners and
customs of the primitive nations, and lessons of moral wisdom and human
nature as it is, and the sights and wonders of the external world, all
narrated with singular simplicity, yet marvelous artistic skill. We find
accuracy, delicacy, naturalness, yet grandeur, sentiment, and beauty,
such as Pheidias represented in his statues of Jupiter. No poems have
ever been more popular, and none have extorted greater admiration from
critics. Like Shakespeare, Homer is a kind of Bible to both the learned
and unlearned among all people and ages--one of the prodigies of this
world. His poems form the basis of Greek literature, and are the best
understood and the most widely popular of all Grecian composition. The
unconscious simplicity of the Homeric narrative, its vivid pictures, its
graphic details and religious spirit, create an enthusiasm such as few
works of genius can claim. Moreover, it presents a painting of society,
with its simplicity and ferocity, its good and evil passions, its
compassion and its fierceness, such as no other poem affords. [Footnote:
The Homeric poems have been translated into nearly all the European
languages, and several times into English. The last translation is by
the Earl of Derby--a most remarkable work. Guizot, _Cours d'Hist.
Mod_., Lecon 7me; Grote, vol. ii. p. 277; _Studies in Homer_, by
Hon. W. E. Gladstone; Mure, _Critical Hist. of Lang. and Lit. of
Greece_; Muller, _Hist, of the Lit. of Ancient Greece_, translated
by Donaldson.] Nor is it necessary to speak of any other Grecian
epic, when the Iliad and the Odyssey attest the perfection which
was attained one hundred and twenty years before Hesiod was born. Grote
thinks that the Iliad and the Odyssey were produced at some period
between 850 B.C., and 776 B.C.

[Sidenote: Pindar.]

In lyrical poetry the Greeks were no less remarkable, and indeed they
attained to absolute perfection, owing to the intimate connection
between poetry and music. Who has surpassed Pindar in artistic skill?
His _triumphal odes_ are paeans, in which piety breaks out in
expressions of the deepest awe, and the most elevated sentiments of
moral wisdom. They alone of all his writings have descended to us, but
all possess fragments of odes, songs, dirges, and panegyrics, which show
the great excellence to which he attained. He was so celebrated that he
was employed by the different states and princes of Greece to compose
choral songs for special occasions, especially the public games.
Although a Theban, he was held in the highest estimation by the
Athenians, and was courted by kings and princes. [Footnote: Born in
Thebes 522 B.C., and died probably in his eightieth year, and was
contemporary with Aeschylus and the battle of Marathon.] We possess,
also, fragments of Sappho, Simonides, Anacreon, and others, enough to
show that, could the lyrical poetry of Greece be recovered, we should
probably possess the richest collection that the world has produced.

[Sidenote: Greek dramatic poetry.]

But dramatic poetry was still more varied and remarkable. Even the great
masterpieces of Sophocles and Euripides, were regarded by contemporaries
as inferior to many tragedies utterly unknown to us.

[Sidenote: Aeschylus.]

The great creator of the Greek drama was Aeschylus, born at Eleusis, 525
B.C. It was not till the age of forty-one that he gained his first
prize. Sixteen years afterwards, defeated by Sophocles, he quitted
Athens in disgust, and went to the court of Hiero, king of Syracuse. But
he was always held, even at Athens, in the highest honor, and his pieces
were frequently reproduced upon the stage. It was not so much his object
to amuse an audience, as to instruct and elevate it. He combined
religious feeling with lofty moral sentiment. And he had unrivaled power
over the realm of astonishment and terror. "At his summons," says Sir
Walter Scott, "the mysterious and tremendous volume of destiny, in which
is inscribed the doom of gods and men, seemed to display its leaves of
iron before the appalled spectators; the more than mortal voices of
Deities, Titans, and departed heroes, were heard in awful conference;
heaven bowed, and its divinities descended; earth yawned and gave up the
pale spectres of the dead, and yet more undefined and ghastly forms of
those infernal deities who struck horror into the gods themselves." His
imagination dwells in the loftiest regions of the old mythology of
Greece; his tone is always pure and moral, though stern and harsh. He
appeals to the most violent passions, and he is full of the boldest
metaphors. In sublimity he has never been surpassed. He was in poetry,
what Pheidias and Michael Angelo were in art. The critics say that his
sublimity of diction is sometimes carried to an extreme, so that his
language becomes inflated. His characters are sublime, like his
sentiments; they were gods and heroes of colossal magnitude. His
religious views were Homeric, and he sought to animate his countrymen to
deeds of glory, as it became one of the generals who fought at Marathon
to do. He was an unconscious genius, and worked, like Homer, without a
knowledge of artistical laws. He was proud and impatient, and his poetry
was religious rather than moral. He wrote seventy plays, of which only
seven are extant; but these are immortal, among the greatest creations
of human genius, like the dramas of Shakespeare. He died in Sicily in
the sixty-ninth year of his age. The principal English translation of
his plays are by Potter, Harford, and Medwin. [Footnote: See Muller and
Bode, histories of Greek Literature.]

[Sidenote: Sophocles.]

The fame of Sophocles is scarcely less than that of Aeschylus. He was
twenty-seven years of age when he appeared as a rival. He was born in
Colonus, in the suburbs of Athens, 495 B.C., and was the contemporary of
Herodotus, of Pericles, of Pindar, of Pheidias, of Socrates, of Cimon,
of Euripides--the era of great men; the period of the Peloponnesian War,
when every thing that was elegant and intellectual culminated at Athens.
Sophocles had every element of character and person which fascinated the
Greeks: beauty of person, symmetry of form, skill in gymnastics,
calmness and dignity of manner, a cheerful and amiable temper, a ready
wit, a meditative piety, a spontaneity of genius, an affectionate
admiration for talent, and patriotic devotion to his country. His
tragedies, by the universal consent of the best critics, are the
perfection of the Grecian drama, and they, moreover, maintain that he
has no rival, Shakespeare alone excepted, in the whole realm of dramatic
poetry, unless it be Aeschylus himself, to whom he bears the same
relation in poetry that Raphael does to Michael Angelo in the world of
art. It was his peculiarity to excite emotions of sorrow and compassion.
He loved to paint forlorn heroes. He was human in all his sympathies,
not so religious as his great rival, but as severely ethical; not so
sublime, but more perfect in art. His sufferers are not the victims of
an inexorable destiny, but of their own follies. Nor does he even excite
emotion apart from a moral end. He lived to be ninety years old, and
produced the most beautiful of his tragedies in his eightieth year, the
"Oedipus at Colonus." He wrote the astonishing number of one hundred and
thirty plays, and carried off the first prize twenty-four times. His
"Antigone" was written when he was forty-five, and when Euripides had
already gained a prize. Only seven of his tragedies have survived, but
these are priceless treasures. The fertility of his genius was only
equaled by his artistic skill. [Footnote: Schlegel, _Lectures on
Dramatic Art_; Muller, _Hist. Lit._; Donaldson's _Antigone_;
Lessing, _Leben des Sophokles_; Philip Smith, article in Smith's
_Dict._.]

[Sidenote: Euripides.]

Euripides, the last of the great triumvirate of the Greek tragic poets,
was born at Athens, B.C. 485. He had not the sublimity of Aeschylus, nor
the touching pathos of Sophocles, but, in seductive beauty and
successful appeal to passion, was superior to both. Nor had he their
stern simplicity. In his tragedies the passion of love predominates, nor
does it breathe the purity of sentiment. It approaches rather to the
tone of the modern drama. He paints the weakness and corruptions of
society, and brings his subjects to the level of common life. He was the
pet of the Sophists, and was pantheistic in his views. He does not paint
ideal excellence, and his characters are not as men ought to be, but as
they are, especially in corrupt states of society. He wrote ninety-five
plays, of which eighteen are extant. Whatever objection may be urged in
reference to his dramas on the score of morality, nobody can question
their transcendent art, or his great originality. With the exception of
Shakespeare, all succeeding dramatists have copied these three great
poets, especially Racine, who took Sophocles for his model. [Footnote:
Muller, Schlegel. Sir Walter Scott on the Drama; Gote, vol. viii. p.
442, Thorne, _Mag. Via. Eurip._ Potter has made a translation of
all his plays.]

[Sidenote: Greek comedy.]

[Sidenote: Aristophanes.]

The Greeks were no less distinguished for comedy. Both tragedy and
comedy sprung from feasts in honor of Bacchus; and as the jests and
frolics were found misplaced when introduced into grave scenes, a
separate province of the drama was formed, and comedy arose. At first it
did not derogate from the religious purposes which were at the
foundation of the Greek drama. It turned upon parodies, in which the
adventures of the gods are introduced by way of sport, like the appetite
of Hercules, or the cowardice of Bacchus. Then the comic authors
entertained spectators by fantastic and gross displays; by the
exhibition of buffoons and pantomimes. But the taste of the Athenians
was too severe to relish such entertainments, and comedy passed into
ridicule of public men and measures, and of the fashions of the day. The
people loved to see their great men brought down to their own level. Nor
did comedy flourish until the morals of society were degenerated, and
ridicule had become the most effective weapon to assail prevailing
follies. Comedy reached its culminating point when society was both the
most corrupt and the most intellectual, as in France, when Moliere
pointed his envenomed shafts against popular vices. It pertained to the
age of Socrates and the Sophists, when there was great bitterness in
political parties, and an irrepressible desire for novelties. In
Cratinus, comedy first made herself felt as a great power, who espoused
the side of Cimon against Pericles, with great bitterness and vehemence.
Many were the comic writers of that age of wickedness and genius, but
all yielded precedence to Aristophanes, whose plays only have reached
us. Never were libels on persons of authority and influence uttered with
such terrible license. He attacked the gods, the politicians, the
philosophers, and the poets of Athens; even private citizens did not
escape from his shafts, and women were subjects of his irony. Socrates
was made the butt of his ridicule, when most revered, and Cleon in the
height of his power, and Euripides when he had gained the highest
prizes. He has furnished jests for Rabelais, and hints to Swift, and
humor for MoliEre. In satire, in derision, in invective, and bitter
scorn, he has never been surpassed. No modern capital would tolerate
such unbounded license. Yet no plays were ever more popular, or more
fully exposed follies which could not otherwise be reached. He is called
the Father of Comedy, and his comedies are of great historical
importance, although his descriptions are doubtless caricatures. He was
patriotic in his intentions, and set up for a reformer. His peculiar
genius shines out in his "Clouds," the greatest of his pieces, in which
he attacks the Sophists. He wrote fifty-four plays. He was born B.C.
444, and died B.C. 380. His best comedies are translated by Mitchell.

Thus it would appear that in the three great departments of poetry,--the
epic, the lyric, and the dramatic,--the old Greeks were great masters,
and have been the teachers of all subsequent nations and ages.

The Romans, in these departments, were not their equals, but they were
very successful copyists, and will bear competition with modern nations.
If the Romans did not produce a Homer, they can boast of a Virgil; if
they had no Pindar, they furnished a Horace, while in satire they
transcended the Greeks.

[Sidenote: Naevius.]

The Romans, however, produced no poetry worthy of notice until the Greek
language and literature were introduced. It was not till the fall of
Tarentum that we read of a Roman poet. Livius Andronicus, a Greek slave,
B.C. 240, rudely translated the Odyssey into Latin, and was the author
of various plays, all of which have perished, and none of which,
according to Cicero, were worth a second perusal. Still he was the first
to substitute the Greek drama for the old lyrical stage poetry. One year
after the first Punic War, he exhibited the first Roman play. As the
creator of the drama, he deserves historical notice, though he has no
claim to originality, and like a schoolmaster as he was, pedantically
labored to imitate the culture of the Greeks. And his plays formed the
commencement of Roman translation-literature, and naturalized the Greek
metres in Latium, even though they were curiosities rather than works of
art. [Footnote: Mommsen, vol. ii. b. ii. ch. xiv.] Naevius, B.C. 235,
produced a play at Rome, and wrote both epic and dramatic poetry, but so
little has survived, that no judgment can be formed of his merits. He
was banished for his invectives against the aristocracy, who did not
relish severity of comedy. [Footnote: Horace, _Ep_. ii. 11, 53.]
Mommsen regards Naevius as the first among the Romans who deserves to be
ranked among the poets. He flourished about the year 550, and closely
adhered to Andronicus in metres. His language is free from stiffness and
affectation, and his verses have a graceful flow. Plautus was perhaps
the first great poet whom the Romans produced, and his comedies are
still admired by critics, as both original and fresh. He was born in
Umbria, B.C. 257, and was contemporaneous with Publius and Cneius
Scipio. He died B.C. 184.

[Sidenote: Plautus.]

The first development of Roman genius in the field of poetry, seems to
have been the dramatic, in which the Greek authors were copied. Plautus
might be mistaken for a Greek, were it not for the painting of Roman
manners. His garb is essentially Greek. He wrote one hundred and thirty
plays, not always for the stage, but for the reading public. He lived
about the time of the second Punic War, before the theatre was fairly
established at Rome. His characters, although founded on Greek models,
act, speak, and joke like Romans. He enjoyed great popularity down to
the latest times of the empire, while the purity of his language, as
well as the felicity of his wit, was celebrated by the ancient critics.
[Footnote: Quint., x. i. Section 99.] Cicero places his wit on a par
with the old Attic comedy, [Footnote: Cicero, _De Off_., i. 29.]
while Jerome spent much time in reading his comedies, even though they
afterward cost him tears of bitter regret. Modern dramatists owe much to
him. Moliere has imitated him in his "_Avare_," and Shakespeare in
his "Comedy of Errors." Lessing pronounces the "_Captivi_" to be
the finest comedy ever brought upon the stage. [Footnote: Smith, _Dict.
of Ant._ art. _Plaut_.] He has translated this play into German.
It has also been admirably translated into English. The great excellence
of Plautus was the masterly handling of the language, and the adjusting
the parts for dramatic effect. His humor, broad and fresh, produced
irresistible comic effects. No one ever surpassed him in his vocabulary
of nicknames, and his happy jokes. Hence he maintained his popularity in
spite of his vulgarity. [Footnote: Mommsen, vol. ii. b. iii. ch. xiv.]

[Sidenote: Terence.]

Terence shares with Plautus the throne of Roman comedy. He was a
Carthaginian slave, and was born B.C. 160, but was educated by a wealthy
Roman, into whose hands he fell, and ever after associated with the best
society, and traveled extensively into Greece. He was greatly inferior
to Plautus in originality, nor has he exerted a lasting influence like
him; but he wrote comedies characterized by great purity of diction, and
which have been translated into all modern languages. [Footnote:
Coleman's _Terence_; Dryden, _On Dram. Poet._; Mommsen, vol.
iii. b. v. ch. xiii.] Anterior to the Augustan age, no tragic production
has reached us, although Quintilian speaks highly of Accius, [Footnote:
Quint., x. 1. Section 97.] especially of the vigor of his style. But
he merely imitated the Greeks. Terence closely copied Menander, whom
Mommsen regards as the most polished, elegant, and chaste of all the
poets of the newer comedy. Unlike Plautus, he draws his characters from
good society, and his comedies, if not moral, were decent. Plautus wrote
for the multitude; Terence for the few. Plautus delighted in a noisy
dialogue and slang expressions; Terence confines himself to quiet
conversation and elegant expressions, for which he was admired by Cicero
and Quintilian, and other great critics. He aspired to the approval of
the good, rather than the applause of the vulgar; and it is a remarkable
fact that his comedies supplanted the more original productions of
Plautus in the latter years of the republic, showing that the literature
of the aristocracy was more prized than that of the people, even in a
degenerate age. The "_Thyestes_" [Footnote: Hor., _Sat_. I 9;
Martial, viii. 18.] of Varius, was regarded in its day as equal to Greek
tragedies. Ennius composed tragedies in a vigorous style, and was
regarded by the Romans as the parent of their literature, although most
of his works have perished. [Footnote: Born B.C. 239.] Virgil borrowed
many of his thoughts, and he was regarded as the prince of Roman song in
the time of Cicero. The Latin language is greatly indebted to him.
Pacuvius imitated Aeschylus in the loftiness of his style. [Footnote:
Born B.C. 170] The only tragedy of the Romans which has reached us was
written by Seneca the philosopher.

[Sidenote: The Aeneid.]

[Sidenote: Virgil.]

In epic poetry the Romans accomplished more, though still inferior to
the Greeks. The "Aeneid" has certainly survived the material glories of
Rome. It may not have come up to the exalted ideal of its author; it may
be defaced by political flatteries; it may not have the force and
originality of the "Iliad," but it is superior in art, and delineates
the passion of love with more delicacy than can be found in any Greek
author. In soundness of judgment, in tenderness of feeling, in chastened
fancy, in picturesque description, in delineation of character, in
matchless beauty of diction, and in splendor of versification, it has
never been surpassed by any poem in any language, and proudly takes its
place among the imperishable works of genius. "Availing himself of the
pride and superstition of the Roman people, the poet traces the origin
and establishment of the 'Eternal City,' to those heroes and actions
which had enough in them of what was human and ordinary to excite the
sympathies of his countrymen, intermingled with persons and
circumstances of an extraordinary and superhuman character to awaken
their admiration and awe. No subject could have been more happily
chosen. It has been admired also for its perfect unity of action; for
while the episodes command the richest variety of description, they are
always subordinate to the main object of the poem, which is to impress
the divine authority under which Aeneas first settled in Italy. The wrath
of Juno, upon which the whole fate of Aeneas seems to turn, is at once
that of a woman and a goddess; the passion of Dido, and her general
character, bring us nearer to the present world; but the poet is
continually introducing higher and more effectual influences, until, by
the intervention of gods and men, the Trojan name is to be continued in
the Roman, and thus heaven and earth are appeased." [Footnote: Thompson,
_Hist. Rom. Lit._, p. 92.] No one work of man has probably had such
a wide and profound influence as this poem of Virgil,--a text-book in
all schools since the revival of learning, the model of the Carlovingian
poets, the guide of Dante, the oracle of Tasso. [Footnote: Virgil was
born seventy years before Christ, and was seven years older than
Augustus. His parentage was humble, but his facilities of education were
great. He was a most fortunate man, enjoying the friendship of Augustus
and Maecenas, fame in his own lifetime, leisure to prosecute his studies,
and ample rewards for his labors. He died at Brundusium at the age of
fifty.]

[Sidenote: Horace.]

In lyrical poetry, the Romans can boast of one of the greatest masters
of any age or nation. The Odes of Horace have never been transcended,
and will probably remain through all the ages, the delight of scholars.
They may not have the deep religious sentiment, and the unity of
imagination and passion which belong to the Greek lyrical poets, but as
works of art, of exquisite felicity of expression, of agreeable images,
they are unrivaled. Even in the time of Juvenal, his poems were the
common school books of Roman youth. Horace, like Virgil, was a favored
man, enjoying the friendship of the great with ease, fame, and fortune.
But his longings for retirement, and his disgust at the frivolities
around him, are a sad commentary on satisfied desires. [Footnote: Born
B.C. 65. The best translation of his works is by Francis; but Horace is
untranslatable.] His odes compose but a small part of his writings. His
epistles are the most perfect of his productions, and rank with the
Georgics of Virgil and the satires of Juvenal, as the most perfect form
of Roman verse. His satires are also admirable, but without the fierce
vehemence and lofty indignation that characterized Juvenal. It is the
folly rather than the wickedness of vice which he describes with such
playful skill and such keenness of observation. He was the first to
mould the Latin tongue to the Greek lyric measures. Quintilian's
criticism is indorsed by all scholars. "_Lyricorum Horatius fere solus
legi dignus, in verbis felicissime audax_." No poetry was ever more
severely elaborated than that of Horace, and the melody of the language
imparts to it a peculiar fascination. If inferior to Pindar in passion
and loftiness, it glows with a more genial humanity, and with purer wit.
It cannot be enjoyed fully, except by those versed in the experiences of
life. Such perceive a calm wisdom, a penetrating sagacity, a sober
enthusiasm, and a refined taste, which are unusual even among the
masters of human thought. It is the fashion to depreciate the original
merits of this poet, as well as those of Virgil and Plautus and Terence,
because they derived so much assistance from the Greeks. But the Greeks
borrowed from each other. Pure originality is impossible. It is the
mission of art to add to its stores, without hoping to monopolize the
whole realm. Even Shakespeare, the most original of modern poets, was
vastly indebted to those who went before him, and even he has not
escaped the hypercriticism of minute observers.

[Sidenote: Catullus.]

In this allusion to lyrical poetry, I have not spoken of Catullus,
unrivaled in tender lyric, and the greatest poet before the Augustan
era. He was born B.C. 87, and enjoyed the friendship of the most
celebrated characters. One hundred and sixteen of his poems have come
down to us, most of which are short, and many of them defiled by great
coarseness and sensuality. Critics say, however, that whatever he
touched he adorned; that his vigorous simplicity, pungent wit, startling
invective, and felicity of expression, make him one of the great poets
of the Latin language.

[Sidenote: Lucretius.]

In didactic poetry, Lucretius was preeminent, and is regarded by
Schlegel as the first of Roman poets in native genius. [Footnote: Born
B.C. 95, died B.C. 52. Smith's _Dict._] He lived before the
Augustan era, and died at the age of forty-two by his own hand. His
great poem "De Rerum Natura," is a delineation of the epicurean
philosophy, and treats of all the great subjects of thought with which
his age is conversant. It somewhat resembles Pope's "Essay on Man," in
style and subject, but immeasurably superior in poetical genius. It is a
lengthened disquisition, in seven thousand four hundred lines, of the
great phenomena of the outward world. As a painter and worshiper of
nature, he was superior to all the poets of antiquity. His skill in
presenting abstruse speculations is marvelous, and his outbursts of
poetic genius are matchless in power and beauty. Into all subjects he
casts a fearless eye, and writes with sustained enthusiasm. But he was
not fully appreciated by his countrymen, although no other poet has so
fully brought out the power of the Latin language. Professor Ramsay,
[Footnote: The translation of Lucretius into English was made by I. M.
Goode, Evelyn, and Drummond.] while alluding to the melancholy
tenderness of Tibullus, the exquisite ingenuity of Ovid, the inimitable
felicity and taste of Horace, the gentleness and splendor of Virgil, and
the vehement declamation of Juvenal, thinks that, had the verses of
Lucretius perished, we should never have known that it could give
utterance to the grandest conceptions with all that self-sustained
majesty and harmonious swell, in which the Grecian muse rolls forth her
loftiest outpourings. The eulogium of Ovid is--

  "Carmina sublimis tune sunt peritura Lucreti,
  Exitio terras quum dabit una dies."

[Sidenote: Ovid.]

Elegiac poetry has an honorable place in Roman literature. To this
school belongs Ovid, [Footnote: Born B.C. 43. Died A.D. 18.] whose
"Metamorphoses" will always retain their interest. He, with that self-
conscious genius common to poets, declares that his poem would be proof
against sword, fire, thunder, and time,--a prediction, says Bayle,
[Footnote: Bayle, _Dict._] which has not yet proved false. Niebuhr
[Footnote: _Lect._, vol. ii. p. 166.] thinks that, next to
Catullus, he was the most poetical of his countrymen. Milton thinks he
could have surpassed Virgil had he attempted epic poetry. He was nearest
to the romantic school of all the classical authors, and Chaucer,
Ariosto, and Spenser owe to him great obligations. Like Pope, his verses
flowed spontaneously. His "Tristia" were more admired by the Romans than
his "Amores" or "Metamorphoses,"--probably from the doleful description
of his exile,--a fact which shows that contemporaries are not always the
best judges of real merit. His poems, great as was their genius, are
deficient in the severe taste which marked the Greeks, and are immoral
in their tendency. He had great advantages, but was banished by Augustus
for his description of licentious love, "Carmina per libidinosa." Nor
did he support exile with dignity. He died of a broken heart, and
languished, like Cicero, when doomed to a similar fate. But few
intellectual men have ever been able to live at a distance from the
scene of their glories, and without the stimulus of high society.
Chrysostom is one of the few exceptions. Ovid, as an immoral man, was
justly punished.

[Sidenote: Tibullus.]

Tibullus was also a famous elegiac poet, and was born the same year as
Ovid, and was the friend of Horace. He lived in retirement, and was both
gentle and amiable. At his beautiful country seat he soothed his soul
with the charms of literature and the simple pleasures of the country.
Niebuhr pronounces his elegies doleful, [Footnote: _Lect._, vol.
iii. p. 143.] but Merivale [Footnote: _Hist_, vol. iv. p. 602.]
thinks that "the tone of tender melancholy in which he sung his
unprosperous loves had a deeper and purer source than the caprices of
three inconstant paramours." "His spirit is eminently religious, though
it bids him fold his hands in resignation rather than open them in hope.
He alone of all the great poets of his day remained undazzled by the
glitter of the Caesarian usurpation, and pined away in unavailing
despondency, in beholding the subjugation of his country."

[Sidenote: Propertius.]

His contemporary, Propertius, [Footnote: Born B.C. 51.] was, on the
contrary, the most eager of all the flatterers of Augustus,--a man of
wit and pleasure, whose object or idolatry was Cynthia, a poetess and a
courtesan. He was an imitator of the Greeks, but had a great
contemporary fame, [Footnote: Quint., x. 1. Section 93.] and shows
great warmth of passion, but he never soared into the sublime heights of
poetry, like his rival. Such were among the great elegiac poets of Rome,
generally devoted to the delineation of the passion of love. The older
English poets resembled them in this respect, but none of them have
soared to such lofty heights as the later ones, like Wordsworth and
Tennyson. It is in lyric poetry that the moderns have chiefly excelled
the ancients, in variety, in elevation of sentiment, and in imagination.
The grandeur and originality of the ancients were displayed rather in
epic and dramatic poetry.

[Sidenote: Juvenal.]

[Sidenote: Perseus.]

In _satire_ the Romans transcended both the Greeks and the moderns.
There is nothing in any language which equals the fire, the intensity,
and the bitterness of Juvenal,--not even Swift and Pope. But he
flourished in the decline of literature, and has neither the taste nor
elegance of the Augustan writers. He was the son of a freedman, and was
born A.D. 38, and was the contemporary of Martial. He was banished by
Domitian on account of a lampoon against a favorite dancer, but under
the reign of Nerva he returned to Rome, and the imperial tyranny was the
subject of his bitterest denunciation, next to the degradation of public
morals. His great rival in satire was Horace, who laughed at follies;
but he, more austere, exaggerated and denounced them. His sarcasms on
women have never been equaled in severity, and we cannot but hope that
they were unjust. In an historical point of view, as a delineation of
the manners of his age, his satires are priceless, even like the
epigrams of Martial. Satire arose with Lucilius, [Footnote: Born B.C.
148.] in the time of Marius, an age when freedom of speech was
tolerated. Horace was the first to gain immortality in this department.
Persius comes next, born A.D. 34, the friend of Lucan and Seneca in the
time of Nero; and he painted the vices of his age when it was passing to
that degradation which marked the reign of Domitian when Juvenal
appeared, who, disdaining fear, boldly set forth the abominations of the
times, and struck without distinction all who departed from duty and
conscience. This uncompromising poet, not pliant and easy like Horace,
animadverted, like an incorruptible censor, on the vices which were
undermining the moral health and preparing the way for violence; on the
hypocrisy of philosophers and the cruelty of tyrants; on the weakness of
women and the debauchery of men. He discourses on the vanity of human
wishes with the moral wisdom of Dr. Johnson, and urges self-improvement
like Socrates and Epictetus. [Footnote: The best translations of Juvenal
are those of Dryden, Gifford, and Badham.]

I might speak of other celebrated poets,--of Lucan, of Martial, of
Petronius; but I only wish to show that the great poets of antiquity,
both Greek and Roman, have never been surpassed in genius, in taste, and
in art, and few were ever more honored in their lifetime by appreciating
admirers showing the advanced state of civilization which was reached in
every thing pertaining to the realm of thought.

But the genius of the ancients was displayed in prose composition as
well as in poetry, although perfection was not so soon attained. The
poets were the great creators of the languages of antiquity. It was not
until they had produced their immortal works that the languages were
sufficiently softened and refined to admit of great beauty in prose. But
prose requires art as well as poetry. There is an artistic rhythm in the
writings of the classical authors, like those of Cicero and Herodotus
and Thucydides, as marked as in the beautiful measure of Homer and
Virgil. Burke and Macaulay are as great artists in style as Tennyson
himself. Plato did not write poetry, but his prose is as "musical as
Apollo's lyre." And it is seldom that men, either in ancient or modern
times, have been distinguished for both kinds of composition, although
Voltaire, Schiller, Milton, Swift, and Scott are among the exceptions.
Cicero, the greatest prose writer of antiquity, produced only an
inferior poem, laughed at by his contemporaries. Bacon could not write
poetry, with all his affluence of thought and vigor of imagination and
command of language, any easier than Pope could write prose.

All sorts of prose compositions were carried to perfection by both
Greeks and Romans, in history, in criticism, in philosophy, in oratory,
in epistles.

[Sidenote: Herodotus.]

The earliest great prose writer among the Greeks was Herodotus,
[Footnote: Born B.C. 484.] from which we may infer that _History_
was the first form of prose composition which attained development. But
Herodotus was not born until Aeschylus had gained a prize for tragedy,
more than two hundred years after Simonides, the lyric poet, flourished,
and probably six hundred years after Homer sung his immortal epics.
After more than two thousand years the style of this great "Father of
History" is admired by every critic; while his history, as a work of
art, is still a study and a marvel. It is difficult to understand why no
anterior work in prose is worthy of note, since the Greeks had attained
a high civilization two hundred years before he appeared, and the
language had reached a high point of development under Homer for more
than five hundred years. The history of Herodotus was probably written
in the decline of life, when his mind was enriched with great
attainments in all the varied learning of his age, and when he had
conversed with most of the celebrated men of the various countries which
he visited. It pertains chiefly to the wars of the Greeks with the
Persians; but, in his frequent episodes, which do not impair the unity
of the work, he is led to speak of the manners and customs of the
oriental nations. It was once the fashion to speak of Herodotus as a
credulous man, who embodied the most improbable, though interesting
stories. But now it is believed that no historian was ever more
profound, conscientious, and careful; and all modern investigations
confirm his sagacity and impartiality. He was one of the most
accomplished men of antiquity, or of any age,--an enlightened and
curious traveler, a profound thinker, a man of universal knowledge,
familiar with the whole range of literature, art, and science in his
day, acquainted with all the great men of Greece and at the courts of
Asiatic princes, the friend of Sophocles, of Pericles, of Thucydides, of
Aspasia, of Socrates, of Damon, of Zeno, of Pheidias, of Protagoras, of
Euripides, of Polygnotus, of Anaxagoras, of Xenophon, of Alcibiades, of
Lysias, of Aristophanes,--the most brilliant constellation of men of
genius who were ever found together within the walls of a Grecian city,
respected and admired by these great lights, all of whom he transcended
in knowledge. Thus was he fitted for his task by travel, by study, and
by intercourse with the great, to say nothing of his original genius,
and the greatest prose work which had yet appeared in Greece was
produced,--a prose epic, severe in taste, perfect in unity, rich in
moral wisdom, charming in style, religious in spirit, grand in subject,
without a coarse passage; simple, unaffected, and beautiful, like the
narratives of the Bible; amusing, yet instructive, easy to understand,
yet extending to the utmost boundaries of human research--a model for
all subsequent historians. So highly was it valued by the Athenians,
when their city was at the height of its splendor, that they decreed to
its author ten talents, about twelve thousand dollars, for reciting it.
He even went from city to city, a sort of prose rhapsodist, or like a
modern lecturer, reciting his history--an honored and extraordinary man,
a sort of Humboldt, having mastered every thing. And he wrote, not for
fame, but to communicate the results of his inquiries, from the pure
love of truth which he learned by personal investigation at Dodona, at
Delphi, at Samos, at Athens, at Corinth, at Thebes, at Tyre; yea, he
traveled into Egypt, Scythia, Asia Minor, Palestine, Babylonia, Italy,
and the islands of the sea. His episode in Egypt is worth more, in an
historical point of view, than every thing combined which has descended
to us from antiquity. Herodotus was the first to give dignity to
history; nor, in truthfulness, candor, and impartiality, has he ever
been surpassed. His very simplicity of style is a proof of his
transcendent art, even as it is the evidence of his severity of taste.
[Footnote: Dahlman has written an admirable life of Herodotus; but
Rawlinson's translation, with his notes, is invaluable.]

[Sidenote: Thucydides.]

To Thucydides, as an historian, the modern world also assigns a proud
preeminence. He treated only of a short period, during the Peloponnesian
War; but the various facts connected with that great event could only be
known by the most minute and careful inquiries. He devoted twenty-seven
years to the composition of his narration, and he weighed his testimony
with the most scrupulous care. His style has not the fascination of
Herodotus, but it is more concise. In a single volume he relates what
could scarcely be compressed into eight volumes of a modern history. As
a work of art, of its kind, it is unrivaled. In his description of the
plague of Athens he is minute as he is simple. He abounds with rich
moral reflections, and has a keen perception of human character. His
pictures are striking and tragic. He is vigorous and intense, and every
word he uses has a meaning. But some of his sentences are not always
easily understood. One of the greatest tributes which can be paid to him
is, that, according to the estimate of an able critic, [Footnote: George
Long, Oxford.] we have a more exact history of a long and eventful
period by Thucydides than we have of any period in modern history,
equally long and eventful; and all this is compressed into a volume.
[Footnote: Born 471 B.C.; lived twenty years in exile on account of a
military failure.]

[Sidenote: Xenophon.]

Xenophon is the last of the trio of the Greek historians, whose writings
are classical and inimitable. [Footnote: Born probably about 444 B.C.]
He is characterized by great simplicity and absence of affectation. His
"Anabasis," in which he describes the expedition of the younger Cyrus
and the retreat of the ten thousand Greeks, is his most famous book. But
his "Cyropaedia," in which the history of Cyrus is the subject, although
still used as a classic in colleges for the beauty of the style, has no
value as a history, since the author merely adopted the current stories
of his hero without sufficient investigation. Xenophon wrote a variety
of treatises and dialogues, but his "Memorabilia" of Socrates is the
most valuable. All antiquity and all modern writers unite in giving to
Xenophon great merit as a writer, and great moral elevation as a man.

If we pass from the Greek to the Latin historians,--to those who were as
famous as the Greek, and whose merit has scarcely been transcended in
our modern times, if, indeed, it has been equaled,--the great names of
Sallust, of Caesar, of Livy, of Tacitus, rise up before us, together with
a host of other names we have not room or disposition to present, since
we only aim to show that the ancients were at least our equals in this
great department of prose composition. The first great masters of the
Greek language in prose were the historians, so far as their writings
have descended, although it is probable that the orators may have shaped
the language before them, and given it flexibility and refinement. The
first great prose writers of Rome were the orators. Nor was the Latin
language fully developed and polished until Cicero appeared. But we do
not write a history of the language: we speak only of those who wrote
immortal works in the various departments of learning.

As Herodotus did not arise until the Greek language had been already
formed by the poets, so no great prose writer appeared among the Romans
for a considerable time after Plautus, Terence, Ennius, and Lucretius
flourished.

[Sidenote: Sallust.]

The first great historian was Sallust, the contemporary of Cicero, born
B.C. 86, the year that Marius died. Q. Fabius Pictor, M. Portius Cato,
L. Cal. Piso had already written works which are mentioned with respect
by the Latin authors, but they were mere annalists or antiquarians, like
the chroniclers of the Middle Ages, and had no claim as artists. Sallust
made Thucydides his model, but fell below him in genius and elevated
sentiment. He was born a plebeian, and rose to distinction by his
talents, but was ejected from the Senate for his profligacy. Afterwards
he made a great fortune as praetor and governor of Numidia, and lived in
magnificence on the Quirinal--one of the most profligate of the literary
men of antiquity. We possess but a small portion of his works, but the
fragments which have come down to us show peculiar merit. He sought to
penetrate the human heart, and reveal the secret motives which actuate
the conduct of men. His style is brilliant, but his art is always
apparent. He is clear and lively, but rhetorical. Like Voltaire, who
inaugurated modern history, he thought more of style than of accuracy of
facts. He was a party man, and never soared beyond his party. He aped
the moralist, but erected egotism and love of pleasure into proper
springs of action, and honored talent disconnected with virtue.
Like Carlyle, he exalted _strong_ men, and _because_ they were
strong. He was not comprehensive like Cicero, or philosophical like
Thucydides, although he affected philosophy as he did morality. He was
the first who deviated from the strict narratives of events, and also
introduced much rhetorical declamation, which he puts into the mouths of
his heroes. [Footnote: The best translations of this author are those by
Stewart, 1806, and Murphy, 1807.] He wrote for eclat.

[Sidenote: Caesar.]

Caesar, as an historian, ranks higher, and no Roman ever wrote purer
Latin than he. But his historical works, however great their merit, but
feebly represent his transcendent genius--the most august name of
antiquity. He was mathematician, architect, poet, philologist, orator,
jurist, general, statesman--imperator. In eloquence he was only second
to Cicero. The great value of his history is in the sketches of the
productions, the manners, the customs, and the political state of Gaul,
Britain, and Germany. His observations on military science, on the
operation of sieges, and construction of bridges and military engines,
are valuable. But the description of his military operations is only a
studied apology for his crimes, even as the bulletins of Napoleon were
set forth to show his victories in the most favorable light. His fame
rests on his victories and successes as a statesman rather than on his
merits as an historian, even as Louis Napoleon will live in history for
his deeds rather than as the apologist of Caesar. [Footnote: See
_History of Caesar_, by Napoleon, a work more learned than popular,
however greatly he may be indebted to the labors of others.] The
"Commentaries" resemble the history of Herodotus more than any other
Latin production, at least in style; they are simple and unaffected,
precise and elegant, plain and without pretension.

Caesar was born B.C. 100, and while I admire his genius and his
generosity, I hold in detestation the ambition which led him to overturn
the constitution of his country on the plea of revolutionary necessity.
It is true that there was the strife of parties and factions, greedy of
revenge, and still more of spoils. It was a period of "_great
offenses_," but it was also the brightest period in Roman history, so
far as pertains to the development of genius. It was more favorable to
literature than the lauded "Augustan era." It was an age of free
opinions, in which liberty gave her last sigh, and when heroic efforts
were made to bring back the ancient virtue, and to save the state from
despotism. The lives of Piso, of Milo, of Cinna, of Lepidus, of Cotta,
of Dolabella, of Crassus, of Quintus Maximus, of Aquila, of Pompey, of
Brutus, of Cassius, of Antony, show what extraordinary men of action
were then upon the stage, both good and evil, while Varro, Cicero,
Catullus, Lucretius, and Sallust gave glory to the world of letters. It
may have resulted favorably to the peace of society that the imperial
rule supplanted the aristocratic regime, but it was a change fatal to
liberty of speech and all independent action--a change, the good of
which was on the outside, and in favor of material interests, but the
evil of which was internal, and consumed secretly, but surely, the real
greatness of the empire.

[Sidenote: Prose composition.]

[Sidenote: High social position of historians.]

The Augustan age, though it produced a constellation of poets who shed
glory upon the throne before which they prostrated themselves in abject
homage, like the courtiers of Louis XIV., still was unfavorable to prose
composition,--to history as well as eloquence. Of the historians, Livy
is the only one whose writings are known to us, and only fragments of
his history. [Footnote: Born B.C. 59.] He was a man of distinction at
court, and had a great literary reputation--so great that a Spaniard
traveled from Cadiz on purpose to see him. Most of the great historians
of the world have occupied places of honor and rank, which were given to
them not as prizes for literary successes, but for the experience,
knowledge, and culture which high social position and ample means
secured. Herodotus lived in courts; Thucydides was a great general, also
Xenophon; Caesar wrote his own exploits; Sallust was praetor and governor;
Livy was tutor to Claudius; Tacitus was praetor and consul suffectus;
Eusebius was bishop and favorite of Constantine; Ammianus was the friend
of the Emperor Julian; Gregory of Tours was one of the leading prelates
of the West; Froissart attended in person, as a man of rank, the
military expeditions of his day; Clarendon was Lord Chancellor; Burnet
was a bishop and favorite of William III.; Thiers and Guizot both were
prime ministers; while Gibbon, Hume, Robertson, Macaulay, Grote, Milman,
Neander, Niebuhr, Muller, Dahlman, Buckle, Prescott, Irving, Bancroft,
Motley, have all been men of wealth or position. Nor do I remember a
single illustrious historian who has been poor and neglected.

[Sidenote: Livy.]

The ancients regarded Livy as the greatest of historians,--an opinion
not indorsed by modern critics, on account of his inaccuracies. But his
narrative is always interesting, and his language pure. He did not sift
evidence like Grote, nor generalize like Gibbon; but he was, like
Voltaire and Macaulay, an artist in style, and possessed undoubted
genius. His annals are comprised in one hundred and forty-two books,
extending from the foundation of the city to the death of Drusus, B.C.
9, of which only thirty-five have come down to us--an impressive
commentary on the vandalism of the Middle Ages, and the ignorance of the
monks who could not preserve so great a treasure. "His story flows in a
calm, clear, sparkling current, with every charm which simplicity and
ease can give." He delineates character with great clearness and power;
his speeches are noble rhetorical compositions; his sentences are
rhythmical cadences. He was not a critical historian, like Herodotus,
for he took his materials secondhand, and he was ignorant of geography;
nor did he write with the exalted ideal of Thucydides, but as a painter
of beautiful forms, which only a rich imagination could conjure, he is
unrivaled in the history of literature. Moreover, he was honest and
sound in heart, and was just and impartial in reference to those facts
with which he was conversant.

[Sidenote: Tacitus.]

In the estimation of modern critics, the highest rank, as an historian,
is assigned to Tacitus, and it would be difficult to find his rival in
any age or country. He was born A.D. 57, about forty-three years after
the death of Augustus. He belonged to the equestrian rank, and was a man
of consular dignity. He had every facility for literary labors that
leisure, wealth, friends, and social position could give, and he lived
under a reign when truth could be told.

The extant works of this great writer are the "Life of Agricola," his
father-in-law; his "Annales," which commence with the death of Augustus,
A.D. 14, and close with the death of Nero, A.D. 68; the "Historiae,"
which comprise the period from the second consulate of Galba, A.D. 68,
to the death of Domitian; and a treatise on the Germans.

[Sidenote: Histories of Tacitus.]

His histories describe Rome in the fullness of imperial glory, when the
will of one man was the supreme law of the empire. He also wrote of
events when liberty had fled, and the yoke of despotism was nearly
insupportable. He describes a period of great moral degradation, nor
does he hesitate to lift the veil of hypocrisy in which his generation
had wrapped itself. He fearlessly exposes the cruelties and iniquities
of the early emperors, and writes with judicial impartiality respecting
all the great characters he describes. No ancient writer shows greater
moral dignity and integrity of purpose than Tacitus. In point of
artistic unity he is superior to Livy and equal to Thucydides, whom he
resembles in conciseness of style. His distinguishing excellence as an
historian is his sagacity and impartiality. Nothing escapes his
penetrating eye; and he inflicts merited chastisement on the tyrants who
reveled in the prostrated liberties of his country, while he
immortalizes those few who were faithful to duty and conscience in a
degenerate age. But his writings were not so popular as those of Livy.
Neither princes nor people relished his intellectual independence and
moral elevation. He does not satisfy Dr. Arnold, who thinks he ought to
have been better versed in the history of the Jews, and who dislikes his
speeches because they were fictitious.

[Sidenote: Qualities which give immortality to historians.]

Neither the Latin nor Greek historians are admired by those dry critics,
who seek to give to rare antiquarian matter a disproportionate
importance, and to make this matter as fixed and certain as the truths
of natural science. History can never be other than an approximation to
the truth, even when it relates to the events and characters of our own
age. History does not give positive knowledge which cannot be disputed
except in general terms. We _know_ that Caesar was ambitious, but we
do not know whether he was more or less so than Pompey, nor do we know
how far he was justified in his usurpation. A great history must have
other merits than mere accuracy, or antiquarian research, or display of
authorities and notes. It must be a work of art, and art has reference
to style and language, to grouping of details and richness of
illustration, to eloquence and poetry and beauty. A dry history, if ever
so learned, will never be read; it will only be consulted, like a law-
book, or Mosheim's "Commentaries." We wish _life_ in history, and
it is for the life that the writings of Livy and Tacitus will be
perpetuated. Voltaire and Schiller have no great merit as historians, in
a technical sense, but the "Life of Charles XII." and the "Thirty Years'
War" are still classics. Neander has written one of the most searching
and recondite histories of modern times, but it is too dry, too
deficient in art, to be cherished, and may pass away, like the
voluminous writings of Varro, the most learned of the Romans. It is the
_art_ which is immortal in a book, not the knowledge, or even the
thoughts. What keeps alive the "Provincial Letters"? It is the style,
the irony, the elegance. It is the exquisite delineation of character,
the moral wisdom, the purity and force of language, the artistic
arrangement, and the lively and interesting narratives, appealing to all
minds, like the "Arabian Nights," or Froissart's "Chronicles," which
give immortality to the classic authors of antiquity. We will not let
them perish, because they amuse us, and inspire us. Livy doubtless was
too ambitious in aspiring to write accurately the whole history of his
country. He would have been wiser had he confined himself to a
particular epoch, of which he was conversant, like Tacitus and
Thucydides. But it is taking a narrow view of history to make all
writers after the same pattern, even as it would be bigoted to make all
Christians belong to the same sect. Some will be remarkable for style,
others for learning, and others again for moral and philosophical
wisdom. Some will be minute, and others generalizing. Some dig out a
multiplicity of facts without apparent object, and others induce from
those facts. Some will make essays, and others chronicles. We have need
of all styles and all kinds of excellence. A great and original thinker
may not have the time or opportunity or taste for a minute and searching
criticism of original authorities; but he may be able to generalize
previously established facts, so as to draw most valuable moral
instruction. History is a boundless field of inquiry. No man can master
it, in all its departments and periods. What he gains in minute details,
he is apt to lose in generalization. If he attempts to embody too much
learning, he may be deficient in originality; if he would say every
thing, he is apt to be dry; if he elaborates too much, he loses life.
Society, too, requires different kinds and styles of history,--history
for students, history for ladies, histories for old men, histories for
young men, histories to amuse, and histories to instruct. If all men
were to write history according to Dr. Arnold's views, then we should
have histories of interest only to classical scholars. A fellow of
Christ Church may demand authorities, even if he never consults one of
them, but a member of Congress may wish to see learning embodied in the
text, and animated by genius, after the fashion of the ancient
historians, who never quoted their sources of knowledge, and who were
valued for the richness of thoughts and artistic beauty of style. The
ages in which they flourished, attached no value to pedantic displays of
labor, or evidences of learning paraded in foot-notes.

[Sidenote: Greatness of the ancient historians.]

Thus the great historians whom I have alluded to, both Greek and Latin,
have few equals and no superiors, in our own times, in those things
which are most to be admired. They were not pedants, but men of immense
genius and learning, who blended the profoundest principles of moral
wisdom with the most fascinating narratives, men universally popular
among learned and unlearned, and men who were great artists in style,
and masters of the language in which they wrote. We claim a superiority
to them, because we are more recondite and critical; but the decline of
Roman literature can be dated to times when commentaries became the
fashion. We improve on commentaries. They are chiefly confined to
biblical questions. _We_ write dictionaries and encyclopedias. In
this respect we are superior to the ancients. Our latest fashion of
histories makes them very long, and very uncertain, containing much
irrelevant matter, and more remarkable for learning than for genius, or
elegance of diction. Yet Macaulay, Prescott, and Motley have few equals
among the ancients in interest or artistic beauty.

[Sidenote: Suetonius.]

[Sidenote: Marcellinus.]

Rome can boast of no great historian after Tacitus, who should have
belonged to the Ciceronian epoch. Suetonius, born about the year A.D.
70, shortly after Nero's death, was rather a biographer than historian.
Nor as a biographer does he take a high rank. His "Lives of the Caesars,"
like Diogenes Laertius' "Lives of the Philosophers," are rather
anecdotical than historical. L. A. Florus, who flourished during the
reign of Trajan, has left a series of sketches of the different wars
from the days of Romulus to those of Augustus. Frontinus epitomized the
large histories of Pompeius. Marcellinus wrote a history from Nerva to
Valens, and is often quoted by Gibbon. But none wrote who should be
adduced as examples of the triumph of genius, except Sallust, Caesar,
Livy, and Tacitus.

[Sidenote: Ancient orators.]

[Sidenote: Ancient eloquence.]

There is another field of prose compositions in which the Greeks and
Romans gained great distinction, and proved themselves equal to any
nation of modern times, and this was that of eloquence. It is true we
have not a rich collection of ancient speeches. But we have every reason
to believe that both Greeks and Romans were most severely trained in the
art of public speaking, and that forensic eloquence was highly prized
and munificently rewarded. It commenced with democratic institutions,
and flourished as long as the people were a great power in the state. It
declined whenever and as soon as tyrants bore rule. Eloquence and
liberty flourished together; nor can there be eloquence when there is
not freedom of debate. In the fifth century before Christ--the first
century of democracy--great orators arose, for without the power and the
opportunity of defending himself against accusation, no man could hold
an ascendent position. Socrates insisted upon the gift of oratory to a
general in the army, [Footnote: Xen. _Mem._, iii. 3, 11.] as well as
to a leader in political life. In Athens the courts of justice were
numerous, and those who could not defend themselves were obliged to
secure the services of those who were trained in the use of public
speaking. Thus the lawyers arose, among whom eloquence has been more in
demand, and more richly paid than in any other class, certainly of
ancient times. Rhetoric became connected with dialectics, and in Greece,
Sicily, and Italy, both were most extensively cultivated. Empedocles was
distinguished as much for rhetoric as for philosophy. It was not,
however, in the courts of law that eloquence displayed the greatest fire
and passion, but in political assemblies. These could only coexist with
liberty; and a democracy was more favorable than an aristocracy to a
large concourse of citizens. In the Grecian republics, eloquence as an
art, may be said to have been born. It was nursed and fed by political
agitations; by the strife of parties. It arose from appeals to the
people as a source of power; and, when the people were not cultivated,
it appealed chiefly to popular passions and prejudices. When they were
enlightened, it appealed to interests.

[Sidenote: Pericles.]

It was in Athens, where there existed the purest form of democratic
institutions, that eloquence rose to the loftiest heights in the ancient
world, so far as eloquence appeals to popular passions. Pericles, the
greatest statesman of Greece, was celebrated for his eloquence, although
no specimens remain to us. It was conceded by the ancient authors, that
his oratory was of the highest kind, and the epithet of Olympian was
given him as carrying the weapons of Zeus upon his tongue. [Footnote:
Plutarch; Cic. _De Orat_., iii. 34; Quin., x. i. Section 82;
Plat. _Phed_., p. 262.] His voice was sweet, and his utterance
distinct and rapid. Pisistratus was also famous for his eloquence,
although he was a usurper and a tyrant. Isocrates [Footnote: Born 436
B.C.] was a professed rhetorician, and endeavored to base it upon sound
moral principles, and rescue it from the influence of the Sophists. He
was the great teacher of the most eminent statesmen of his day. Twenty-
one of his orations have come down to us, and they are excessively
polished and elaborated; but they were written to be read; they were not
extemporary. His language is the purest and most refined Attic dialect.
Lysias [Footnote: Born B.C. 458.] was a fertile writer of orations also,
and he is reputed to have produced as many as four hundred and twenty-
five. Of these only thirty-five are extant. They are characterized by
peculiar gracefulness and elegance, which did not interfere with
strength. So able were these orations, that only two were unsuccessful.
They were so pure that they were regarded as the best canon of the Attic
idiom. [Footnote: Dion. _Lys_., ii. 3.]

[Sidenote: Demosthenes.]

But all the orators of Greece--and Greece was the land of orators--gave
way to Demosthenes, born B.C. 385. He received a good education, and is
said to have been instructed in philosophy by Plato, and in eloquence by
Isocrates. But it is more probable that he privately prepared himself
for his brilliant career. As soon as he attained his majority, he
brought suits against the men whom his father had appointed his
guardians for their waste of property, and was, after two years,
successful, conducting the prosecution himself. It was not until the age
of thirty that he appeared as a speaker in the public assembly on
political matters, and he enjoyed universal respect, and became one of
the leading statesmen of Athens, and henceforth he took an active part
in every question that concerned the state. He especially distinguished
himself in his speeches against Macedonian aggrandizements, and his
Philippics are, perhaps, the most brilliant of his orations. But the
cause which he advocated was unfortunate. The battle of Cheronea, B.C.
338, put an end to the independence of Greece, and Philip of Macedon was
all-powerful. For this catastrophe Demosthenes was somewhat responsible,
but his motives were pure and his patriotism lofty, and he retained the
confidence of his countrymen. Accused by Aeschines, he delivered his
famous Oration on the Crown. Afterwards, during the supremacy of
Alexander, he was again accused, and suffered exile. Recalled from
exile, on the death of Alexander, he roused himself for the deliverance
of Greece, without success, and, hunted by his enemies, he took poison
in the sixty-third year of his age, having vainly contended for the
freedom of his country,--one of the noblest spirits of antiquity,
spotless in his public career, and lofty in his private life. As an
orator, he has not probably been equaled by any man of any country. By
his contemporaries he was regarded as faultless as a public speaker, and
when it is remembered that he struggled against physical difficulties
which, in the early part of his career, would have utterly discouraged
any ordinary man, we feel that he deserves the highest commendation. He
never spoke without preparation, and most of his orations were severely
elaborated. He never trusted to the impulse of the occasion. And all his
orations exhibit him as a pure and noble patriot, and are full of the
loftiest sentiments. He was a great artist, and his oratorical successes
were greatly owing to the arrangement of his speeches and the
application of the strongest arguments in their proper places. Added to
this moral and intellectual superiority was the "magic power of his
language, majestic and simple at the same time, rich yet not bombastic,
strange and yet familiar, solemn without being ornamented, grave and yet
pleasing, concise and yet fluent, sweet and yet impressive, which
altogether carried away the minds of his hearers." [Footnote: Leonhard
Schmitz.] His orations were most highly prized by the ancients, who
wrote innumerable commentaries on them, but most of these criticisms are
lost. Sixty, however, of these great productions of genius have come
down to us, and are contained in the various collections of the Attic
orators by Aldus, Stephens, Taylor, Reiske, Dukas, Bekker, Dobson, and
Sauppe. Demosthenes, like other orators, first became known as the
composer of speeches for litigants; but his great fame was based on the
orations he pronounced in great political emergencies. His rival was
Aeschines, but he was vastly inferior to Demosthenes, although bold,
vigorous, and brilliant. Indeed, the opinions of mankind, for two
thousand years, have been unanimous in ascribing to Demosthenes the
highest position as an orator of all the men of ancient and modern
times. David Hume says of him, "that, could his manner be copied, its
success would be infallible over a modern audience." "It is rapid
harmony exactly adjusted to the sense. It is vehement reasoning, without
any appearance of art. It is disdain, anger, boldness, freedom involved
in a continual stream of argument; so that, of all human productions,
his orations present to us the models which approach the nearest to
perfection." [Footnote: _Dissertation of Lord Brougham on the
Eloquence of the Ancients._]

[Sidenote: Roman orators.]

It is probable that the Romans were behind the Athenians in all the arts
of rhetoric; and yet in the days of the republic celebrated orators
arose, called out by the practice of the law and political meetings. It
was, in fact, in forensic eloquence that Latin prose first appears as a
cultivated language; for the forum was to the Romans what libraries are
to us. And the art of public speaking was very early developed. Cato,
Laelius, Carbo, and the Gracchi are said to have been majestic and
harmonious in speech. Their merits were eclipsed by Antonius, Crassus,
Cotta, Sulpitius, and Hortensius. The last had a very brilliant career
as an orator, although his orations were too florid to be read. Caesar
was also distinguished for his eloquence, the characteristics of which
were force and purity. Caelius was noted for lofty sentiment; Brutus for
philosophical wisdom; Callidus for a delicate and harmonious style, and
Calvus for sententious force.

[Sidenote: Cicero.]

But all the Roman orators yielded to Cicero, as the Greeks did to
Demosthenes. These two men are always coupled together when allusion is
made to eloquence. They were preeminent in the ancient world, and have
never been equaled in the modern.

Cicero was not probably equal to his great Grecian rival in vehemence,
in force, in fiery argument, which swept every thing away before him;
and he was not probably equal to him in original genius; but he was his
superior in learning, in culture, and in breadth. [Footnote: Born B.C.
106.] He distinguished himself very early as an advocate; but his first
great public effort was in the prosecution of Verres for corruption.
Although defended by Hortensius, and the whole influence of the Metelli
and other powerful families, Cicero gained his cause,--more fortunate
than Burke in his prosecution of Warren Hastings, who was also sustained
by powerful interests and families. Burke also resembled Cicero in his
peculiarities and in his fortunes more than any modern orator. His
speech on the Manilian law, when he appeared as a political orator,
greatly contributed to his popularity. I need not describe his memorable
career; his successive election to all the highest offices of state, his
detection of Catiline's conspiracy, his opposition to turbulent and
ambitious partisans, his alienations and friendships, his brilliant
career as a statesman, his misfortunes and sorrows, his exile and
recall, his splendid services to the state, his greatness and his
defects, his virtues and weaknesses, his triumphs and martyrdom. These
are foreign to my purpose. No man of heathen antiquity is better known
to us, and no man, by pure genius, ever won more glorious laurels. His
life and labors are immortal. His virtues and services are embalmed in
the heart of the world. Few men ever performed greater literary labors,
and in most of its departments. Next to Aristotle, he was the most
learned man of antiquity, but performed more varied labors than he,
since he was not only great as a writer and speaker, but as a statesman,
and was the most conspicuous man in Rome after Pompey and Caesar. He may
not have had the moral greatness of Socrates, nor the philosophical
genius of Plato, nor the overpowering eloquence of Demosthenes, but he
was a master of all the wisdom of antiquity. Even civil law, the great
science of the Romans, became interesting in his hands, and is divested
of its dryness and technicality. He popularized history, and paid honor
to all art, even to the stage. He made the Romans conversant with the
philosophy of Greece, and systematized the various speculations. He may
not have added to the science, but no Roman, after him, understood so
well the practical bearing of all the various systems. His glory is
purely intellectual, and it was by pure genius that he rose to his
exalted position and influence.

But it was in forensic eloquence that he was preeminent, and in which he
had but one equal in ancient times. Roman eloquence culminated in him.
He composed about eighty orations, of which fifty-nine are preserved.
Some were delivered from the rostrum to the people, and some in the
Senate. Some were mere philippics, as savage in denunciation as those of
Demosthenes. Some were laudatory; some were judicial; but all were
severely logical, full of historical allusion, profound in philosophical
wisdom, and pervaded with the spirit of patriotism. "He goes round and
round his object, surveys it in every light, examines it in all its
parts, retires and then advances, compares and contrasts it,
illustrates, confirms, and enforces it, till the hearer feels ashamed of
doubting a position which seems built on a foundation so strictly
argumentative. And having established his case, he opens upon his
opponent a discharge of raillery so delicate and good natured that it is
impossible for the latter to maintain his ground against it; or, when
the subject is too grave, he colors his exaggerations with all the
bitterness of irony and vehemence of passion. But the appeal to the
gentler emotions is reserved for the close of the oration, as in the
defense of Cluentius, Caelius, Milo, and Flaccus; the most striking
instances of which are the poetical bursts of feeling with which he
addresses his client, Plaucius, and his picture of the desolate
condition of the vestal Fonteia, should her brother be condemned. At
other times his peroration contains more heroic and elevated sentiments,
as in the invocation of the Alban Altars, and in his defense of Sextius,
and that on liberty at the close of the third Philippic." [Footnote:
Newman, _Hist. Rom. Lit._, p. 305.]

Critics have uniformly admired his style as peculiarly suited to the
Latin language, which, being scanty and unmusical, requires more
redundancy than the Greek. The simplicity of the Attic writers would
make Latin composition bold and tame. To be perspicuous, the Latin must
be full. Thus Arnold thinks that what Tacitus gained in energy he lost
in elegance and perspicuity. But Cicero, dealing with a barren and
unphilosophical language, enriched it with circumlocutions and
metaphors, while he formed it of harsh and uncouth expressions, and thus
became the greatest master of composition the world has seen. He was a
great artist, making use of his scanty materials to the best effect; and
since he could not attain the elegance of the Greeks, he sought to excel
them in vigor. He had absolute control over the resources of his
vernacular tongue, and not only unrivaled skill in composition, but tact
and judgment. Thus he was generally successful, in spite of the venality
and corruption of the times. The courts of justice were the scene of his
earliest triumphs; nor did he speak from the rostra until he was praetor
on mere political questions, as in reference to the Manilian and
Agrarian laws. It is in his political discourses that he rises to the
highest ranks. In his speeches against Verres, Catiline, and Antony, he
kindles in his countrymen lofty feelings for the honor of his country,
and abhorrence of tyranny and corruption. Indeed, he hated bloodshed,
injustice, and strife, and beheld the downfall of liberty with
indescribable sorrow.

Cicero held a very exalted position as a philosophical writer and
critic; but we defer what we have to say on this point until we speak of
the philosophy of the ancients. Upon eloquence his main efforts were,
however, directed, and eloquence was the most perfect fruit of his
talents. Nor can we here speak of Cicero as a man. He has his admirers
and detractors. He had great faults and weaknesses as well as virtues.
He was egotistical, vain, and vacillating. But he was industrious,
amiable, witty, and public spirited. In his official position he was
incorruptible. He was no soldier, but he had a greater than a warrior's
excellence. In spite of his faults, his name is one of the brightest of
the ancients. His integrity was never impeached, even in an age of
unparalleled corruption, and he was pure in morals. He was free from
rancor and jealousy, was true in his friendships, and indulgent to his
dependents. [Footnote: Professor Ramsay, of Glasgow, has written a most
admirable article on Cicero in Smith's _Dictionary_. It is very
full and impartial. Cicero's own writings are the best commentary on his
life. Plutarch has afforded much anecdote. Forsythe is the last work of
erudition. The critics sneer at Middleton's _Life of Cicero_; but
it has lasted one hundred years. It is, perhaps, too eulogistic. Drumann
is said to have most completely exhausted his subject in his
_Geschichte Roms_.]

Thus in oratory, as in history, the ancients can boast of most
illustrious examples, never even equaled. Still, we cannot tell the
comparative merits of the great classical orators of antiquity, with the
more distinguished of our times. Only Mirabeau, Pitt, Fox, Burke,
Brougham, Webster, and Clay, can even be compared with them. In power of
moving the people, some of our modern reformers and agitators may be
mentioned favorably; but their harangues are comparatively tame when
read.

[Sidenote: Varro.]

In philosophy, the Greeks and Romans distinguished themselves more than
even in poetry, or history, or eloquence. Their speculations pertained
to the loftiest subjects which ever tasked the intellect of man. But
this great department deserves a separate chapter. There were
respectable writers, too, in various other departments of literature,
but no very great names whose writings have descended to us.
Contemporaries had an exalted opinion of Varro, who was considered the
most learned of the Romans, as well as their most voluminous author. He
was born ten years before Cicero, and he is highly commended by
Augustine. [Footnote: Born B.C. 116; _Civ. Dei_., vi. 2.] He was
entirely devoted to literature, took no interest in passing events, and
lived to a good old age. St. Augustine says of him, "that he wrote so
much that one wonders how he had time to read; and that he read so much,
we are astonished how he found time to write." He composed four hundred
and ninety books. Of these only one has descended to us entire--"De Re
Rustica"--written at the age of eighty; but it is the best treatise
which has come down from antiquity on ancient agriculture. We have parts
of his other books, and we know of books which have entirely perished
which, for their information, would be invaluable; especially his
"Divine Antiquities," in sixteen books--his great work, from which St.
Augustine drew his materials for his "City of God." He wrote treatises
on language, on the poets, on philosophy, on geography, and various
other subjects. He wrote satire and criticism. But although his writings
were learned, his style was so bad that the ages have failed to preserve
him. It is singular that the truly immortal books are most valued for
their artistic excellences. No man, however great his genius, can afford
to be dull. Style is to written composition, what delivery is to a
public speaker. John Foster, one of the finest intellects of the last
generation, preached to a "handful" of hearers, while "Satan" Montgomery
drew ecstatic crowds. Nobody goes to hear the man of thoughts, every
body to hear the man of words, being repelled or attracted by
_manner_.

[Sidenote: Seneca.]

Seneca was another great writer among the Romans, but he belongs to the
domain of philosophy, although it is his ethical works which have given
him immortality, as may be truly said of Socrates and Epictetus,
although they are usually classed among the philosophers. He was a
Spaniard, and was born a few years before the Christian era, was a
lawyer and a rhetorician, a teacher and minister of Nero. It was his
misfortune to know one of the most detestable princes that ever
scandalized humanity, and it is not to his credit to have accumulated,
in four years, one of the largest fortunes in Rome, while serving such a
master. But since he lived to experience his ingratitude, he is more
commonly regarded as a martyr. Had he lived in the republican period, he
would have been a great orator. He wrote voluminously on many subjects,
and was devoted to a literary life. He rejected the superstitions of his
country, and looked upon the ritualism of religion as a mere fashion;
but his religion was a mere deism, and he dishonored his own virtues by
a compliance with the vices of others. He saw much of life, and died at
fifty-three. What is remarkable in his writings, which are clear but
labored, is, that under pagan influences and imperial tyranny, he should
have presented such lofty moral truth; and it is a mark of almost
transcendent talent that he should, unaided by Christianity, have soared
so high in the realm of ethical inquiry. Nor is it easy to find any
modern author who has treated great questions in so attractive a way.

[Sidenote: Quintilian.]

Quintilian is a Latin classic, and belonged to the class of
rhetoricians, and should have been mentioned among the orators, like
Lysias the Greek, a teacher, however, of eloquence, rather than an
orator. He was born A.D. 40, and taught the younger Pliny, also two
nephews of Domitian, receiving a regular salary from the imperial
treasury. His great work is a complete system of rhetoric.
"_Institutiones Oratoriae_" is one of the clearest and fullest of
all rhetorical manuals ever written in any language, although, as a
literary production, inferior to the "_De Oratore_" of Cicero. It
is very practical and sensible, and a complete compendium of every topic
likely to be useful in the education of an aspirant for the honors of
eloquence. In systematic arrangement, it falls short of a similar work
by Aristotle; but it is celebrated for its sound judgment and keen
discrimination, showing great reading and reflection. He should be
viewed as a critic rather than as a rhetorician, since he entered into
the merits and defects of the great masters of Greek and Roman
literature. In his peculiar province he has had no superior. Like
Cicero, or Demosthenes, or Plato, or Thucydides, or Tacitus, he would be
a great man if he lived in our times, and could proudly challenge the
modern world to produce a better teacher than he in the art of public
speaking.

[Sidenote: Lucian.]

There are other writers of immense fame, who do not represent any
particular class in the field of literature, which can be compared with
the modern. But I can only draw attention to Lucian, a witty and
voluminous Greek author, who lived in the reign of Commodus, wrote
rhetorical, critical, and biographical works, and even romances which
have given hints to modern authors. But his fame rests on his
"Dialogues," intended to ridicule the heathen philosophy and religion,
and which show him to have been one of the great masters of ancient
satire and mockery. His style of dialogue--a combination of Plato and
Aristophanes--is not much used by modern writers, and his peculiar kind
of ridicule is reserved now for the stage. Yet he cannot be called a
writer of comedy, like MoliEre. He resembles Rabelais and Swift more
than any other modern writers, and has their indignant wit, indecent
jokes, and pungent sarcasms. He paints, like Juvenal, the vices and
follies of his time, and exposes the hypocrisy that reigns in the high
places of fashion and power. His dialogues have been imitated by
Fontanelle and Lord Lyttleton, but they do not possess his humor or
pungency. Lucian does not grapple with great truths, but contents
himself in ridiculing those who have proclaimed them; and, in his cold
cynicism, depreciates human knowledge, and all the great moral teachers
of mankind. He is even shallow and flippant upon Socrates. But he was
well read in human nature, and superficially acquainted with all the
learning of antiquity. In wit and sarcasm, he may be compared with
Voltaire, and his end was the same, to demolish and pull down, without
substituting any thing in its stead. His skepticism was universal, and
extended to religion, to philosophy, and to every thing venerated and
ancient. His purity of style was admired by Erasmus, and he has been
translated into most European languages. The best English version is
rendered by Dr. Franklin, London, 2 vols. 4to. In strong contrast to the
"Dialogues" is the "City of God," by Saint Augustine, in which he
demolishes with keener ridicule all the gods of antiquity, but
substitutes instead the knowledge of the true God.

Thus the Romans, as well as Greeks, produced works in all departments of
literature which will bear comparison with the masterpieces of modern
times. And where would have been the literature of the early Church, or
of modern nations, had not the great original writers of Athens and Rome
been our schoolmasters? And when we further remember that their glorious
literature was created by native genius, without the aid of
Christianity, we are filled with amazement, and may almost be excused if
we deify the reason of man. At least we are assured that literature as
well as art may flourish under pagan influences, and that Christianity
has a higher mission than the culture of the mind. Religious skepticism
cannot be disarmed if we appeal to Christianity as the test of
intellectual culture. The realm of reason has no fairer fields than
those which are adorned by pagan art. Nor have greater triumphs of
intellect been witnessed in these, our Christian times, than among that
class which is the least influenced by Christian ideas. Some of the
proudest trophies of genius have been won by infidels, or by men
stigmatized as such. Witness Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot, Hegel, Fichte,
Gibbon, Hume, Buckle. And then how many great works are written without
the inspiration or the spirit of a living Christianity! How little
Bulwer, or Byron, or Dumas, or Goethe owe, apparently, to Christian
teachings! Is Emerson superior to Epictetus, in an ethical point of
view? Was Franklin a great philosopher, or Jefferson a great statesman,
because they were surrounded by Christian examples? May there not be the
greatest practical infidelity, with the most artistic beauty and native
reach of thought? Milton justly ascribes the most sublime intelligence
to Satan and his angels on the point of rebellion against the majesty of
Heaven. A great genius may be kindled by the fires of discontent and
ambition, which will quicken the intellectual faculties, even while they
consume the soul, and spread their devastating influence on the homes
and hopes of man.



RERERENCES.--There are no better authorities than the classical authors
themselves, and their works must be studied in order to comprehend the
spirit of ancient literature. Modern historians of Roman literature are
merely critics, like Drumann, Schlegel, Niebuhr, Muller, Mommsen, Mure,
Arnold, Dunlap, and Thompson. Nor do I know of an exhaustive history of
Roman literature in the English language. Yet nearly every great writer
has occasional criticisms, entitled to respect. The Germans, in this
department, have no equals. As critics and commentators they are
unrivaled.




CHAPTER VIII.

GRECIAN PHILOSOPHY.


Whatever may be said of the inferiority of the ancients to the moderns
in natural and mechanical science, which no one is disposed to question,
or even in the realm of literature, which can be questioned, there was
one department which they carried to absolute perfection, and to which
we have added nothing of consequence. In the realm of art they were our
equals, and probably our superiors; in philosophy they carried logical
deductions to their utmost limit. They created the science. They
advanced, from a few crude speculations on material phenomena, to an
analysis of all the powers of the mind, and finally to the establishment
of ethical principles which even Christianity did not overturn. The
progress of the science, from Thales to Plato, is the most stupendous
triumph of the human understanding. The reason of man soared to the
loftiest flights that it has ever attained. It cast its searching eye
into the most abstruse inquiries which ever tasked the famous intellects
of the world. It exhausted all the subjects which dialectical subtlety
ever raised. It originated and it carried out the boldest speculations
respecting the nature of the soul and its future existence. It
established most important psychological truths. It created a method for
the solution of the most abstruse questions. It went on, from point to
point, until all the faculties of the mind were severely analyzed, and
all its operations were subjected to a rigid method. The Romans never
added a single principle to the philosophy which the Greeks elaborated;
the ingenious scholastics of the Middle Ages merely reproduced their
ideas; and even the profound and patient Germans have gone round in the
same circles that Plato and Aristotle marked out more than two thousand
years ago. It was Greek philosophy in which noble Roman youth were
educated, and hence, as it was expounded by a Cicero, a Marcus Aurelius,
and an Epictetus, it was as much the inheritance of the Romans as it was
of the Greeks themselves, after their political liberties were swept
away, and the Grecian cities formed a part of the Roman empire. The
Romans learned, or might have learned, what the Greeks created and
taught, and philosophy became, as well as art, identified with the
civilization which extended from the Rhine and the Po to the Nile and
the Tigris. Grecian philosophy was one of the distinctive features of
ancient civilization long after the Greeks had ceased to speculate on
the laws of mind, or the nature of the soul, or the existence of God, or
future rewards and punishments. Although it was purely Grecian in its
origin and development, it cannot be left out of the survey of the
triumphs of the human mind when the Romans were masters of the world,
and monopolized the fruits of all the arts and sciences. It became one
of the grand ornaments of the Roman schools, one of the priceless
possessions of the Roman conquerors. The Romans did not originate
medicine, but Galen was one of its greatest lights; they did not invent
the hexameter verse, but Virgil sung to its measure; they did not create
Ionic capitals, but their cities were ornamented with marble temples on
the same principles as those which called out the admiration of
Pericles. So, if they did not originate philosophy, and generally had
but little taste for it, still its truths were systematized and
explained by Cicero, and formed no small accession to the treasures with
which cultivated intellects sought everywhere to be enriched. It formed
an essential part of the intellectual wealth of the civilized world,
when civilization could not prevent the world from falling into decay
and ruin. And as it was the noblest triumph which the human mind, under
pagan influences, ever achieved, so it was followed by the most
degrading imbecility into which man, in civilized countries, was ever
allowed to fall. Philosophy, like art, like literature, like science,
arose, shined, grew dim, and passed away, and left the world in night.
Why was so bright a glory followed by so dismal a shame? What a comment
is this on the greatness and littleness of man!

[Sidenote: Commencement of Grecian speculations.]

The development of Greek philosophy is doubtless one commence-of the
most interesting and instructive subjects Grecian in the whole history
of mind. In all probability it originated with the Ionian Sophoi, though
many suppose it was derived from the East. It is questionable whether
the oriental nations had any philosophy distinct from religion. The
Germans are fond of tracing resemblances in the early speculations of
the Greeks to the systems which prevailed in Asia from a very remote
antiquity. Gladish sees in the Pythagorean system an adoption of Chinese
doctrines; in the Heraclitic system, the influence of Persia; in the
Empedoclean, Egyptian speculations; and in the Anaxagorean, the Jewish
creeds. [Footnote: Lewes, _Biog. Hist. of Philos_., Introd.] But
the Orientals had theogonies, not philosophies. The Indian speculations
aim to an exposition of ancient revelation. They profess to liberate the
soul from the evils of mortal life--to arrive at eternal beatitudes. But
the state of perfectibility could only be reached by religious
ceremonial observances and devout contemplation. The Indian systems do
not disdain logical discussions, or a search after the principles of
which the universe is composed; and hence we find great refinements in
sophistry, and a wonderful subtlety of logical discussion; but these are
directed to unattainable ends,--to the connection of good with evil, and
the union of the supreme with nature. Nothing came out of these
speculations but an occasional elevation of mind among the learned, and
a profound conviction of the misery of man and the obstacles to his
perfection. [Footnote: See Archer Butler's fine lecture on the Indian
Philosophies.] The Greeks, starting from physical phenomena, went on in
successive series of inquiries, until they elevated themselves above
matter, above experience, even to the loftiest abstractions, and until
they classified the laws of thought. It is curious how speculation led
to demonstration, and how inquiries into the world of matter prepared
the way for the solution of intellectual phenomena. Philosophy kept pace
with geometry, and those who observed nature also gloried in abstruse
calculations. Philosophy and mathematics seem to have been allied with
the worship of art among the same men, and it is difficult to say which
more distinguished them, aesthetic culture or power of abstruse
reasoning.

[Sidenote: Thales.]

[Sidenote: Water the vital principle of Nature.]

We do not read of any remarkable philosophical inquirer until Thales
arose, the first of the Ionian school. He was born at Miletus, a Greek
colony in Asia Minor, about the year B.C. 636, when Ancus Martius was
king of Rome, and Josiah reigned at Jerusalem. He has left no writings
behind him, but he was numbered as one of the seven wise men of Greece.
He was numbered with the wise men on account of his political sagacity
and wisdom in public affairs. [Footnote: Miller, Hist, of Grec. Lit., ch.
xvii.]

  "And he, 't is said, did first compute the stars
  Which beam in Charles' wain, and guide the bark
  Of the Phoenician sailor o'er the sea."

He was the first who attempted a logical solution of material phenomena,
without resorting to mythical representations. Thales felt that there
was a grand question to be answered relative to the _beginning of
things_. "Philosophy," it has been well said, "may be a history of
_errors_, but not of _follies_" It was not a folly, in a rude
age, to speculate on the first or fundamental principle of things. He
looked around him upon Nature, upon the sea and earth and sky, and
concluded that water or moisture was the vital principle. He felt it in
the air, he saw it in the clouds above, and in the ground beneath his
feet. He saw that plants were sustained by rain and by the dew, that
neither animal nor man could live without water, and that to fishes it
was the native element. What more important or vital than water? It was
the _prima materia_, the [Greek: archae], the beginning of all things--the
origin of the world. [Footnote: Aristotle, _Metaph._, 1. c. 3;
Diog. Laertius, _Thales_.] I do not here speak of his astronomical
and geometrical labors--as the first to have divided the year into three
hundred and sixty-five days. He is celebrated also for practical wisdom.
"Know thyself," is one of his remarkable sayings. But the foundation
principle of his philosophy was that water is the first cause of all
things--the explanation, of the origin of the universe. How so crude a
speculation could have been maintained by so wise a man it is difficult
to conjecture. It is not, however, the _reason_ which he assigns
for the beginning of things which is noteworthy, so much as the
_fact_ that his mind was directed to the solution of questions
pertaining to the origin of the universe. It was these questions which
marked the Ionian philosophers. It was these which showed the inquiring
nature of their minds. What is the great first cause of all things?
Thales saw it in one of the four elements of nature, as the ancients
divided them. And it is the earliest recorded theory among the Greeks of
the origin of the world. It is an induction from the phenomena of
animated nature--the nutrition and production of a seed. [Footnote:
Bitter, b. iii. c. 3; Lewes, ch. 1.] He regarded the entire world in the
light of a living being gradually maturing and forming itself from an
imperfect seed state, which was of a moist nature. This moisture endues
the universe with vitality. The world, he thought, was full of gods, but
they had their origin in water. He had no conception of God as
_Intelligence_, or as a _creative_ power. He had a great and
inquiring mind, but he was a pagan, with no knowledge of a spiritual and
controlling and personal deity.

[Sidenote: Anaximenes. Air the _animus mundi_.]

Anaximenes, his disciple, pursued his inquiries, and adopted his method.
He also was born in Miletus, but at what time is unknown, probably B.C.
529. Like Thales, he held to the eternity of matter. Like him, he
disbelieved in the existence of any thing immaterial, for even a human
soul is formed out of matter. He, too, speculated on the origin of the
universe, but thought that _air_, not water, was the primal cause.
[Footnote: Cicero, _De Nat. D_., i. 10.] This seemed to be
universal. We breathe it; all things are sustained by it. It is Life--
that is pregnant with vital energy, and capable of infinite
transmutations. All things are produced by it; all is again resolved
into it; it supports all things; it surrounds the world; it has
infinitude; it has eternal motion. Thus did this philosopher reason,
comparing the world with our own living existence,--which he took to be
air,--an imperishable principle of life. He thus advanced a step on
Thales, since he regarded the world not after the analogy of an
imperfect seed-state, but that of the highest condition of life,--the
human soul. [Footnote: Ritter, b. iii. c. 3.] And he attempted to refer
to one general law all the transformations of the first simple substance
into its successive states, for the cause of change is the eternal
motion of the air.

[Sidenote: Diogenes. Air and soul identical.]

Diogenes of Apollonia, in Crete, one of his disciples, born B.C. 460,
also believed that air was the principle of the universe, but he imputed
to it an intellectual energy, yet without recognizing any distinction
between mind and matter. [Footnote: Diog. Laert., ii. 3; Bayle, _Dict.
Hist. et Crit._] He made air and the soul identical. "For," says he,
"man and all other animals breathe and live by means of the air, and
therein consists their soul." [Footnote: Ritter, b. iii. c. 3.] And as
it is the primary being from which all is derived, it is necessarily an
eternal and imperishable body; but, as _soul_, it is also endued
with consciousness. Diogenes thus refers the origin of the world to an
intelligent being--to a soul which knows and vivifies. Anaximenes
regarded air as having Life. Diogenes saw in it also Intelligence. Thus
philosophy advanced step by step, though still groping in the dark; for
the origin of all things, according to Diogenes, must exist in
_Intelligence_.

[Sidenote: Heraclitus--Fire the principle of life.]

Heraclitus of Ephesus, classed by Ritter among the Ionian philosophers,
was born B.C. 503. Like others of his school, he sought a physical
ground for all phenomena. The elemental principle he regarded as
_fire_, since all things are convertible into it. In one of its
modifications, this fire, or fluid, self-kindled, permeating every thing
as the soul or principle of life, is endowed with intelligence and
powers of ceaseless activity. "If Anaximenes discovered that he had
within him a power and principle which ruled over all the acts and
functions of his bodily frame, Heraclitus found that there was life
within him which he could not call his own, and yet it was, in the very
highest sense, _himself_, so that without it he would have been a
poor, helpless, isolated creature; a universal life which connected him
with his fellow-men,--with the absolute source and original fountain of
life." [Footnote: Maurice, _Moral and Metaph. Phil._] "He
proclaimed the absolute vitality of nature, the endless change of
matter, the mutability and perishability of all individual things in
contrast with the eternal Being--the supreme harmony which rules over
all." [Footnote: Lewes, _Biog. Hist. of Phil._] To trace the divine
energy of life in all things was the general problem of his philosophy,
and this spirit was akin to the pantheism of the East. But he was one of
the greatest speculative intellects that preceded Plato, and of all the
physical theorists arrived nearest to spiritual truth. He taught the
germs of what was afterwards more completely developed. "From his theory
of perpetual fluxion Plato derived the necessity of seeking a stable
basis for the universal system in his world of ideas." [Footnote: Archer
Butler, series i. lect. v.; Hegel, _Gesch. D. Phil._, i. p. 334.]

Anaxagoras, the most famous of the Ionian philosophers, was born B.C.
500, and belonged to a rich and noble family. Regarding philosophy as
the noblest pursuit of earth, he abandoned his inheritance for the study
of nature. He went to Athens in the most brilliant period of her history,
and had Pericles, Euripides, and Socrates for pupils. He taught that the
great moving force of nature was intellect [Greek: nous]. Intelligence
was the cause of the world and of order, and mind was the principle of
motion; yet this intelligence was not a moral intelligence, but simply
the _primum mobile_--the all-knowing motive force by which the
order of nature is effected. He thus laid the foundation of a new system
which, under the Attic philosophers, sought to explain nature, not by
regarding matter in its different forms, as the cause of all things, but
rather mind, thought, intelligence, which both knows and acts--a grand
conception unrivaled in ancient speculation. This explanation of
material phenomena by intellectual causes was his peculiar merit, and
places him in a very high rank among the thinkers of the world.
Moreover, he recognized the reason as the only faculty by which we
become cognizant of truth, the senses being too weak to discover the
real component particles of things. Like all the great inquirers, he was
impressed with the limited degree of positive knowledge, compared with
what there is to be learned. "Nothing," says he, "can be known; nothing
is certain; sense is limited, intellect is weak, life is short"
[Footnote: Cicero, _Qu. Ac._, i. 12.]--the complaint, not of a
skeptic, but of a man overwhelmed with the sense of his incapacity to
solve the problems which arose before his active mind. [Footnote:
Lucret., lib. i. 834-875.] Anaxagoras thought that this spirit [Greek:
Nous] gave to all those material atoms, which, in the beginning of the
world, lay in disorder, the impulse by which they took the forms of
individual things, and that this impulse was given in a circular direction.
Hence that the sun, moon, and stars, and even the air, are constantly
moving in a circle. [Footnote: Muller, _Hist. Lit. of Greece_,
chap. xvii.]

[Sidenote: Anaximander thought that the Infinite is the origin of
things.]

In the mean time another sect of philosophers arose, who like the
Ionians, sought to explain nature, but by a different method.
Anaximander, born B.C. 610, was one of the original mathematicians of
Greece, yet, like Pythagoras and Thales, speculated on the beginning of
things. His principle was that the _Infinite_ is the origin of all things.
He used the word [Greek: archae] to denote the material out of which
all things were formed, as the everlasting and divine. [Footnote: Arist.,
_Phy_., iii. 4.] The idea of elevating an abstraction into a great
first cause is certainly puerile, nor is it easy to understand his
meaning, other than that the abstract has a higher significance than the
concrete. The speculations of Thales tended toward discovering the
material constitution of the universe, upon an _induction_ from
observed facts, and thus made water to be the origin of all things.
Anaximander, accustomed to view things in the abstract, could not accept
so concrete a thing as water; his speculations tended toward
mathematics, to the science of pure _deduction_. The primary being
is a unity, one in all, comprising within itself the multiplicity of
elements from which all mundane things are composed. It is only in
infinity that the perpetual changes of things can take place. [Footnote:
Diog. Laert., i. 119; Cicero, _Tus. Qu._, i. 16; Tennemann, p. 1,
ch. i. Sec. 86.] This original but obscure thinker prepared the way for
Pythagoras.

[Sidenote: Pythagoras--Number the essence of things.]

[Sidenote: Order and harmony in nature.]

This philosopher and mathematician, born about the year B.C. 570, is one
of the great names of antiquity; but his life is shrouded in dim
magnificence. The old historians paint him as "clothed in robes of
white, his head covered with gold, his aspect grave and majestic, wrapt
in the contemplation of the mysteries of existence, listening to the
music of Homer and Hesiod, or to the harmony of the spheres." [Footnote:
Lewes, _Biog. Hist. Phil._] To him is ascribed the use of the word
_philosopher_ rather than _sophos_, a lover of wisdom, not wise
man. He taught his doctrines to a select few, the members of which
society lived in common, and venerated him as an oracle. His great
doctrine is, that _number_ is the essence of things, by which is
understood the _form_ and not the _matter_ of the sensible.
The elements of numbers are the _odd_ and _even_, the former
being regarded as limited, the latter unlimited. Diogenes Laertius thus
sums up his doctrines, which were that "the _monad_ is--the
beginning of every thing. From the monad proceeds an indefinite
_duad_. From the monad and the duad proceed _numbers_, and from
numbers _signs_, and from these _lines_, of which plain figures
consist. And from plain figures are derived solid bodies, and
from these sensible bodies, of which there are four elements, fire,
water, earth, and air. The world results from a combination of these
elements." [Footnote: Diog. Laert., _Lives of Phil._] All this is
unintelligible or indefinite. We cannot comprehend how the number theory
will account for the production of corporeal magnitude any easier than
we can identify monads with mathematical points. But underlying this
mysticism is the thought that there prevails in the phenomena of nature
a rational _order, harmony_, and conformity to _law_, and that
these laws can be represented by numbers. Number or harmony is the
principle of the universe, and order holds together the world. Like
Anaximander, he passes from the region of physics to metaphysics, and
thus opens a new world of speculation. His method was purely deductive,
and his science mathematical. "The _Infinite_ of Anaximander became
the _One_ of Pythagoras." Assuming that number is the essence of
the world, he deduced that the world is regulated by numerical
proportions, in other words, by a system of laws, and these laws,
regular and harmonious in their operation, _may_ have suggested to
the great mind of Pythagoras, so religious and lofty, the necessity for
an intelligent creator of the universe. It was in moral truth that he
delighted as well as metaphysical, and his life and the lives of his
disciples were disciplined to a severe virtue, as if he recognized in
numbers or order the necessity of a conformity to all law, and saw in
obedience to it both harmony and beauty. But we have no _direct_
and positive evidence of the kind or amount of knowledge which this
great intellect acquired. All that can be affirmed is, that he was a man
of extensive attainments; that he was a great mathematician, that he was
very religious, that he devoted himself to doing good, that he placed
happiness in the virtues of the soul or the perfect science of numbers,
and made a likeness to the Deity the object of all endeavors. He
believed that the soul was incorporeal, [Footnote: Ritter, b. iv. chap
i.] and is put into the body by the means of number and harmonical
relation, and thus subject to a divine regulation. Every thing was
regarded by him in a moral light. The order of the universe is only a
harmonical development of the first principle of all things to virtue
and wisdom. [Footnote: Our knowledge of Pythagoras is chiefly derived
from Aristotle. Both Ritter and Brandis have presented his views
elaborately, but with more clearness than was to be expected.] He
attached great value to music, as a subject of precise mathematical
calculation, and an art which has a great effect on the affections.
Hence morals and mathematics were linked together in his mind. As the
heavens were ordered in consonance with number, they must move in
eternal order. "The spheres" revolved in harmonious order around the
great centre of light and heat--the sun--"the throne of the elemental
world." Hence the doctrine of "the music of the spheres." _Pythagoras
ad harmoniam canere mundum existimat_. [Footnote: Cicero, _De Nat.
D_., iii. ii. 27.] The tendency of his speculations, obscure as they
are to us, was to raise the soul to a contemplation of order and beauty
and law, in the material universe, and hence to the contemplation of a
supreme intelligence reigning in justice and truth. Justice and truth
became therefore paramount virtues, to be practiced, to be sought as the
great end of life, allied with the order of the universe, and with
mathematical essences--the attributes of the deity, the sublime unity
which he adored.

The Ionic philosophers, and the Pythagoreans, sought to find the nature
or first principle of all things in the elements, or in numbers. But the
Eleatics went beyond the realm of physics to pure metaphysical
inquiries. This is the second stage in the history of philosophy--an
idealistic pantheism, which disregarded the sensible and maintained that
the source of all truth is independent of sense.

[Sidenote: Xenophanes.--God the first great cause.]

The founder of this school was Xenophanes, born in Colophon, an Ionian
city of Asia Minor, from which, being expelled, he wandered over Sicily
as a rhapsodist or minstrel, reciting his elegiac poetry on the loftiest
truths; and at last came to Elea, about the year 536, where he settled.
The great subject of his inquiries was God himself--the first great
cause--the supreme intelligence of the universe. "From the principle
_ex nihilo nihil fit_, he concluded that nothing could pass from
non-existence to existence. All things that exist are eternal and
immutable. God, as the most perfect essence, is eternally One,
unalterable, neither finite nor infinite, neither movable nor immovable,
and not to be represented under any human semblance." [Footnote:
Tennemann, _Hist. of Phil._, p. 1, Section 98.] What a great
stride was this! Whence did he derive his opinions? He starts with the
proposition that God is an all-powerful being, and denies all beginning
of being, and hence infers that God must be from eternity. From this
truth he advances to deny all multiplicity. A plurality of gods is
impossible. With these sublime views--the unity and eternity and
omnipotence of God--he boldly attacked the popular errors of his day. He
denounced the transference to the deity of the human form; he inveighed
against Homer and Hesiod; he ridiculed the doctrine of migration of
souls. Thus he sings,--

  "Such things of the gods are related by Homer and Hesiod,
  As would be shame and abiding disgrace to mankind,--
  Promises broken, and thefts, and the one deceiving the other."

[Footnote: See Ritter, on Xenophanes. See note 20, in Archer Butler,
series i. lect vi.]

And, again, respecting anthropomorphic representations of the Deity,--

  "But men foolishly think that gods are born like as men are,
  And have, too, a dress like their own, and their voice and their figure
  But there's but one God alone, the greatest of gods and of mortals,
  Neither in body, to mankind resembling, neither in ideas."

God seen in all the manifestations of nature.

[Sidenote: God seen in all manifestations of nature.]

[Sidenote: He sought to create a knowledge of God.]

Such were his sublime meditations. He believed in the _One_, which
is God; but this all-pervading, unmoved, undivided being was not a
personal God, nor a moral governor, but the deity pervading all space.
He could not separate God from the world, nor could he admit the
existence of world which is not God. He was a monotheist, but his
monotheism was pantheism. He saw God in all the manifestations of
nature. This did not satisfy him, nor resolve his doubts, and he
therefore confessed that reason could not compass the exalted aims of
philosophy. But there was no cynicism in his doubt. It was the soul-
sickening consciousness that Reason was incapable of solving the mighty
questions that he burned to know. There was no way to arrive at the
truth, "for," as he said, "error is spread over all things." It was not
disdain of knowledge, it was the combat of contradictory opinions that
oppressed him. He could not solve the questions pertaining to God. What
uninstructed reason can? "Canst thou by searching find out God, canst
thou know the Almighty unto perfection." What was impossible to Job, was
not possible to him. But he had attained a recognition of the unity and
perfections of God, and this conviction he would spread abroad, and tear
down the superstitions which hid the face of truth. I have great
admiration of this philosopher, so sad, so earnest, so enthusiastic,
wandering from city to city, indifferent to money, comfort, friends,
fame, that he might kindle the knowledge of God. This was a lofty aim
indeed for philosophy in that age. It was a higher mission than that of
Homer, [Footnote: Lewes has some shallow remarks on this point, although
spirited and readable. Ritter is more earnest.] great as his was, but
not so successful.

Parmenides of Elea, born about the year B.C. 536, followed out the
system of Xenophanes, the central idea of which was the existence of
God. With him the central idea was the notion of _being_. Being is
uncreated and unchangeable; the fullness of all being is _thought_;
the _All_ is thought and intelligence. He maintained the uncertainty
of knowledge; but meant the knowledge derived through the senses.
He did not deny the certainty of reason. He was the first who drew
a distinction between knowledge obtained by the senses, and that
obtained through the reason; and thus he anticipated the doctrine of
innate ideas. From the uncertainty of knowledge derived through the
senses, he deduced the twofold system of true and apparent knowledge.
[Footnote: Prof. Brandis's article in Smith's _Dictionary_.]

[Sidenote: Zeno introduces a new method.]

Zeno of Elea, the friend and pupil of Parmenides, born B.C. 500, brought
nothing new to the system, but invented _Dialectics_, that logic
which afterwards became so powerful in the hands of Plato and Aristotle,
and so generally admired among the schoolmen. It seeks to establish
truth by refuting error by the _reductio ad absurdum_. While
Parmenides sought to establish the doctrine of the _One_, Zeno
proved the non-existence of the _Many_. He denied that appearances
were real existences, but did not deny existences. It was the mission of
Zeno to establish the doctrines of his master. But, in order to convince
his listeners, he was obliged to use a new method of argument. So he
carried on his argumentation by question and answer, and was, therefore,
the first who used dialogue as a medium of philosophical communication.
[Footnote: Cousin, _Nouveaux Fragments Philosophiques_.]

[Sidenote: Empedocles.--Love the moving cause of all things.]

Empedocles, born B.C. 444, like others of the Eleatics, complained of
the imperfection of the senses, and looked for truth only in reason. He
regarded truth as a perfect unity, ruled by love,--the only true force,
the one moving cause of all things,--the first creative power by whom
the world was formed. Thus "God is love," a sublime doctrine which
philosophy revealed to the Greeks.

[Sidenote: The loftiness of the Eleatic philosophers.]

Thus did the Eleatic philosophers speculate almost contemporaneously
with the Ionians, on the beginning of things and the origin of
knowledge, taking different grounds, and attempting to correct the
representations of sense by the notions of reason. But both schools,
although they did not establish many truths, raised an inquisitive
spirit and awakened freedom of thought and inquiry. They raised up
workmen for more enlightened times, even as scholastic inquirers in the
Middle Ages prepared the way for the revival of philosophy on sounder
principles. They were all men of remarkable elevation of character as
well as genius. They hated superstitions and attacked the
Anthropomorphism of their day. They handled gods and goddesses with
allegorizing boldness, and hence were often persecuted by the people.
They did not establish moral truths by scientific processes, but they
set examples of lofty disdain of wealth and factitious advantages, and
devoted themselves with holy enthusiasm to the solution of the great
questions which pertain to God and nature. Thales won the respect of his
countrymen by devotion to studies. Pythagoras spent twenty-two years in
Egypt to learn its science. Xenophanes wandered over Sicily as a
rhapsodist of truth. Parmenides, born to wealth and splendor, forsook
the feverish pursuit of sensual enjoyments to contemplate "the quiet and
still air of delightful studies." Zeno declined all worldly honors to
diffuse the doctrines of his master. Heraclitus refused the chief
magistracy of Ephesus that he might have leisure to explore the depths
of his own nature. Anaxagoras allowed his patrimony to run to waste in
order to solve problems. "To philosophy," said he, "I owe my worldly
ruin and my soul's prosperity." They were, without exception, the
greatest and best men of their times. They laid the foundation of the
beautiful temple which was constructed after they were dead, in which
both physics and psychology reached the dignity of science. [Footnote:
Archer Butler in his lecture on the Eleatic school follows closely, and
expounds clearly, the views of Ritter.]

Nevertheless, these great men, lofty as were their inquiries, and
blameless their lives, had not established any system, nor any theories
which were incontrovertible. They had simply speculated, and the world
ridiculed their speculations. They were one-sided; and, when pushed out
to their extreme logical sequence, were antagonistic to each other,
which had a tendency to produce doubt and skepticism. Men denied the
existence of the gods, and the grounds of certainty fell away from the
human mind.

[Sidenote: Circumstances which favoured the Sophists.]

[Sidenote: Character of the Sophists.]

This spirit of skepticism was favored by the tide of worldliness and
prosperity which followed the Persian War. Athens became a great centre
of art, of taste, of elegance, and of wealth. Politics absorbed the
minds of the people. Glory and splendor were followed by corruption of
morals and the pursuit of material pleasures. Philosophy went out of
fashion, since it brought no outward and tangible good. More scientific
studies were pursued--those which could be applied to purposes of
utility and material gains; even, as in our day, geology, chemistry,
mechanics, engineering, having reference to the practical wants of men,
command talent, and lead to certain reward. In Athens, rhetoric,
mathematics, and natural history supplanted rhapsodies and speculations
on God and Providence. Renown and wealth could only be secured by
readiness and felicity of speech, and that was most valued which brought
immediate reward, like eloquence. Men began to practice eloquence as an
_art_, and to employ it in furthering their interests. They made
special pleadings, since it was their object to gain their point, at any
expense of law and justice. Hence they taught that nothing was immutably
right, but only so by convention. They undermined all confidence in
truth and religion by teaching its uncertainty. They denied to men even
the capability of arriving at truth. They practically affirmed the cold
and cynical doctrine that there is nothing better for a man than that he
should eat and drink. _Qui bono_, the cry of the Epicureans, of the
latter Romans, and of most men in a period of great outward prosperity,
was the popular inquiry,--who shall show us any good?--how can we become
rich, strong, honorable?--this was the spirit of that class of public
teachers who arose in Athens when art and eloquence and wealth and
splendor were at their height in the fifth century before Christ, and
when the elegant Pericles was the leader of fashion and of political
power.

[Sidenote: Power and popularity of the Sophists.]

[Sidenote: Influence of the Sophists.]

These men were the Sophists--rhetorical men who taught the children of
the rich; worldly men who sought honor and power; frivolous men,
trifling with philosophical ideas; skeptical men, denying all certainty
to truths; men who, as teachers, added nothing to the realm of science,
but who yet established certain dialectical rules useful to later
philosophers. They were a wealthy, powerful, honored class, not much
esteemed by men of thought, but sought out as very successful teachers
of rhetoric. They were full of logical tricks, and contrived to throw
ridicule upon profound inquiries. They taught also mathematics,
astronomy, philology, and natural history with success. They were
polished men of society, not profound nor religious, but very brilliant
as talkers, and very ready in wit and sophistry. And some of them were
men of great learning and talent, like Democritus, Leucippus, and
Gorgias. They were not pretenders and quacks; they were skeptics who
denied subjective truths, and labored for outward advantage. They were
men of general information, skilled in subtleties, of powerful social
and political connections, and were generally selected as ambassadors on
difficult missions. They taught the art of disputation, and sought
systematic methods of proof. They thus prepared the way for a more
perfect philosophy than that taught by the Ionians, the Pythagoreans, or
the Elentae, since they showed the vagueness of their inquiries,
conjectural rather than scientific. They had no doctrines in common.
They were the barristers of their age, _paid_ to make the "worse
appear the better reason," yet not teachers of immorality any more than
the lawyers of our day,--men of talents, the intellectual leaders of
society. If they did not advance positive truths, they were useful in
the method they created. They taught the art of disputation. They
doubtless quibbled when they had a bad cause to present. They brought
out the truth more forcibly when they defended a good cause. They had no
hostility to truth; they only doubted whether it could be reached in the
realm of psychological inquiries, and sought to apply it to their own
purposes, or rather to distort it in order to gain a case. They are not
a class of men whom I admire, as I do the old sages they ridiculed, but
they were not without their use in the development of philosophy.
[Footnote: Grote has a fine chapter on the Sophists (part ii. ch. 67).]
The Sophists also rendered a service to literature by giving
definiteness to language, and creating style in prose writing.
Protagoras investigated the principles of accurate composition; Prodicus
busied himself with inquiries into the significance of words; Gorgias
proposed a captivating style. He gave symmetry to the structure of
sentences.

[Sidenote: Socrates.]

[Sidenote: The method of Socrates.]

[Sidenote: Ethical inquiries of Socrates.]

The ridicule and skepticism of the Sophists brought out the great powers
of Socrates, to whom philosophy is probably more indebted than to any
man who ever lived, not so much for a perfect system, but for the
impulse he gave to philosophical inquiries, and his successful exposure
of error. He inaugurated a new era. Born in Athens in the year 470 B.C.,
the son of a poor sculptor, he devoted his life to the search for truth,
for its own sake, and sought to base it on immutable foundations. He was
the mortal enemy of the Sophists, whom he encountered, as Pascal did the
Jesuits, with wit, irony, puzzling questions, and remorseless logic.
Like the earlier philosophers, he disdained wealth, ease, and comfort,
but with greater devotion than they, since he lived in a more corrupt
age, when poverty was a disgrace and misfortune a crime, when success
was the standard of merit, and every man was supposed to be the arbiter
of his own fortune, ignoring that Providence who so often refuses the
race to the swift and the battle to the strong. He was what in our time
would be called eccentric. He walked barefooted, meanly clad, and withal
not over cleanly, seeking public places, disputing with every body
willing to talk with him, making every body ridiculous, especially if
one assumed airs of wisdom or knowledge,--an exasperating opponent,
since he wove a web around a man from which he could not be extricated,
and then exposed him to ridicule, in the wittiest city of the world. He
attacked every body, and yet was generally respected, since it was
_errors_ and not the person, _opinions_ rather than vices; and
this he did with bewitching eloquence and irresistible fascination; so
that, though he was poor and barefooted, a Silenus in appearance, with
thick lips, upturned nose, projecting eyes, unwieldy belly, he was
sought by Alcibiades and admired by Aspasia. Even Xantippe, a beautiful
young woman, very much younger than he, a woman fond of the comforts and
pleasures of life, was willing to be his wife, even if she did
afterwards torment him, when the _res angusta domi_ disenchanted
her from the music of his voice and the divinity of his nature. "I have
heard Pericles," said the most dissipated and voluptuous man in Athens,
"and other excellent orators, but was not moved by them; while this
Marsyas--this Satyr--so affects me that the life I lead is hardly worth
living, and I stop my ears, as from the Syrens, and flee as fast as
possible, that I may not sit down and grow old in listening to his
talk." He learned his philosophy from no one, and struck out an entirely
new path. He declared his own ignorance, and sought to convince other
people of theirs. He did not seek to reveal truth so much as to expose
error. And yet it was his object to attain correct ideas as to moral
obligations. He was the first who recognized natural right, and held
that virtue and vice are inseparably united. He proclaimed the
sovereignty of virtue, and the immutability of justice. He sought to
delineate and enforce the practical duties of life. His great object was
the elucidation of morals, and he was the first to teach ethics
systematically, and from the immutable principles of moral obligation.
Moral certitude was the lofty platform from which he surveyed the world,
and upon which, as a rock, he rested in the storms of life. Thus he was
a reformer and a moralist. It was his ethical doctrines which were most
antagonistic to the age, and the least appreciated. He was a profoundly
religious man, recognized Providence, and believed in the immortality of
the soul. From the abyss of doubt, which succeeded the speculations of
the first philosophers, he would plant grounds of certitude--a ladder
on which he would mount to the sublime regions of absolute truth. He did
not presume to inquire into the Divine essence, yet he believed that the
gods were omniscient and omnipresent, that they ruled by the law of
goodness, and that, in spite of their multiplicity, there was unity--a
supreme intelligence that governed the world. Hence he was hated by the
Sophists, who denied the certainty of arriving at the knowledge of God.
From the comparative worthlessness of the body he deduced the
immortality of the soul. With him, the end of life was reason and
intelligence. He proved the existence of God by the order and harmony of
nature, which belief was certain. He endeavored to connect the moral
with the religious consciousness, and then he proclaimed his convictions
for the practical welfare of society. In this light Socrates stands out
the grandest personage of pagan antiquity,--as a moralist, as a teacher
of ethics, as a man who recognized the Divine.

[Sidenote: The mission of Socrates.]

[Sidenote: The great aim of the Socratic method.]

So far as he was concerned in the development of Grecian philosophy
proper, he was probably inferior to some of his disciples. Yet he gave a
turning-point to a new period, when he awakened the _idea_ of
knowledge, and was the founder of the theory of scientific knowledge,
since he separated the legitimate bounds of inquiry, and was thus the
precursor of Bacon and Pascal. He did not attempt to make physics
explain metaphysics, nor metaphysics the phenomena of the natural world.
And he only reasoned from what was assumed to be true and invariable. He
was a great pioneer of philosophy, since he resorted to inductive
methods of proof, and gave general definiteness to ideas. [Footnote:
Arist., _Metaph_., xiii. 4.] He gave a new method, and used great
precision of language. Although he employed induction, it was his aim to
withdraw the mind from the contemplation of nature, and to fix it on its
own phenomena,--to look inward rather than outward, as carried out so
admirably by Plato. The previous philosophers had given their attention
to external nature; he gave up speculations about material phenomena,
and directed his inquiries solely to the nature of knowledge. And, as he
considered knowledge to be identical with virtue, he speculated on
ethical questions mainly, and the method which he taught was that by
which alone man could become better and wiser. To know one's self, in
other words, "that the proper study of mankind is man," he was the first
to proclaim. He did not disdain the subjects which chiefly interested
the Sophists,--astronomy, rhetoric, physics; but he discussed moral
questions, such as, what is piety? what is the just and the unjust? what
is temperance? what is courage? what is the character fit for a
citizen?--and such like ethical points. And he discussed them in a
peculiar manner, in a method peculiarly his own. "Professing ignorance,
he put perhaps this question--What is law? It was familiar and was
answered off-hand. Socrates, having got the answer, then put fresh
questions applicable to specific cases, to which the respondent was
compelled to give an answer inconsistent with the first, thus showing
that the _definition_ was too narrow or too wide, or defective in
some essential condition. [Footnote: Grote, part ii. ch. 68.] The
respondent then amended his answer; but this was a prelude to other
questions, which could only be answered in ways inconsistent with the
amendment; and the respondent, after many attempts to disentangle
himself, was obliged to plead guilty to his inconsistencies, with an
admission that he could make no satisfactory answer to the original
inquiry which had at first appeared so easy." Thus, by this system of
cross-examination, he showed the intimate connection between the
dialectic method, and the logical distribution of particulars into
species and genera. The discussion first turns upon the meaning of some
generic term; the queries bring the answers into collision with various
particulars which it ought not to comprehend, or which it ought to
comprehend, but does not. He broke up the one into many by his
analytical string of questions, which was a novel mode of argument. This
was the method which he invented, and by which he separated _real_
knowledge from the _conceit_ of knowledge, and led to precision in
the use of definitions. It was thus that he exposed the false, without
aiming even to teach the true; for he generally professed ignorance, and
put himself in the attitude of a learner, while he made by his cross-
examinations the man from whom he apparently sought knowledge to be as
ignorant as himself, or, still worse, absolutely ridiculous. Thus he
pulled away all the foundations on which a false science had been
erected, and indicated the way by which alone the true could be
established. Here he was not unlike Bacon, who pointed out the way that
science could be advanced, without founding any school or advocating any
system; but he was unlike Bacon in the object of his inquiries. Bacon
was disgusted with ineffective _logical_ speculations, and Socrates
with ineffective _physical_ researches. [Footnote: Archer Butler,
s. i. 1. vii.] He never suffered a general term to remain undetermined,
but applied it at once to particulars, and by questions the purport of
which was not comprehended. It was not by positive teaching, but by
exciting scientific impulse in the minds of others, or stirring up the
analytical faculties, which constitute his originality. "The Socratic
dialectics, clearing away," says Grote, [Footnote: Grote, part ii. ch.
68; Maurice, _Ancient Philosophy_, p. 119.] "from the mind its mist
of fancied knowledge, and, laying bare the real ignorance, produced an
immediate effect like the touch of the torpedo; the newly created
consciousness of ignorance was humiliating and painful, yet it was
combined with a yearning after truth never before experienced. Such
intellectual quickening, which could never commence until the mind had
been disabused of its original illusion of false knowledge, was
considered by Socrates not merely as the index and precursor, but as the
indisputable condition of future progress." It was the aim of Socrates
to force the seekers after truth into the path of inductive
generalization, whereby alone trustworthy conclusions could be formed.
He thus improved the method of speculative minds, and struck out from
other minds that fire which sets light to original thought and
stimulates analytical inquiry. He was a religious and intellectual
missionary preparing the way for the Platos and Aristotles of the
succeeding age by his severe dialectics. This was his mission, and he
declared it by talking. He did not lecture; he conversed. For more than
thirty years he discoursed on the principles of morality, until he
arrayed against himself enemies who caused him to be put to death, for
his teachings had undermined the popular system which the Sophists
accepted and practiced. He probably might have been acquitted if he had
chosen it, but he did not wish to live after his powers of usefulness
had passed away. He opened to science new matter and a new method, as a
basis for future philosophical systems. He was a "colloquial
dialectician," such as this world has never seen, and may never see
again. He was a skeptic respecting physics, but as far as man and
society are concerned, he thought that every man might and ought to know
what justice, temperance, courage, piety, patriotism, etc., were, and
unless he did know what they were he would not be just, temperate, etc.
He denied that men can know that on which they have bestowed no pains,
or practice what they do not know. "The method of Socrates survives
still in some of the dialogues of Plato, and is a process of eternal
value and universal application. There is no man whose notions have not
been first got together by spontaneous, unartificial associations,
resting upon forgotten particulars, blending together disparities or
inconsistencies, and having in his mind old and familiar phrases and
oracular propositions of which he has never rendered to himself an
account; and there is no man who has not found it a necessary branch of
self-education to break up, analyze, and reconstruct these ancient
mental compounds." [Footnote: Grote has written very ably, and at
unusual length, respecting Socrates and his philosophy. Thirlwall has
also reviewed Hegel and other German authors on Socrates' condemnation.
Ritter has a full chapter of great value. See Donaldson's continuation
of Muller. The original sources of knowledge respecting Socrates are
found chiefly in Plato and Xenophon. Cicero may be consulted in
his _Tusculan Questions_.] The services which he rendered to
philosophy, as enumerated by Tennemann, [Footnote: Tennemann;
Schliermacker, _Essay on the Worth of Socrates as a Philosopher_,
translated by Bishop Thirlwall, and reprinted in Dr. Wigger's _Life of
Socrates_.] "are twofold,--negative and positive: _Negative_,
inasmuch as he avoided all vain discussions; combated mere speculative
reasoning on substantial grounds, and had the wisdom to acknowledge
ignorance when necessary, but without attempting to determine accurately
what is capable, and what is not, of being accurately known.
_Positive_, inasmuch as he examined with great ability the ground
directly submitted to our understanding, and of which man is the
centre."

Socrates cannot be said to have founded a school, like Xenophanes. He
did not bequeath a system of doctrines; he rather attempted to awaken
inquiry, for which his method was admirably adapted. He had his
admirers, who followed in the path which he suggested. Among these were
Aristippus, Antisthenes, Euclid of Megara, Phaedo of Elis, and Plato, all
of whom were disciples of Socrates, and founders of schools. Some only
partially adopted his method, and all differed from each other. Nor can
it be said that all of them advanced science. Aristippus, the founder of
the Cyreniac School, was a sort of Epicurean, teaching that pleasure was
the end of life. Antisthenes, the founder of the Cynics, was both
virtuous and arrogant, placing the supreme good in virtue, but despising
speculative science, and maintaining that no man can refute the opinions
of another. He made it a virtue to be ragged, hungry, and cold, like the
ancient monks; an austere, stern, bitter, reproachful man, who affected
to despise all pleasures, like his own disciple Diogenes, who lived in a
tub, and carried on a war between the mind and body--brutal, scornful,
proud. To men who maintained that science was impossible, philosophy is
not much indebted, although they were disciples of Socrates. Euclid
merely gave a new edition of the Eleatic doctrines, and Phaedo speculated
on the oneness of the good.

[Sidenote: Plato.]

[Sidenote: His education and travels.]

[Sidenote: He adopts the Socratic method.]

It was not till Plato arose that a more complete system of philosophy
was founded. He was born of noble Athenian parents B.C. 429, the year
that Pericles died, and the second year of the Peloponnesian War, and
the most active period of Grecian thought. He had a severe education,
studying poetry, music, rhetoric, and blending these with philosophy. He
was only twenty when he found out Socrates, with whom he remained ten
years, and from whom he was separated only by death. He then went on his
travels, visiting every thing worth seeing in his day, especially in
Egypt. When he returned, he commenced to teach the doctrines of his
master, which he did, like him, gratuitously, in a garden near Athens,
planted with lofty plane-trees, and adorned with temples and statues.
This was called the Academy, and gave a name to his system of
philosophy. And it is this only with which we have to do. It is not the
calm, serious, meditative, isolated man that I would present, but _his
contribution_ to the developments of philosophy on the principles of
his master. And surely no man ever made a richer contribution. He may
not have had the originality or breadth of Socrates, but he was more
profound. He was preeminently a great thinker--a great logician--skilled
in dialectics, and his "Dialogues" are such exercises of dialectical
method that the ancients were divided whether he was a skeptic or a
dogmatist. He adopted the Socratic method, and enlarged it. "Socrates
relied on inductive reasoning, and on definitions, as the two principles
of investigation. Definitions form the basis of all philosophy. To know
a thing, you must know what it is not. Plato added a more efficient
process of analysis and synthesis, of generalization and
classification." [Footnote: Lewes, _Biog. Hist. of Philos_.]
"Analysis," continues the same author, "as insisted on by Plato, is the
decomposition of the whole into its separate parts--is seeing the
_one_ in many. Definitions were to Plato, what general or abstract
ideas were to later metaphysicians. The individual thing was transitory;
the abstract idea was eternal. Only concerning the latter could
philosophy occupy itself. Socrates, insisting on proper definitions, had
no conception of the classification of those definitions which must
constitute philosophy. Plato, by the introduction of this process,
shifted philosophy from the ground of inquiries into man and society,
which exclusively occupied Socrates, to that of dialectics." Plato was
also distinguished for skill in composition. Dionysius of Halicarnassus
classes him with Herodotus and Demosthenes in the perfection of his
style, which is characterized by great harmony and rhythm, as well as
the variety of elegant figures. [Footnote: See Donaldson's quotations,
_Hist. Lit. of Greece_, vol. ii. p. 257.]

[Sidenote: His doctrines.]

[Sidenote: The end of science is the contemplation of truth.]

Plato made philosophy to consist in the discussion of general terms, or
abstract ideas. General terms were synonymous with real existences, and
these were the only objects of philosophy. These were called
_Ideas_; and ideas are the basis of his system, or rather the
subject matter of dialectics. He was a Realist, that is, he maintained
that every general term, or abstract idea, has a real and independent
existence. Here he probably was indebted to Pythagoras, for Plato was a
master of the whole realm of philosophical speculation; but his
conception of _ideas_ is a great advance on the conception of
_numbers_. He was taught by Socrates that beyond this world of
sense, there was the world of eternal truth, and that there were certain
principles concerning which there could be no dispute. The soul
apprehends the idea of goodness, greatness, etc. It is in the celestial
world that we are to find the realm of ideas. Now God is the supreme
idea. To know God should be the great aim of life. We know him by the
desire which like feels for like. The divinity within feels for the
divinity revealed in beauty, or any other abstract idea. The longing of
the soul for beauty is _Love_. Love then is the bond which unites
the human to the divine. Beauty is not revealed by harmonious outlines
which appeal to the senses, but is _Truth_. It is divinity. Beauty,
truth, love, these are God, the supreme desire of the soul to
comprehend, and by the contemplation of which the mortal soul sustains
itself, and by perpetual meditation becomes participant in immortality.
The communion with God presupposes immortality. The search for the
knowledge of God is the great end of life. Wisdom is the consecration of
the soul to the search; and this is effected by dialectics, for only out
of dialectics can correct knowledge come. But man, immersed in the flux
of sensualities, can never fully attain this high excellence--the
knowledge of God, the object of all rational inquiry. Hence the
imperfection of all human knowledge. The supreme good is attainable; it
is not attained. God is the immutable good, and justice the rule of the
universe. "The vital principle of his philosophy is to show that true
science is the knowledge of the good; is the eternal contemplation or
truth, or ideas; and though man may not be able to apprehend it in its
unity, because he is subject to the restraints of the body, he is,
nevertheless, permitted to recognize it, imperfectly, by calling to mind
the eternal measure of existence, by which he is in his origin
connected." [Footnote: Ritter, _Hist, of Phil_., b. viii. p. 2,
chap. i.] He was unable to find a transition from his world of ideas to
that of sense, and his philosophy, vague and mystical, though severely
logical, diverts the mind from the investigations of actual life--from
that which is the object of experience.

[Sidenote: The object of Plato's inquiries.]

The writings of Plato have come down to us complete, and have been
admired by all ages for their philosophical acuteness, as well as beauty
of language. He was not the first to use the form of dialogue, but he
handled it with greater mastery than any one who preceded him, or has
come after him, and all with a view to bring his hearers to a
consciousness of knowledge or ignorance. He regarded wisdom as the
attribute of the godhead; that philosophy is the necessity of the
intellectual man, and the greatest good to which he can attain. This
wisdom presupposes, however, a communion with the divine. He regarded
the soul as immortal and indestructible. He maintained that neither
happiness nor virtue can consist in the attempt to satisfy our unbridled
desires; that virtue is purely a matter of intelligence; that passions
disturb the moral economy.

[Sidenote: God the immutable good.]

"When we review the doctrines of Plato, it is impossible to deny," says
Hitter, "that they are pervaded with a grand view of life and the
universe. This is the noble thought which inspired him to say, that God
is the constant and immutable good; the world is good in a state of
becoming, and the human soul that in and through which the good in the
world is to be consummated. In his sublimer conception, he shows himself
the worthy disciple of Socrates. His merit lies chiefly in having
advanced certain distinct and precise rules for the Socratic method, and
in insisting, with a perfect consciousness of its importance, upon the
law of science, that to be able to descend from the higher to the lower
ideas by a principle of the reason, and reciprocally from the
multiplicity of the lower to the higher, is indispensable to the perfect
possession of any knowledge. He thus imparted to this method a more
liberal character. While he adopted many of the opinions of his
predecessors, and gave due consideration to the results of the earlier
philosophy, he did not allow himself to be disturbed by the mass of
conflicting theories, but breathed into them the life-giving breath of
unity. He may have erred in his attempts to determine the nature of
good; still he pointed out to all who aspire to a knowledge of the
divine nature, an excellent road by which they may arrive at it."

Plato is very much admired by the Germans, who look upon him as the
incarnation of dialectical power; but it were to be hoped that, some
day, these great metaphysicians may make a clearer exposition of his
doctrines, and of his services to philosophy, than they have as yet
done. To me, Ritter, Brandis, and all the great authorities, are
obscure. But that Plato was one of the greatest lights of the ancient
world, there can be no reasonable doubt. Nor is it probable that, as a
dialectician, he has ever been surpassed; while his purity of life, and
his lofty inquiries, and his belief in God and immortality, make him, in
an ethical point of view, the most worthy of the disciples of Socrates.
He was to the Greeks what Kant was to the Germans, and these two great
thinkers resemble each other in the structure of their minds and their
relations to society.

The ablest part of the lectures of Archer Butler of Dublin, is devoted
to the Platonic philosophy. It is a criticism and an eulogium. No modern
writer has written more enthusiastically of what he considers the
crowning excellence of the Greek philosophy. The dialectics of Plato,
his ideal theory, his physics, his psychology, and his ethics, are most
ably discussed, and in the spirit of a loving and eloquent disciple. He
represents the philosophy which he so much admires as a contemplation
of, and the tendency to, the absolute and eternal good. The good is
enthroned by Plato in majesty supreme at the summit of the whole
universe, and the sensible world is regarded as a development of supreme
perfection in an inferior and transitory form. Nor are ideas
abstractions, as some suppose, but archetypal conceptions of the divine
mind itself--the eternal laws and reasons of things. The sensible world
is regarded as an imperfect image of ideal perfection, yet the
uncertainty of physical researches is candidly admitted. The discovery
of theological and moral truth, is the great object even of the
"_Timoeus_." Hence the physics of Plato have a theological
character--are mathematical rather than experimental. The psychology
represents the body as the prison of the soul, somewhat after the spirit
of oriental theogonists, and the aim of virtue is to preserve the
distinctness of both, and realize liberty in bonds. The doctrine of
preexistence is maintained, as well as a future state. In the ethics,
the perfection of the human soul--the perfection which it may attain--is
distinctly unfolded, and also the unity of the great ideas of the
beautiful, just, and good. The "_Phoedo_" enforces the supremacy
of wisdom, and the "_Philebus_" the "_summum bonum_." _Love_ is
the aspiration after a communion with perfection. The chief
excellence of the philosophy which Plato taught, consists in the
immutable basis assigned to the principles of moral truth; the defects
are a want of distinct apprehension of the claims of divine justice in
consequence of human sin, and an indirect discouragement of active
virtue.

The great disciple of Plato was Aristotle, and he carried on the
philosophical movement which Socrates had started to the highest limit
that it ever reached in the ancient world. He was born at Stagira B.C.
384, of wealthy parents, and early evinced an insatiable thirst for
knowledge. When Plato returned from Sicily he joined his disciples, and
was his pupil for seventeen years, at Athens. On the death of Plato, he
went on his travels, and became the tutor of Alexander the Great, and
B.C. 335, returned to Athens, after an absence of twelve years, and set
up a school, and taught in the Lyceum. He taught while walking up and
down the shady walks which surrounded it, from which he obtained the
name of Peripatetic, which has clung to his name and philosophy. His
school had a great celebrity, and from it proceeded illustrious
philosophers, statesmen, historians, and orators. He taught thirteen
years, during which he composed most of his greater works. He not only
wrote on dialectics and logic, but also on physics in its various
departments. His work on "The History of Animals" was deemed so
important that his royal pupil presented him with eight hundred talents--
an enormous sum--for the collection of materials. He also wrote on
ethics and politics, history and rhetoric; letters, poems, and speeches,
three fourths of which are lost. He was one of the most voluminous
writers of antiquity, and probably the most learned man whose writings
have come down to us. Nor has any one of the ancients exercised upon the
thinking of succeeding ages so great an influence. He was an oracle
until the revival of learning.

[Sidenote: Genius of Aristotle.]

"Aristotle," says Hegel, "penetrated into the whole mass, and into every
department of the universe of things, and subjected to the comprehension
its scattered wealth; and the greater number of the philosophical
sciences owe to him their separation and commencement." [Footnote: Hagel
is said to have comprehended Aristotle better than any modern writer,
and the best work on his philosophy is by him.] He is also the father of
the history of philosophy, since he gives an historical review of the
way in which the subject has been hitherto treated by the earlier
philosophers.

"Plato made the external world the region of the incomplete and bad, of
the contradictory and the false, and recognized absolute truth only in
the eternal immutable ideas. Aristotle laid down the proposition that
the idea, which cannot of itself fashion itself into reality, is
powerless, and has only a potential existence, and that it becomes a
living reality, only by realizing itself in a creative manner by means
of its own energy." [Footnote: Adolph Stahr, Oldenburg.]

[Sidenote: Vast attainments of Aristotle.]

But there can be no doubt as to his marvelous power of systematization.
Collecting together all the results of ancient speculation, he so
elaborated them into a coordinate system, that for two thousand years he
reigned supreme in the schools. In a literary point of view, Plato was
doubtless his superior, but Plato was a poet making philosophy divine
and musical; but Aristotle's investigations spread over a far wider
range. He wrote also on politics, natural history, and ethics, in so
comprehensive and able manner, as to prove his claim to be one of the
greatest intellects of antiquity, the most subtle and the most patient.
He differed from Plato chiefly in relation to the doctrine of ideas,
without however resolving the difficulty which divided them. As he made
matter to be the eternal ground of phenomena, he reduced the notion of
it to a precision it never before enjoyed, and established thereby a
necessary element in human science. But being bound to matter, he did
not soar, as Plato did, into the higher regions of speculation; nor did
he entertain as lofty views of God, or of immortality. Neither did he
have as high an ideal of human life. His definition of the highest good
was a perfect practical activity in a perfect life.

With Aristotle closed the great Socratic movement in the history of
speculation. When Socrates appeared there was the general prevalence of
skepticism, arising from the unsatisfactory speculations respecting
nature. He removed this skepticism by inventing a new method, and by
withdrawing the mind from the contemplation of nature, to the study of
man himself. He bade men to look inward.

[Sidenote: Ethics the great subject of inquiry with Plato.]

Plato accepted his method, but applied it more universally. Like
Socrates, however, ethics were the great subject of his inquiries, to
which physics were only subordinate. The problem he sought to solve was
the way to live like the gods. He would contemplate truth as the great
aim of life.

[Sidenote: Main inquiries of Aristotle had reference to physics and
metaphysics.]

With Aristotle, ethics formed only one branch of his attention. His main
inquiries were in reference to physics and metaphysics. He thus, by
bringing these into the region or inquiry, paved the way for a new epoch
of skepticism. [Footnote: Lewes, Ritter, Hegel, Maurice, Diogenes
Laertius. See fine article in _Encyclopedia Britannica._ Schwegler,
translated by Seelyn.]

It is impossible, within the proper limits of this chapter, to enter
upon an analysis of the philosophy of either the three great lights of
the ancient world, or to enumerate and describe their other writings. I
merely wish to show what are considered to be the vital principles on
which their systems were based, and the general spirit of their
speculations. The student must examine these in the elaborate treatises
of modern philosophers, and in the original works of Plato and
Aristotle.

[Sidenote: Their characteristic inquiries.]

Both Plato and Aristotle taught that reason alone could form science;
but Aristotle differed from his master respecting the theory of ideas.
He did not deny to ideas a _subjective_ existence, but he did deny
that they have an objective existence. And he maintained that the
individual things alone _existed_, and if individuals only exist,
they can only be known by _sensation_. Sensation thus becomes the
basis of knowledge. Plato made reason the basis of knowledge,
but Aristotle made _experience_. Plato directed man to the
contemplation of ideas; Aristotle, to the observations of Nature.
Instead of proceeding synthetically and dialectically like Plato, he
pursues an analytic course. His method is hence inductive--the
derivation of certain principles from a sum of given facts and
phenomena. It would seem that positive science commenced with him, since
he maintained that experience furnishes the principles of every science;
but, while his conception was just, there was not sufficient experience
then accumulated from which to generalize with effect. He did not
sufficiently verify his premises. His reasoning was correct upon the
data given, as in the famous syllogism, "All black birds are crows; this
bird is black; therefore this bird is a crow." The defect of the
syllogism is not in the reasoning, but in the truth of the major
premise, since all black birds are not crows. It is only a most
extensive and exhaustive examination of the accuracy of a proposition
which will warrant reasoning upon it. Aristotle reasoned without
sufficient examination of the major premise of his syllogisms.

[Sidenote: Logic of Aristotle.]

Aristotle was the father of logic, and Hegel and Kant think there has
been no improvement upon it since his day. And this became to him the
real organon of science. "He supposed it was not merely the instrument
of thought, but the instrument of investigation." Hence it was futile
for purposes of discovery, although important to aid the processes of
thought. Induction and syllogism are the two great instruments of his
logic. The one sets out from particulars already known to arrive at a
conclusion; the other sets out from some general principle to arrive at
particulars. The latter more particularly characterized his logic, which
he presented in sixteen forms, showing great ingenuity, and useful as a
dialectical exercise. This syllogistic process of reasoning would be
incontrovertible, if the _general_ were better known than the
_particular_. But it is only by induction, which proceeds from the
world of experience, that we reach the higher world of cognition. We
arrive at no new knowledge by the syllogism, since the major premise is
more evident than the conclusion, and anterior to it. Thus he made
speculation subordinate to logical distinctions, and his system, when
carried out by the schoolmen, led to a spirit of useless quibbling.
Instead of interrogating Nature, as Bacon led the way, they interrogated
their own minds, and no great discoveries were made. From a want of a
proper knowledge of the conditions of scientific inquiry, the method of
Aristotle became fruitless. [Footnote: Maurice, _Anc. Phil_. See
Whewell, _Hist. Ind. Science_.]

Though Aristotle wrote in a methodical manner, yet there is great
parsimony of language. There is no fascination in his style. It is
without ornament, and very condensed. His merit consisted in great
logical precision, and scrupulous exactness in the employment of terms.

[Sidenote: The Skeptics.]

Philosophy, as a great system of dialectics, as an analysis of the power
and faculties of the mind, as a method to pursue inquiries, as an
intellectual system merely, culminated in Aristotle. He completed the
great fabric of which Thales laid the foundation. The subsequent schools
of philosophy directed attention to ethical and practical questions,
rather than to intellectual phenomena. The skeptics, like Pyrrho, had
only negative doctrines, and had a disdain of those inquiries which
sought to penetrate the mysteries of existence. They did not believe
that absolute truth was attainable by man. And they attacked the
prevailing systems with great plausibility. Thus Sextus attacked both
induction and definitions. "If we do not know the thing we define," said
he, "we do not comprehend it because of the definition, but we impose on
it the definition because we know it; and if we are ignorant of the
thing we would define, it is impossible to define it." Thus the skeptics
pointed out the uncertainty of things and the folly of striving to
comprehend them.

The Epicureans despised the investigations of philosophy, since, in
their view, they did not contribute to happiness. The subject of their
inquiries was happiness, not truth. What will promote this, was the
subject of their speculation. Epicurus, born B.C. 342, contended that
pleasure was happiness; that pleasure should not be sought for its own
sake, but with a view of the happiness of life obtained by it. He taught
that it was inseparable from virtue, and that its enjoyments should be
limited. He was averse to costly pleasures, and regarded contentedness
with a little to be a great good. He placed wealth not in great
possessions, but few wants. He sought to widen the domain of pleasure,
and narrow that of pain, and regarded a passionless state of life the
highest. Nor did he dread death, which was deliverance from misery.
Epicurus has been much misunderstood, and his doctrines were
subsequently perverted, especially when the arts of life were brought
into the service of luxury, and a gross materialism was the great
feature of society. Epicurus had much of the practical spirit of a
philosopher, although very little of the earnest cravings of a religious
man. He himself led a virtuous life, because it was wiser and better to
be virtuous, not because it was his duty. His writings were very
voluminous, and in his tranquil garden he led a peaceful life of study
and enjoyment. His followers, and they were numerous, were led into
luxury and effeminacy, as was to be expected from a skeptical and
irreligious philosophy, the great principle of which was that whatever
is pleasant should be the object of existence. [Footnote: the doctrines
of the Epicureans are best set forth in Lucretius.]

The Stoics were a large and celebrated sect of philosophers; but they
added nothing to the domain of thought,--they created no system, they
invented no new method, they were led into no new psychological
inquiries. Their inquiries were chiefly ethical. And if ethics are a
part of the great system of Grecian philosophy, they are well worthy of
attention. Some of the greatest men of antiquity are numbered among
them--like Seneca and Marcus Aurelius. The philosophy they taught was
morality, and this was eminently practical and also elevated.

[Sidenote: Zeno.]

The founder of this sect, Zeno, born rich, but reduced to poverty by
misfortune, was a very remarkable man, and a very good one, and
profoundly revered by the Athenians, who intrusted him with the keys of
their citadel. The date of his birth is unknown, but he lived in a
degenerate age, when skepticism and sensuality were eating out the life
and vigor of Grecian society, when Greek civilization was rapidly
passing away, when ancient creeds had lost their majesty, and general
levity and folly overspread the land. Deeply impressed with the
prevailing laxity of morals and the absence of religion, he lifted up
his voice, more as a reformer than as an inquirer after truth, and
taught for more than fifty years in a place called the Porch, which had
once been the resort of the poets. He was chiefly absorbed with ethical
questions, although he studied profoundly the systems of the old
philosophers. He combated Plato's doctrine that virtue consists in
contemplation, and of Epicurus, that it consisted in pleasure. Man, in
his eyes, was made for active duties. He also sought to oppose
skepticism, which was casting the funereal veil of doubt and uncertainty
over every thing pertaining to the soul, and God, and the future life.
"The skeptics had attacked both perception and reason. They had shown
that perception is, after all, based upon appearance, and appearance is
not a certainty; and they showed that reason is unable to distinguish
between appearance and certainty, since it had nothing but phenomena to
build upon, and since there is no criterion to apply to reason itself."
Then they proclaimed philosophy a failure, and without foundation. But
he, taking a stand on common sense, fought for morality, as did Reid and
Beattie, when they combated the skepticism of Hume.

[Sidenote: Doctrines of the Stoics.]

[Sidenote: Influence of the Stoics.]

Philosophy, according to Zeno and other Stoics, was intimately connected
with the duties of practical life. The contemplation, recommended by
Plato and Aristotle, seemed only a covert recommendation of selfish
enjoyment. The wisdom, which it should be the aim of life to attain, is
virtue. And virtue is to live harmoniously with nature. To live
harmoniously with nature is to exclude all personal ends. Hence pleasure
is to be disregarded, and pain is to be despised. And as all moral
action must be in harmony with nature, the law of destiny is supreme,
and all things move according to immutable fate. With the predominant
tendency to the universal which characterized their system, the Stoics
taught that the sage ought to regard himself as a citizen of the world
rather than of any particular city or state. They made four things to be
indispensable to virtue: a knowledge of _good and evil_, which is
the province of the reason; _temperance_, a knowledge of the due
regulation of the sensual passions; _fortitude_, a conviction that
it is good to suffer what is necessary; and _justice_, or
acquaintance with what ought to be to every individual. They made
_perfection_ necessary to virtue, and saw nothing virtuous in the
mere advance to it. Hence the severity of their system. The perfect
sage, according to them, is raised above all influence of external
events; he submits to the law of destiny; he is exempt from desire and
fear, joy or sorrow; he is not governed even by what he is exposed to
necessarily, like sorrow and pain; he is free from the restraints of
passion; he is like a god in his mental placidity. Nor must the sage
live only for himself, but for others; he is a member of the whole body
of mankind; he ought to marry, and to take part in public affairs, but
he will never give way to compassion or forgiveness, and is to attack
error and vice with uncompromising sternness. But with this ideal, the
Stoics were forced to admit that virtue, like true knowledge, although
attainable, is beyond the reach of man. They were discontented with
themselves, and with all around them, and looked upon all institutions
as corrupt. They had a profound contempt of their age, and of human
attainments; but it cannot be denied they practiced a lofty and stern
virtue, and were the best people in their degenerate times. Their God
was made subject to Fate, and he was a material god, synonymous with
Nature. Thus their system was pantheistic. But they maintained the
dignity of reason, and the ideal in nature, the actualization of which
we should strive after, though without the hope of reaching it. "As a
reaction against effeminacy, Stoicism may be applauded; as a doctrine,
it is one-sided, and ends in apathy and egotism." [Footnote: See Cicero,
_De Fin_. and _Tusculan Questions_; Diogenes Laertius on Zeno.
This historian is quite full on this subject, and seems to furnish the
basis for Ritter.]

With the Stoics ended all inquiry among the Greeks of a philosophical
nature worthy of especial mention, until philosophy was revived in the
Christian schools of Alexandria, where faith was united with reason. The
Stoics endeavored to establish the certitude of human knowledge in order
that they might establish the truth of moral principles, and the basis
of their system was common sense, with which they attacked the godless
skepticism of their times, and raised up a barrier, feeble though it
was, to prevailing degeneracy. The struggles of so many great thinkers,
from Thales to Aristotle, all ended in doubt and in despair. It was
discovered that all of them were wrong, but that their error was without
a remedy.

[Sidenote: Bright period of Grecian philosophy.]

The bright and glorious period of Grecian philosophy was from Socrates
to Aristotle. Philosophical inquiries began about the origin of things,
and ended with an elaborate systematization of the forms of thought,
which was the most magnificent triumph that the unaided intellect of man
ever achieved. Socrates founds a school, but does not elaborate a
system. He reveals most precious truths, and stimulates the youth who
listen to his instructions by the doctrine that it is the duty of man to
pursue a knowledge of himself, which is to be sought in that divine
reason which dwells within him and which also rules the world. He
confides in science; he loves truth for its own sake; he loves virtue,
which consists in the knowledge of the good.

[Sidenote: Summary.]

Plato seizes his weapons and is imbued with his spirit. He is full of
hope for science and humanity. With soaring boldness he directs his
inquiries to futurity, dissatisfied with the present, and cherishing a
fond hope of a better existence. He speculates on God and the soul. He
is not much interested in physical phenomena. He does not, like Thales,
strive to find out the beginning of all things, but the highest good, by
which his immortal soul may be refreshed and prepared for the future
life he cannot solve, yet in which he believes. The sensible is an
impenetrable empire, but ideas are certitudes, and upon these he dwells
with rapt and mystical enthusiasm,--a great poetical rhapsodist like
Xenophanes, severe dialectician as he is, believing in truth and beauty
and goodness.

Then Aristotle, following out the method of _his_ teachers,
attempts to exhaust experience, and directs his inquiries into the
outward world of sense and observation, but all with the view of
discovering from phenomena the unconditional truth, in which he, too,
believes. But every thing in this world is fleeting and transitory, and,
therefore, it is not easy to arrive at truth. A cold doubt creeps into
the experimental mind of Aristotle with all his learning and all his
logic.

The Epicureans arise. They place their hopes in sensual enjoyment. They
despair of truth. But the world will not be abandoned to despair. The
Stoics rebuke the impiety which is blended with sensualism, and place
their hopes on virtue. But it is unattainable virtue, while their God is
not a moral governor, but subject to necessity.

Thus did those old giants grope about, for they did not know the God who
was revealed unto Abraham, and Moses, and David, and Isaiah. They solved
nothing, since they did not _know_, even if they speculated on, the
_Great First Cause_. And yet, with all their errors, they were the
greatest benefactors of the ancient world. They gave dignity to
intellectual inquiries, while they set, by their lives, examples of a
pure morality--not the morality of the gospel, but the severest virtue
practiced by the old guides of mankind.

[Sidenote: Philosophy among the Romans.]

The Romans added absolutely nothing to the philosophy of the Greeks. Nor
were they much interested in any speculative inquiries. It was only the
ethical views of the old sages which had attraction or force to them.
They were too material to love pure subjective inquiries. They had
conquered the land; they disdained the empire of the air.

[Sidenote: Followers of the Greeks.]

There were, doubtless, students of the Greek philosophy among the
Romans, perhaps as early as Cato the Censor. But there were only two
persons of note who wrote philosophy, till the time of Cicero,
Aurafanius and Rubinus, and these were Epicureans.

[Sidenote: Cicero.]

Cicero was the first to systematize the philosophy which contributed so
greatly to his intellectual culture. But even he added nothing. He was
only a commentator and expositor. Nor did he seek to found a system or a
school, but merely to influence and instruct men of his own rank. He
regarded those subjects, which had the greatest attraction for the
Grecian schools, to be beyond the power of human cognition, and,
therefore, looked upon the practical as the proper domain of human
inquiry. Yet he held logic in great esteem, as furnishing rules for
methodical investigation. He adopted the doctrine of Socrates as to the
pursuit of moral good. He regarded the duties which grow out of the
relations of human society preferable to the obligations of pursuing
scientific researches. Although a great admirer of Plato and Aristotle,
he regarded patriotic calls of duty as paramount to any study of science
or philosophy, which he thought was involved in doubt. He had a great
contempt for knowledge which could neither lead to the clear
apprehension of certitude, nor to practical applications. He thought it
impossible to arrive at a knowledge of God, or the nature of the soul,
or the origin of the world. And he thus was led to look upon the
sensible and the present as of more importance than inconclusive
inductions, or deductions from a truth not satisfactorily established.

[Sidenote: His eclecticism.]

Cicero was an Eclectic, seizing on what was true and clear in the
ancient systems, and disregarding what was simply a matter of
speculation. This is especially seen in his treatise "De Finibus Bonorum
et Malorum," in which the opinions of all the Grecian schools concerning
the supreme good are expounded and compared. Nor does he hesitate to
declare that happiness consists in the cognition of nature and science,
which is the true source of pleasure both to gods and men. Yet these are
but hopes, in which it does not become us to indulge. It is the actual,
the real, the practical, which preeminently claims attention; in other
words, the knowledge which will but furnish man with a guide and rule of
life. [Footnote: _De Fin._, v. 6.] Indeed, the sum of Philosophy,
to the mind of Cicero, is that she is an instructress and a comforter.
He takes an entirely practical view of the end of philosophy, which is
to improve the mind, and make a man contented and happy. For philosophy
as a science,--a series of inductions and deductions,--he had profound
contempt. He also regards the doctrines of philosophy as involved in
doubt, and even in the consideration of moral questions he is pursued by
the conflict of opinions, although, in this department, he is most at
home. The points he is most anxious to establish are the doctrines of
God and the soul. These are most fully treated in his essay, "De Natura
Deorum," in which he submits the doctrines of the Epicureans and the
Stoics to the objections of the Academy. [Footnote: _De Nat. D._,
iii. 10.] He admits that man is unable to form true conceptions of God,
but acknowledges the necessity of assuming one supreme God as the
creator and ruler of all things, moving all things, remote from all
mortal mixture, and endued with eternal motion in himself. He seems to
believe in a divine providence ordering good to man; in the soul's
immortality, in free-will, in the dignity of human nature, in the
dominion of reason, in the restraint of the passions as necessary to
virtue, in a life of public utility, in an immutable morality, in the
imitation of the divine.

[Sidenote: His ethics.]

The doctrines of Cicero on ethical subjects, are chiefly drawn from the
Stoics and Peripatetics. They are opinions drawn sometimes from one
system and sometimes from another. Thus he agrees with the disciples of
Aristotle, that health, honors, friends, country, are worthy objects of
desire. Then again, he coincides with the Stoics that passions and
emotions of the soul are vices. But he recedes from their severe tone,
which elevated the sage too high above his fellow-men.

[Sidenote: Character of his philosophical writings.]

Thus there is little of original thought in the moral theories of
Cicero, and these are the result of observation rather than of any
philosophical principle. We might enumerate his various opinions, and
show what an enlightened mind he possessed; but this would not be the
development of philosophy. His views, interesting as they are, and
generally wise and lofty, yet do not indicate any progress of the
science; He merely repeats earlier doctrines. These were not without
their utility, since they had great influence on the Latin fathers. They
were esteemed for their general enlightenment. He softened down the
extreme views of the great thinkers before his day, and clearly unfolded
what had become obscured. He is a critic of philosophy; an expositor
whom we can scarcely spare.

If any body advanced philosophy among the Romans, it was Epictetus, and
he even only in the realm of ethics. Qumtius Sextius, in the time of
Augustus, had revived the Pythagorean doctrines. Seneca had recommended
the severe morality of the Stoics, but they added nothing that was not
previously known. The Romans had no talent for philosophy, although they
were acquainted with its various systems. Their greatest light was a
Phrygian slave.

[Sidenote: Epictetus.]

[Sidenote: His lofty ethical system.]

Epictetus taught in the time of Domitian, and though he did not leave
any written treatises, his doctrines were preserved and handed down by
his disciple Arrian, who had for him the reverence that Plato had for
Socrates. The loftiness of his recorded views makes us feel that he must
have been indebted to Christianity; for no one, before him, has revealed
precepts so much in accordance with its spirit. He was a Stoic, but he
held in the highest estimation Socrates and Plato. It is not for the
solution of metaphysical questions that he was remarkable. He was not a
dialectician, but a moralist, and, as such, takes the highest ground of
all the old inquirers after truth. With him, philosophy, as it was to
Cicero and Seneca, is a wisdom of life. He sets no value on logic, nor
much on physics; but he reveals sentiments of great simplicity and
grandeur. His great idea is the purification of the soul. He believes in
the severest self-denial; he would guard against the syren spells of
pleasure; he would make men feel that, in order to be good, they must
first feel that they are evil; he condemns suicide, although it had been
defended by the Stoics; he would complain of no one, not even of
injustice; he would not injure his enemies; he would pardon all
offenses; he would feel universal compassion, since men sin from
ignorance; he would not easily blame, since we have none to condemn but
ourselves; he would not strive after honor or office, since we put
ourselves in subjection to that we seek or prize; he would constantly
bear in mind that all things are transitory, and that they are not our
own; he would bear evils with patience, even as he would practice self-
denial of pleasure; he would, in short, be calm, free, keep in
subjection his passions, avoid self-indulgence, and practice a broad
charity and benevolence. He felt he owed all to God; that all was his
gift, and that we should thus live in accordance with his will; that we
should be grateful not only for our bodies, but for our souls, and
reason, by which we attain to greatness. And if God has given us such a
priceless gift, we should be contented, and not even seek to alter our
external relations, which are doubtless for the best. We should wish,
indeed, for only what God wills and sends, and we should avoid pride and
haughtiness, as well as discontent, and seek to fulfill our allotted
part. [Footnote: A fine translation of Epictetus has been published by
Little and Brown.]

[Sidenote: Marcus Aurelius.]

Such were the moral precepts of Epictetus, in which we see the nearest
approach to Christianity that had been made in the ancient world. And
these sublime truths had a great influence, especially on the mind of
the most lofty and pure of all the Roman emperors, Marcus Aurelius, who
_lived_ the principles he had learned from a slave, and whose
"Maxims" are still held in admiration.

[Sidenote: General observations.]

Thus did the speculations about the beginning of things lead to
elaborate systems of thought, and end in practical rules of life, until,
in spirit, they had, with Epictetus, harmonized with many of the
revealed truths which Christ and his Apostles laid down for the
regeneration of the world. Who cannot see in the inquiries of the old
philosopher, whether into nature, or the operations of mind, or the
existence of God, or the immortality of the soul, or the way to
happiness and virtue, a magnificent triumph of human genius, such as has
been exhibited in no other department of human science? We regret that
our limits preclude a more extended view of the various systems which
the old sages propounded--systems full of errors, yet also marked by
important truths, but whether false or true, showing a marvelous reach
of the human understanding. Modern researches have discarded many
opinions which were highly valued in their day, yet philosophy, in its
methods of reasoning, is scarcely advanced since the time of Aristotle;
while the subjects which agitated the Grecian schools, have been from
time to time revived and rediscussed, and are still unsettled. If any
science has gone round in perpetual circles, incapable, apparently, of
progression or rest, it is that glorious field of inquiry which has
tasked more than any other the mightiest intellects of this world, and
which, progressive or not, will never be relinquished without the loss
of what is most valuable in human culture.



For original authorities in reference to the matter of this chapter,
read Diogenes Laertius' Lives of the Philosophers; the Writings of Plato
and Aristotle; Cicero, De Nat., De Or., De Offic., De Div., De Fin.,
Tusc. Quaest.; Xenophon, Memorabilia; Boethius, De Idea Hist. Phil.;
Lucretius.

The great modern authorities are the Germans, and these are very
numerous. Among the most famous writers on the history of philosophy,
are Bruckner, Hegel, Brandis, I. G. Buhle, Tennemann, Ritter, Plessing,
Schwegler, Hermann, Meiners, Stallbaum, and Speugel. The history of
Ritter is well translated, and is always learned and suggestive.
Tennemann, translated by Morell, is a good manual, brief, but clear. In
connection with the writings of the Germans, the great work of Cousin
should be consulted.

The English historians of ancient philosophy are not so numerous as the
Germans. The work of Enfield is based on Bruckner, or is rather an
abridgment. Archer Butler's Lectures are suggestive and able, but
discursive and vague, as is the History of Ancient Philosophy by
Maurice. Grote has written learnedly on Socrates and the other great
lights. Lewes' Biographical History of Philosophy has the merit of
clearness, and is very interesting, but rather superficial. Henry has
written a good epitome. See also Stanley's History of Philosophy, and
the articles in Smith's Dictionary, on the leading ancient philosophers.
Donaldson's continuation of Muller's History of the Lit. of Greece, is
learned, and should be consulted with Thompson's Notes on Archer Butler.
There are also fine articles in the Encyclopedias Britannica and
Metropolitana. Schleirmacher, on Socrates, translated by Bishop
Thirlwall.




CHAPTER IX.

SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE AMONG THE ROMANS.


[Sidenote: Wonders of modern science.]

[Sidenote: Every great age distinguished for something never afterwards
equaled.]

It would be absurd to claim for the ancients any great attainments in
science, such as they made in the field of letters or the realm of art.
It is in science, especially when applied to practical life, that the
moderns show their great superiority to the most enlightened nations of
antiquity. In this great department, modern genius shines with the
lustre of the sun. It is this which most strikingly attests the advance
of society, which makes their advance a most incontestible fact. It is
this which has distinguished and elevated the races of Europe more
triumphantly than what has resulted from the combined energies of Greeks
and Romans in all other departments combined. With the magnificent
discoveries and inventions of the last three hundred years in almost
every department of science,--especially in physics, in the
explorations of distant seas and continents, in the analysis of chemical
compounds, in the explanation of the phenomena of the heavens, in the
wonders of steam and electricity, in mechanical appliance to abridge
human labor or destroy human life, in astronomical researches, in the
miracles which inventive genius has wrought,--seen in our ships, our
manufactories, our wondrous instruments, our printing-presses, of our
observatories, our fortifications, our laboratories, our mills, our
machines to cultivate the earth, to make our clothes, to build our
houses, to multiply our means of offense and defense, to make weak
children do the work of Titans, to measure our time with the accuracy of
the orbit of the planets, to use the sun itself in perpetuating our
likenesses to distant generations, to cause a needle to guide the
mariner with assurance on the darkest night, to propel a heavy ship
against the wind and tide without oars or sails, to make carriages
ascend mountains without horses at the rate of thirty miles an hour, to
convey intelligence with the speed of lightning from continent to
continent, under oceans that ancient navigators never dared to cross;
these and other wonders attest an ingenuity and audacity of intellect
which would have overwhelmed with amazement the most adventurous of
Greeks and the most potent of Romans. The achievements of modern science
settle forever the question as to the advance of society and the
superiority of modern times over those of the most favored nations of
antiquity. But the great discoveries and inventions to which we owe this
marked superiority are either accidental or the result of generations of
experiment, assisted by an immense array of ascertained facts from which
safe inductions can be made. It is not, probably, the superiority of the
Teutonic races over the Greeks and Romans to which we may ascribe the
wonderful advance of modern society, but the particular direction which
genius was made to take. Had the Greeks given the energy of their minds
to mechanical forces as they did to artistic creations, they might have
made wonderful inventions. But it was so ordered by Providence. Nor was
the world in that stage of development when this particular direction of
intellect would have been favored. There were some things which the
Greeks and Romans exhausted, some fields of labor and thought in which
they never have been, and, perhaps, never will be, surpassed; and some
future age may direct its energies into channels which are as unknown to
us as clocks and steam-engines were to the Greeks. This is the age of
mechanism and of science, and mechanism and science sweep every thing
before them, and will probably be carried to their utmost capacity and
development. Then the human mind may seek some new department, some new
scope for energies, and a new age of wonders may arise,--perhaps after
the present dominant races shall have become intoxicated with the
greatness of their triumphs and have shared the fate of the old
monarchies of the East. But I would not speculate on the destinies of
the European nations, whether they are to make indefinite advances,
until they occupy and rule the whole world, or are destined to be
succeeded by nations as yet undeveloped,--savages, as their fathers
were when Rome was in the fullness of material wealth and grandeur. We
know nothing of the future. We only know that all nations are in the
hands of God, who setteth up and pulleth down according to his infinite
wisdom.

I have shown that in the field of artistic excellence, in literary
composition, in the arts of government and legislation, and even in the
realm of philosophical speculations, the ancients were our
schoolmasters, and that among them were some men of most marvelous
genius, who have had no superiors among us.

[Sidenote: The ancients deficient in the application of science.]

But we do not see the exhibition of genius in what we call science, at
least in its application to practical life. It would be difficult to
show any department of science which the ancients carried to any degree
of perfection. Nevertheless, there were departments in which they made
noble attempts, and in which they showed considerable genius, even if
they were unsuccessful in great practical results.

[Sidenote: Labors of the ancients in astronomy.]

Astronomy was one of these. So far as mathematical genius is concerned,
so far as astronomy taxed the reasoning powers, such men as
Eratosthenes, Aristarchus, Hipparchus, and Ptolemy were great lights, of
whom humanity may be proud; and, had they been assisted by our modern
accidental inventions, they might have earned a fame scarcely eclipsed
by that of Kepler and Newton. The Ionic philosophers added but little to
the realm of true philosophy, but they were pioneers of thought, and
giants in their native powers. The old astronomers did as little as they
to place science on a true foundation, but they showed great ingenuity,
and discovered some great truths which no succeeding age has repudiated.
They determined the circumference of the earth by a method identical
with that which would be employed by modern astronomers. They
ascertained the position of the stars by right ascension and
declination. They knew the obliquity of the ecliptic, and determined the
place of the sun's apogee as well as its mean motion. Their calculations
on the eccentricity of the moon prove that they had a rectilinear
trigonometry and tables of chords. They had an approximate knowledge of
parallax. [Footnote: Delambre, _Hist. d'Astr. Anc._, tom. 1, p.
184.] They could calculate eclipses of the moon, and use them for the
correction of their lunar tables. They understood spherical
trigonometry, and determined the motions of the sun and moon, involving
an accurate definition of the year, and a method of predicting eclipses.
They ascertained that the earth was a sphere, and reduced the phenomena
of the heavenly bodies to uniform movements of circular orbits.
[Footnote: Lewis, _Hist. of Astron._, p. 209.] We have settled, by
physical geography, the exact form of the earth, but the ancients
arrived at their knowledge by astronomical reasoning. "The reduction of
the motions of the sun, moon, and five planets to circular orbits, as
was done by Hipparchus, implies deep concentrated thought and scientific
abstraction. The theory of eccentrics and epicycles accomplished the end
of explaining all the known phenomena. The resolution of the apparent
motions of the heavenly bodies into an assemblage of circular motions,
was a great triumph of genius, [Footnote: Whewell, _Hist. Induc.
Science_, v. i. p. 181.] and was equivalent to the most recent and
improved processes by which modern astronomers deal with such motions."

But I will not here enumerate the few discoveries which were made by the
Alexandrian school. I only wish to show that there are a few names among
the ancients which are inscribed on the roll of great astronomers,
limited as were the triumphs of the science itself. But, until the time
of Aristarchus, most of the speculations were crude and useless. Nothing
can be more puerile than the notions of the ancients respecting the
nature and motions of the heavenly bodies.

[Sidenote: Astronomy born in Chaldea.]

Astronomy was probably born in Chaldea as early as the time of Abraham.
The glories of the firmament were impressed upon the minds of the rude
primitive races with an intensity which we do not feel with all the
triumphs of modern science. The Chaldean shepherds, as they watched
their flocks by night, noted the movements of the planets, and gave
names to the more brilliant constellations. Before religious rituals
were established, before great superstitions arose, before poetry was
sung, before musical instruments were invented, before artists
sculptured marble or melted bronze, before coins were stamped, before
temples arose, before diseases were healed by the arts of medicine,
before commerce was known, before heroes were born, those oriental
shepherds counted the hours of anxiety by the position of certain
constellations. Astronomy is, therefore, the oldest of the ancient
sciences, although it remained imperfect for more than four thousand
years. The old Assyrians, Egyptians, and Greeks made but few discoveries
which are valued by modern astronomers, but they laid the foundation of
the science, and ever regarded it as one of the noblest subjects which
could stimulate the faculties of man. It was invested with all that was
religious and poetical.

[Sidenote: Discoveries made by oriental nations.]

The spacious level and unclouded horizon of Chaldea afforded peculiar
facilities of observation; and its pastoral and contemplative
inhabitants, uncontaminated by the vices and superstitions of subsequent
ages, active-minded and fresh, discovered, after a long observation of
eclipses--some say extending over nineteen centuries--the cycle of two
hundred and twenty-three lunations, which brings back the eclipses in
the same order. Having once established their cycle, they laid the
foundation for the most sublime of all the sciences. Callisthenes
transmitted from Babylon to Aristotle a collection of observations of
all the eclipses that preceded the conquests of Alexander, together with
the definite knowledge which the Chaldeans had collected about the
motions of the heavenly bodies. It was rude and simple, and amounted to
little beyond the fact that there were spherical revolutions about an
inclined axis, and that the poles pointed always to particular stars.
The Egyptians also recorded their observations, from which it would
appear that they observed eclipses at least one thousand six hundred
years before the commencement of our era. Nor is this improbable, if the
speculations of modern philosophers respecting the age of the world are
entitled to respect. The Egyptians discovered, by the rising of Sirius,
that the year consists of three hundred and sixty-five and one quarter
days, and this was their sacred year, in distinction from the civil,
which consisted of three hundred and sixty-five days. They also had
observed the courses of the planets, and could explain the phenomena of
the stations and retrogradations, and it is even asserted that they
regarded Mercury and Venus as satellites of the sun. Some have
maintained that the obelisks which they erected served the purpose of
gnomons, for determining the obliquity of the ecliptic, the altitude of
the pole, and the length of the tropical year. It is thought that even
the Pyramids, by the position of their sides toward the cardinal points,
attest their acquaintance with a meridional line. The Chinese boast of
having noticed and recorded a series of eclipses extending over a period
of three thousand eight hundred and fifty-eight years, and it is
probable that they anticipated the Greeks two thousand years in the
discovery of the Metonic cycle, or the cycle of nineteen years, at the
end of which time the new moons fall on the same days of the year. They
determined the obliquity of the ecliptic, one thousand one hundred years
before our era, to be 23 degrees 54' 3-15". The Indians, at a remote
antiquity, represented celestial phenomena with considerable exactness,
and constructed tables by which the longitude of the sun and moon are
determined. Bailly thinks that astronomy was cultivated in Siam three
thousand one hundred and two years before Christ, which hardly yields in
accuracy to that which modern science has built on the theory of
universal gravitation. The Greeks divided the heavens into
constellations fourteen centuries before Christ. Thales, born 640 B.C.,
taught the rotundity of the earth, and that the moon shines with
reflected light. He also predicted eclipses. Anaximander, born 610 B.C.,
invented the gnomon, and constructed geographical charts.

[Sidenote: The early Greek investigators.]

But the Greeks, after all, were the only people of antiquity who
elevated astronomy to the dignity of a science. They however confessed
that they derived their earliest knowledge from the Babylonian and
Egyptian priests, while the priests of Thebes asserted that they were
the originators of exact astronomical observations. [Footnote: Diod., i.
50.] Diodorus asserts that the Chaldeans used the Temple of Belus, in
the centre of Babylon, for their survey of the heavens. [Footnote:
Diod., ii. 9.] But whether the Babylonians or the Egyptians were the
earliest astronomers, it is of little consequence, although the pedants
make it a grave matter of investigation. All we know is, that astronomy
was cultivated by both Babylonians and Egyptians, and that they made but
very limited attainments. The early Greek philosophers, who visited
Egypt and the East in search of knowledge, found very little to reward
their curiosity or industry; not much beyond preposterous claims to a
high antiquity, and an esoteric wisdom which has not yet been revealed.
They approximated to the truth in reference to the solar year, by
observing the equinoxes and solstices, and the heliacal rising of
particular stars. Plato and Eudoxus spent thirteen years in Heliopolis
for the purpose of extracting the scientific knowledge of the priests,
but they learned but little beyond the fact that the solar year was a
trifle beyond three hundred and sixty-five days. No great names have
come down to us from the priests of Babylon or Egypt. No one gained an
individual reputation. The Chaldean and Egyptian priests may have
furnished the raw material of observation to the Greeks, but the latter
alone possessed the scientific genius by which indigested facts were
converted into a symmetrical system. The East never gave valuable
knowledge to the West. It gave only superstition. Instead of astronomy,
it gave astrology; instead of science, it gave magic and incantations
and dreams--poison which perverted the intellect. [Footnote: Sir G. G.
Lewis, _Hist. of Anc. Astron._, p. 293.] They connected their
astronomy with divination from the stars, and made their antiquity reach
back to two hundred and seventy thousand years. There were soothsayers
in the time of Daniel, and magicians, exorcists, and interpreters of
signs. [Footnote: Dan. i. 4, 17, 20.] They were not men of scientific
research, seeking truth. It was power they sought, by perverting the
intellect of the people. The astrology of the East was founded on the
principle that a star or constellation presided over the birth of an
individual, and either portended his fate, or shed a good or bad
influence upon his future life. The star which looked upon a child at
the hour of his birth, was called the horoscopus, and the peculiar
influence of each planet was determined by professors of the genethliac
art. The superstitions of Egypt and Chaldea unfortunately spread both
among the Greeks and Romans, and these were about all that the western
nations learned from the boastful priests of occult science. Whatever
was known of real value among the ancients, is due to the earnest
inquiries of the Greeks.

[Sidenote: Researches of the Greeks.]

And yet their researches were very unsatisfactory until the time of
Hipparchus. The primitive knowledge, until Thales, was almost nothing.
The Homeric poems regarded the earth as a circular plain, bounded by the
heaven, which was a solid vault or hemisphere, with its concavity turned
downwards. And this absurdity was believed until the time of Herodotus,
five centuries after; nor was it exploded fully in the time of
Aristotle. The sun, moon, and stars, were supposed to move upon, or
with, the inner surface of the heavenly hemisphere, and the ocean was
thought to gird the earth around as a great belt, into which the
heavenly bodies sunk at their setting. [Footnote: _Il_., vii. 422;
_Od_., iii. i. xix. 433.] Homer believed that the sun arose out of
the ocean, ascending the heaven, and again plunging into the ocean,
passing under the earth, and producing darkness. [Footnote: _Il_.
viii. 485.] The Greeks even personified the sun as a divine charioteer
driving his fiery steeds over the steep of heaven, until he bathed them
at evening in the western waves. Apollo became the god of the sun, as
Diana was the goddess of the moon. But the early Greek inquirers did not
attempt to explain how the sun found his way from the west back again to
the east. They merely took note of the diurnal course, the alternation
of day and night, the number of the seasons, and their regular
successions. They found the points of the compass by determining the
recurrence of the equinoxes and solstices; but they had no conception of
the ecliptic--of that great circle in the heaven, formed by the sun's
annual course, and of its obliquity when compared with the equator. Like
the Egyptians and Babylonians, they ascertained the length of the year
to be three hundred and sixty-five days; but perfect accuracy was
wanting for want of scientific instruments, and of recorded observations
of the heavenly bodies. The Greeks had not even a common chronological
era for the designation of years. Thus Herodotus informs us that the
Trojan War preceded his time by eight hundred years: [Footnote:
_Il_, ii. 53.] he merely states the interval between the event in
question and his own time; he had certain data for distant periods. Thus
the Greeks reckoned dates from the Trojan War, and the Romans from the
building of their city. And they divided the year into twelve months,
and introduced the intercalary circle of eight years, although the
Romans disused it afterwards until the calendar was reformed by Julius
Caesar. Thus there was no scientific astronomical knowledge worth
mentioning among the primitive Greeks.

Immense research and learning have been expended by modern critics, to
show the state of scientific astronomy among the Greeks. I am equally
amazed at the amount of research, and its comparative worthlessness,
for what addition to science can be made by an enumeration of the
puerilities and errors of the Greeks, and how wasted and pedantic the
learning which ransacks all antiquity to prove that the Greeks adopted