LETTER 23. TO J.D. HOOKER.

(23/1. The following extract gives the germ of what developed into an
interesting discussion in the "Origin" (Edition I., page 147). Darwin
wrote, "I suspect also that some cases of compensation which have been
advanced and likewise some other facts, may be merged under a more
general principle: namely, that natural selection is continually trying
to economise in every part of the organism." He speaks of the general
belief of botanists in compensation, but does not quote any instances.)

[September 1846].

Have you ever thought of G. St. Hilaire's "loi de balancement" (23/2.
According to Darwin ("Variation of Animals and Plants," 2nd edition,
II., page 335) the law of balancement was propounded by Goethe and
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire (1772-1844) nearly at the same time, but he gives
no reference to the works of these authors. It appears, however, from
his son Isidore's "Vie, Travaux etc., d'Etienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire,"
Paris 1847, page 214, that the law was given in his "Philosophie
Anatomique," of which the first part was published in 1818. Darwin
(ibid.) gives some instances of the law holding good in plants.), as
applied to plants? I am well aware that some zoologists quite reject it,
but it certainly appears to me that it often holds good with animals.
You are no doubt aware of the kind of facts I refer to, such as
great development of canines in the carnivora apparently causing
a diminution--a compensation or balancement--in the small size of
premolars, etc. I have incidentally noticed some analogous remarks on
plants, but have never seen it discussed by botanists. Can you think
of cases in any one species in genus, or genus in family, with certain
parts extra developed, and some adjoining parts reduced? In varieties
of the same species double flowers and large fruits seem something of
this--want of pollen and of seeds balancing with the increased number
of petals and development of fruit. I hope we shall see you here this
autumn.


(24/1. In this year (1847) Darwin wrote a short review of Waterhouse's
"Natural History of the Mammalia," of which the first volume had
appeared. It was published in "The Annals and Magazine of Natural
History," Volume XIX., page 53. The following sentence is the only one
which shows even a trace of evolution: "whether we view classification
as a mere contrivance to convey much information in a single word, or as
something more than a memoria technica, and as connected with the laws
of creation, we cannot doubt that where such important differences in
the generative and cerebral systems, as distinguish the Marsupiata from
the Placentata, run through two series of animals, they ought to be
arranged under heads of equal value."

A characteristic remark occurs in reference to Geographical
Distribution, "that noble subject of which we as yet but dimly see the
full bearing."

The following letter seems to be of sufficient interest to be published
in spite of the obscurities caused by the want of date. It seems to have
been written after 1847, in which year a dispute involving Dr. King and
several "arctic gentlemen" was carried on in the "Athenaeum." Mr. Darwin
speaks of "Natural History Instructions for the present expedition."
This may possibly refer to the "Admiralty Manual of Scientific Enquiry"
(1849), for it is clear, from the prefatory memorandum of the Lords
of the Admiralty, that they believed the manual would be of use in the
forthcoming expeditions in search of Sir John Franklin.)

LETTER 24. TO E. CRESY.

(24/2. Mr. Cresy was, we believe, an architect: his friendship with Mr.
Darwin dates from the settlement at Down.)

Down [after 1847].

Although I have never particularly attended to the points in dispute
between Dr. (Richard) King and the other Arctic gentlemen, yet I have
carefully read all the articles in the "Athenaeum," and took from them
much the same impression as you convey in your letter, for which I thank
you. I believe that old sinner, Sir J. Barrow (24/3. Sir John Barrow,
(1764-1848): Secretary to the Admiralty. has been at the bottom of all
the money wasted over the naval expeditions. So strongly have I felt on
this subject, that, when I was appointed on a committee for Nat. Hist.
instructions for the present expedition, had I been able to attend I had
resolved to express my opinion on the little advantage, comparatively
to the expense, gained by them. There have been, I believe, from
the beginning eighteen expeditions; this strikes me as monstrous,
considering how little is known, for instance, on the interior of
Australia. The country has paid dear for Sir John's hobbyhorse. I have
very little doubt that Dr. King is quite right in the advantage of land
expeditions as far as geography is concerned; and that is now the chief
object. (24/4. This sentence would imply that Darwin thought it hopeless
to rescue Sir J. Franklin's expedition. If so, the letter must be, at
least, as late as 1850. If the eighteen expeditions mentioned above
are "search expeditions," it would also bring the date of the letter to
1850.)


LETTER 25. TO RICHARD OWEN. Down [March 26th, 1848].

My dear Owen

I do not know whether your MS. instructions are sent in; but even
if they are not sent in, I daresay what I am going to write will be
absolutely superfluous (25/1. The results of Mr. Darwin's experience
given in the above letter were embodied by Prof. Owen in the section "On
the Use of the Microscope on Board Ship," forming part of the article
"Zoology" in the "Manual of Scientific Enquiry, Prepared for the Use of
Her Majesty's Navy" (London, 1849).), but I have derived such infinitely
great advantage from my new simple microscope, in comparison with the
one which I used on board the "Beagle," and which was recommended to me
by R. Brown ("Life and Letters," I., page 145.), that I cannot forego
the mere chance of advantage of urging this on you. The leading point
of difference consists simply in having the stage for saucers very large
and fixed. Mine will hold a saucer three inches in inside diameter.
I have never seen such a microscope as mine, though Chevalier's (from
whose plan many points of mine are taken), of Paris, approaches it
pretty closely. I fully appreciate the utter ABSURDITY of my giving
you advice about means of dissecting; but I have appreciated myself the
enormous disadvantage of having worked with a bad instrument, though
thought a few years since the best. Please to observe that without you
call especial attention to this point, those ignorant of Natural History
will be sure to get one of the fiddling instruments sold in shops.
If you thought fit, I would point out the differences, which, from my
experience, make a useful microscope for the kind of dissection of
the invertebrates which a person would be likely to attempt on board a
vessel. But pray again believe that I feel the absurdity of this letter,
and I write merely from the chance of yourself, possessing great skill
and having worked with good instruments, [not being] possibly fully
aware what an astonishing difference the kind of microscope makes for
those who have not been trained in skill for dissection under water.
When next I come to town (I was prevented last time by illness) I must
call on you, and report, for my own satisfaction, a really (I think)
curious point I have made out in my beloved barnacles. You cannot tell
how much I enjoyed my talk with you here.

Ever, my dear Owen, Yours sincerely, C. DARWIN.

P.S.--If I do not hear, I shall understand that my letter is
superfluous. Smith and Beck were so pleased with the simple microscope
they made for me, that they have made another as a model. If you are
consulted by any young naturalists, do recommend them to look at this.
I really feel quite a personal gratitude to this form of microscope, and
quite a hatred to my old one.


LETTER 26. TO J.S. HENSLOW. Down [April 1st, 1848.]

Thank you for your note and giving me a chance of seeing you in town;
but it was out of my power to take advantage of it, for I had previously
arranged to go up to London on Monday. I should have much enjoyed
seeing you. Thanks also for your address (26/1. An introductory lecture
delivered in March 1848 at the first meeting of a Society "for giving
instructions to the working classes in Ipswich in various branches of
science, and more especially in natural history" ("Memoir of the Rev.
J.S. Henslow," by Leonard Jenyns, page 150.), which I like very much.
The anecdote about Whewell and the tides I had utterly forgotten; I
believe it is near enough to the truth. I rather demur to one sentence
of yours--viz., "However delightful any scientific pursuit may be, yet,
if it should be wholly unapplied, it is of no more use than building
castles in the air." Would not your hearers infer from this that the
practical use of each scientific discovery ought to be immediate and
obvious to make it worthy of admiration? What a beautiful instance
chloroform is of a discovery made from purely scientific researches,
afterwards coming almost by chance into practical use! For myself I
would, however, take higher ground, for I believe there exists, and I
feel within me, an instinct for truth, or knowledge or discovery, of
something of the same nature as the instinct of virtue, and that our
having such an instinct is reason enough for scientific researches
without any practical results ever ensuing from them. You will wonder
what makes me run on so, but I have been working very hard for the last
eighteen months on the anatomy, etc., of the Cirripedia (on which I
shall publish a monograph), and some of my friends laugh at me, and I
fear the study of the Cirripedia will ever remain "wholly unapplied,"
and yet I feel that such study is better than castle-building.


LETTER 27. TO J.D. HOOKER, at Dr. Falconer's, Botanic Garden, Calcutta.
Down, May 10th, 1848.

I was indeed delighted to see your handwriting; but I felt almost sorry
when I beheld how long a letter you had written. I know that you are
indomitable in work, but remember how precious your time is, and do not
waste it on your friends, however much pleasure you may give them. Such
a letter would have cost me half-a-day's work. How capitally you seem
going on! I do envy you the sight of all the glorious vegetation. I am
much pleased and surprised that you have been able to observe so much in
the animal world. No doubt you keep a journal, and an excellent one it
will be, I am sure, when published. All these animal facts will tell
capitally in it. I can quite comprehend the difficulty you mention about
not knowing what is known zoologically in India; but facts observed, as
you will observe them, are none the worse for reiterating. Did you see
Mr. Blyth in Calcutta? He would be a capital man to tell you what is
known about Indian Zoology, at least in the Vertebrata. He is a very
clever, odd, wild fellow, who will never do what he could do, from not
sticking to any one subject. By the way, if you should see him at any
time, try not to forget to remember me very kindly to him; I liked all I
saw of him. Your letter was the very one to charm me, with all its facts
for my Species-book, and truly obliged I am for so kind a remembrance
of me. Do not forget to make enquiries about the origin, even if only
traditionally known, of any varieties of domestic quadrupeds, birds,
silkworms, etc. Are there domestic bees? if so hives ought to be brought
home. Of all the facts you mention, that of the wild [illegible], when
breeding with the domestic, producing offspring somewhat sterile, is the
most surprising: surely they must be different species. Most zoologists
would absolutely disbelieve such a statement, and consider the result as
a proof that they were distinct species. I do not go so far as that,
but the case seems highly improbable. Blyth has studied the Indian
Ruminantia. I have been much struck about what you say of lowland plants
ascending mountains, but the alpine not descending. How I do hope you
will get up some mountains in Borneo; how curious the result will be!
By the way, I never heard from you what affinity the Maldive flora has,
which is cruel, as you tempted me by making me guess. I sometimes groan
over your Indian journey, when I think over all your locked up riches.
When shall I see a memoir on Insular floras, and on the Pacific? What
a grand subject Alpine floras of the world (27/1. Mr. William Botting
Hemsley, F.R.S., of the Royal Gardens, Kew, is now engaged on a
monograph of the high-level Alpine plants of the world.) would be,
as far as known; and then you have never given a coup d'oeil on the
similarity and dissimilarity of Arctic and Antarctic floras. Well, thank
heavens, when you do come back you will be nolens volens a fixture. I am
particularly glad you have been at the Coal; I have often since you went
gone on maundering on the subject, and I shall never rest easy in Down
churchyard without the problem be solved by some one before I die.
Talking of dying makes me tell you that my confounded stomach is much
the same; indeed, of late has been rather worse, but for the last year,
I think, I have been able to do more work. I have done nothing besides
the barnacles, except, indeed, a little theoretical paper on erratic
boulders (27/2. "On the Transportal of Erratic Boulders from a Lower to
a Higher Level" ("Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc." Volume IV., pages 315-23.
1848). In this paper Darwin favours the view that the transport of
boulders was effected by coast-ice. An earlier paper entitled "Notes on
the Effects produced by the ancient Glaciers of Caernarvonshire, and on
the Boulders transported by floating Ice" ("Phil. Mag." 1842, page 352)
is spoken of by Sir Archibald Geikie as standing "almost at the top of
the long list of English contributions to the history of the Ice
Age" ("Charles Darwin," "Nature" Series, page 23).), and Scientific
Geological Instructions for the Admiralty Volume (27/3. "A manual of
Scientific Enquiry, prepared for the use of Her Majesty's Navy, and
adapted for Travellers in General." Edited by Sir John F.W. Herschel,
Bart. Section VI.--Geology--by Charles Darwin. London, 1849. See "Life
and Letters," pages 328-9.), which cost me some trouble. This work,
which is edited by Sir J. Herschel, is a very good job, inasmuch as
the captains of men-of-war will now see that the Admiralty cares for
science, and so will favour naturalists on board. As for a man who is
not scientific by nature, I do not believe instructions will do him any
good; and if he be scientific and good for anything the instructions
will be superfluous. I do not know who does the Botany; Owen does the
Zoology, and I have sent him an account of my new simple microscope,
which I consider perfect, even better than yours by Chevalier. N.B. I
have got a 1/8 inch object-glass, and it is grand. I have been getting
on well with my beloved Cirripedia, and get more skilful in dissection.
I have worked out the nervous system pretty well in several genera,
and made out their ears and nostrils (27/4. For the olfactory sacs see
Darwin's "Monograph of the Cirripedia," 1851, page 52.), which were
quite unknown. I have lately got a bisexual cirripede, the male being
microscopically small and parasitic within the sack of the female. I
tell you this to boast of my species theory, for the nearest closely
allied genus to it is, as usual, hermaphrodite, but I had observed some
minute parasites adhering to it, and these parasites I now can show are
supplemental males, the male organs in the hermaphrodite being unusually
small, though perfect and containing zoosperms: so we have almost a
polygamous animal, simple females alone being wanting. I never should
have made this out, had not my species theory convinced me, that an
hermaphrodite species must pass into a bisexual species by insensibly
small stages; and here we have it, for the male organs in the
hermaphrodite are beginning to fail, and independent males ready formed.
But I can hardly explain what I mean, and you will perhaps wish my
barnacles and species theory al Diavolo together. But I don't care what
you say, my species theory is all gospel. We have had only one party
here: viz., of the Lyells, Forbes, Owen, and Ramsay, and we both missed
you and Falconer very much...I know more of your history than you will
suppose, for Miss Henslow most good-naturedly sent me a packet of your
letters, and she wrote me so nice a little note that it made me quite
proud. I have not heard of anything in the scientific line which
would interest you. Sir H. De la Beche (27/5. The Presidential Address
delivered by De la Beche before the Geological Society in 1848 ("Quart.
Journ. Geol. Soc." Volume IV., "Proceedings," page xxi, 1848).) gave a
very long and rather dull address; the most interesting part was from
Sir J. Ross. Mr. Beete Jukes figured in it very prominently: it really
is a very nice quality in Sir Henry, the manner in which he pushes
forward his subordinates. Jukes has since read what was considered a
very valuable paper. The man, not content with moustaches, now sports
an entire beard, and I am sure thinks himself like Jupiter tonans. There
was a short time since a not very creditable discussion at a meeting
of the Royal Society, where Owen fell foul of Mantell with fury and
contempt about belemnites. What wretched doings come from the order of
fame; the love of truth alone would never make one man attack another
bitterly. My paper is full, so I must wish you with all my heart
farewell. Heaven grant that your health may keep good.


LETTER 28. TO J.S. HENSLOW. The Lodge, Malvern, May 6th, 1849.

Your kind note has been forwarded to me here. You will be surprised to
hear that we all--children, servants, and all--have been here for nearly
two months. All last autumn and winter my health grew worse and worse:
incessant sickness, tremulous hands, and swimming head. I thought I was
going the way of all flesh. Having heard of much success in some cases
from the cold-water cure, I determined to give up all attempts to do
anything and come here and put myself under Dr. Gully. It has answered
to a considerable extent: my sickness much checked and considerable
strength gained. Dr. G., moreover (and I hear he rarely speaks
confidently), tells me he has little doubt but that he can cure me in
the course of time--time, however, it will take. I have experienced
enough to feel sure that the cold-water cure is a great and powerful
agent and upsetter of all constitutional habits. Talking of habits, the
cruel wretch has made me leave off snuff--that chief solace of life. We
thank you most sincerely for your prompt and early invitation to Hitcham
for the British Association for 1850 (28/1. The invitation was probably
not for 1850, but for 1851, when the Association met at Ipswich.): if
I am made well and strong, most gladly will I accept it; but as I have
been hitherto, a drive every day of half a dozen miles would be more
than I could stand with attending any of the sections. I intend going to
Birmingham (28/2. The Association met at Birmingham in 1849.) if able;
indeed, I am bound to attempt it, for I am honoured beyond all measure
in being one of the Vice-Presidents. I am uncommonly glad you will be
there; I fear, however, we shall not have any such charming trips as
Nuneham and Dropmore. (28/3. In a letter to Hooker (October 12th, 1849)
Darwin speaks of "that heavenly day at Dropmore." ("Life and Letters,"
I., page 379.)) We shall stay here till at least June 1st, perhaps till
July 1st; and I shall have to go on with the aqueous treatment at home
for several more months. One most singular effect of the treatment
is that it induces in most people, and eminently in my case, the most
complete stagnation of mind. I have ceased to think even of barnacles!
I heard some time since from Hooker...How capitally he seems to have
succeeded in all his enterprises! You must be very busy now. I happened
to be thinking the other day over the Gamlingay trip to the Lilies
of the Valley (28/4. The Lily of the Valley (Convallaria majalis)
is recorded from Gamlingay by Professor Babington in his "Flora of
Cambridgeshire," page 234. (London, 1860.)): ah, those were delightful
days when one had no such organ as a stomach, only a mouth and the
masticating appurtenances. I am very much surprised at what you say,
that men are beginning to work in earnest [at] Botany. What a loss it
will be for Natural History that you have ceased to reside all the year
in Cambridge!


LETTER 29. TO J.F. ROYLE. Down, September 1st [184-?].

I return you with very many thanks your valuable work. I am sure I
have not lost any slip or disarranged the loose numbers. I have been
interested by looking through the volumes, though I have not found quite
so much as I had thought possible about the varieties of the Indian
domestic animals and plants, and the attempts at introduction have been
too recent for the effects (if any) of climate to have been developed.
I have, however, been astonished and delighted at the evidence of the
energetic attempts to do good by such numbers of people, and most of
them evidently not personally interested in the result. Long may
our rule flourish in India. I declare all the labour shown in
these transactions is enough by itself to make one proud of one's
countrymen...


LETTER 30. TO HUGH STRICKLAND.

(30/1. The first paragraph of this letter is published in the "Life and
Letters," I., page 372, as part of a series of letters to Strickland,
beginning at page 365, where a biographical note by Professor Newton is
also given. Professor Newton wrote: "In 1841 he brought the subject
of Natural History Nomenclature before the British Association, and
prepared the code of rules for Zoological Nomenclature, now known by his
name--the principles of which are very generally accepted." Mr. Darwin's
reasons against appending the describer's name to that of the species
are given in "Life and Letters," page 366. The present letter is
of interest as giving additional details in regard to Darwin's
difficulties.)

Down, February 10th [1849].

I have again to thank you cordially for your letter. Your remarks shall
fructify to some extent, and I will try to be more faithful to rigid
virtue and priority; but as for calling Balanus "Lepas" (which I did
not think of) I cannot do it, my pen won't write it--it is impossible. I
have great hopes some of my difficulties will disappear, owing to wrong
dates in Agassiz and to my having to run several genera into one; for I
have as yet gone, in but few cases, to original sources. With respect to
adopting my own notions in my Cirripedia book, I should not like to do
so without I found others approved, and in some public way; nor indeed
is it well adapted, as I can never recognise a species without I have
the original specimen, which fortunately I have in many cases in the
British Museum. Thus far I mean to adopt my notion, in never putting
mihi or Darwin after my own species, and in the anatomical text giving
no authors' names at all, as the systematic part will serve for those
who want to know the history of the species as far as I can imperfectly
work it out.

I have had a note from W. Thompson (30/2. Mr. Thompson is described in
the preface to the Lepadidae as "the distinguished Natural Historian
of Ireland.") this morning, and he tells me Ogleby has some scheme
identical almost with mine. I feel pretty sure there is a growing
general aversion to the appendage of author's name, except in cases
where necessary. Now at this moment I have seen specimens ticketed with
a specific name and no reference--such are hopelessly inconvenient;
but I declare I would rather (as saving time) have a reference to some
second systematic work than to the original author, for I have cases of
this which hardly help me at all, for I know not where to look amongst
endless periodical foreign papers. On the other hand, one can get hold
of most systematic works and so follow up the scent, and a species does
not long lie buried exclusively in a paper.

I thank you sincerely for your very kind offer of occasionally assisting
me with your opinion, and I will not trespass much. I have a case, but
[it is one] about which I am almost sure; and so to save you writing, if
I conclude rightly, pray do not answer, and I shall understand silence
as assent.

Olfers in 1814 made Lepas aurita Linn. into the genus Conchoderma;
[Oken] in 1815 gave the name Branta to Lepas aurita and vittata, and
by so doing he alters essentially Olfers' generic definition. Oken was
right (as it turns out), and Lepas aurita and vittata must form together
one genus. (30/3. In the "Monograph on the Cirripedia" (Lepadidae) the
names used are Conchoderma aurita and virgata.) (I leave out of question
a multitude of subsequent synonyms.) Now I suppose I must retain
Conchoderma of Olfers. I cannot make out a precise rule in the "British
Association Report" for this. When a genus is cut into two I see that
the old name is retained for part and altered to it; so I suppose the
definition may be enlarged to receive another species--though the cases
are somewhat different. I should have had no doubt if Lepas aurita and
vittata had been made into two genera, for then when run together the
oldest of the two would have been retained. Certainly to put Conchoderma
Olfers is not quite correct when applied to the two species, for such
was not Olfers' definition and opinion. If I do not hear, I shall retain
Conchoderma for the two species...

P.S.--Will you by silence give consent to the following?

Linnaeus gives no type to his genus Lepas, though L. balanus comes
first. Several oldish authors have used Lepas exclusively for the
pedunculate division, and the name has been given to the family and
compounded in sub-generic names. Now, this shows that old authors
attached the name Lepas more particularly to the pedunculate division.
Now, if I were to use Lepas for Anatifera (30/4. Anatifera and Anatifa
were used as generic names for what Linnaeus and Darwin called Lepas
anatifera.) I should get rid of the difficulty of the second edition of
Hill and of the difficulty of Anatifera vel Anatifa. Linnaeus's generic
description is equally applicable to Anatifera and Balanus, though the
latter stands first. Must the mere precedence rigorously outweigh the
apparent opinion of many old naturalists? As for using Lepas in place
of Balanus, I cannot. Every one will understand what is meant by Lepas
Anatifera, so that convenience would be wonderfully thus suited. If I do
not hear, I shall understand I have your consent.


LETTER 31. J.D. HOOKER TO CHARLES DARWIN.

(31/1. In the "Life and Letters," I., page 392, is a letter to Sir J.D.
Hooker from Mr. Darwin, to whom the former had dedicated his "Himalayan
Journals." Mr. Darwin there wrote: "Your letter, received this morning,
has interested me extremely, and I thank you sincerely for telling me
your old thoughts and aspirations." The following is the letter referred
to, which at our request Sir Joseph has allowed us to publish.)

Kew, March 1st, 1854.

Now that my book (31/2. "Himalayan Journals," 2 volumes. London, 1854.)
has been publicly acknowledged to be of some value, I feel bold to
write to you; for, to tell you the truth, I have never been without a
misgiving that the dedication might prove a very bad compliment, however
kindly I knew you would receive it. The idea of the dedication has been
present to me from a very early date: it was formed during the Antarctic
voyage, out of love for your own "Journal," and has never deserted me
since; nor would it, I think, had I never known more of you than by
report and as the author of the said "Naturalist's Journal." Short of
the gratification I felt in getting the book out, I know no greater than
your kind, hearty acceptation of the dedication; and, had the reviewers
gibbeted me, the dedication would alone have given me real pain. I have
no wish to assume a stoical indifference to public opinion, for I am
well alive to it, and the critics might have irritated me sorely, but
they could never have caused me the regret that the association of your
name with a bad book of mine would have.

You will laugh when I tell you that, my book out, I feel past the
meridian of life! But you do not know how from my earliest childhood I
nourished and cherished the desire to make a creditable journey in a new
country, and write such a respectable account of its natural features as
should give me a niche amongst the scientific explorers of the globe
I inhabit, and hand my name down as a useful contributor of original
matter. A combination of most rare advantages has enabled me to gain
as much of my object as contents me, for I never wished to be greatest
amongst you, nor did rivalry ever enter my thoughts. No ulterior object
has ever been present to me in this pursuit. My ambition is fully
gratified by the satisfactory completion of my task, and I am now happy
to go on jog-trot at Botany till the end of my days--downhill, in one
sense, all the way. I shall never have such another object to work for,
nor shall I feel the want of it...As it is, the craving of thirty
years is satisfied, and I now look back on life in a way I never could
previously. There never was a past hitherto to me. The phantom was
always in view; mayhap it is only a "ridiculus mus" after all, but it is
big enough for me...


(PLATE: T.H. HUXLEY, 1857. Maull & Polyblank photo., Walker & Cockerell
ph. sc.)

(32/1. The story of Huxley's life has been fully given in the
interesting biography edited by Mr. Leonard Huxley. (32/2. "Life and
Letters of Thomas Henry Huxley." London 1900.) Readers of this book and
of the "Life and Letters of Charles Darwin" gain an insight into the
relationship between this pair of friends to which any words of ours can
add but little. Darwin realised to the full the essential strength of
Mr. Huxley's nature; he knew, as all the world now knows, the delicate
sense of honour of his friend, and he was ever inclined to lean on his
guidance in practical matters, as on an elder brother. Of Mr. Huxley's
dialectical and literary skill he was an enthusiastic admirer, and
he never forgot what his theories owed to the fighting powers of his
"general agent." (32/3. Ibid., I., page 171.) Huxley's estimate of
Darwin is very interesting: he valued him most highly for what was so
strikingly characteristic of himself--the love of truth. He spoke of
finding in him "something bigger than ordinary humanity--an unequalled
simplicity and directness of purpose--a sublime unselfishness." (32/4.
Ibid., II., page 94. Huxley is speaking of Gordon's death, and goes on:
"Of all the people whom I have met with in my life, he and Darwin are
the two in whom I have found," etc.) The same point of view comes out in
Huxley's estimate of Darwin's mental power. (32/5. Ibid., II., page
39.) "He had a clear, rapid intelligence, a great memory, a vivid
imagination, and what made his greatness was the strict subordination of
all these to his love of truth." This, as an analysis of Darwin's mental
equipment, seems to us incomplete, though we do not pretend to mend
it. We do not think it is possible to dissect and label the complex
qualities which go to make up that which we all recognise as genius.
But, if we may venture to criticise, we would say that Mr. Huxley's
words do not seem to cover that supreme power of seeing and thinking
what the rest of the world had overlooked, which was one of Darwin's
most striking characteristics. As throwing light on the quality of their
friendship, we give below a letter which has already appeared in the
"Life and Letters of T.H. Huxley," I., page 366. Mr. L. Huxley gives an
account of the breakdown in health which convinced Huxley's friends that
rest and relief from anxiety must be found for him. Mr. L. Huxley aptly
remarks of the letter, "It is difficult to say whether it does more
honour to him who sent it or to him who received it." (32/6. Huxley's
"Life," I., page 366. Mr. Darwin left to Mr. Huxley a legacy of 1,000
pounds, "as a slight memorial of my lifelong affection and respect for
him."))


LETTER 32. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, April 23rd, 1873.

My dear Huxley

I have been asked by some of your friends (eighteen in number) to inform
you that they have placed, through Robarts, Lubbock & Co., the sum
of 2,100 pounds to your account at your bankers. We have done this
to enable you to get such complete rest as you may require for the
re-establishment of your health; and in doing this we are convinced that
we act for the public interest, as well as in accordance with our most
earnest desires. Let me assure you that we are all your warm personal
friends, and that there is not a stranger or mere acquaintance amongst
us. If you could have heard what was said, or could have read what
was, as I believe, our inmost thoughts, you would know that we all feel
towards you, as we should to an honoured and much loved brother. I am
sure that you will return this feeling, and will therefore be glad to
give us the opportunity of aiding you in some degree, as this will be a
happiness to us to the last day of our lives. Let me add that our plan
occurred to several of your friends at nearly the same time and quite
independently of one another.

My dear Huxley, Your affectionate friend, CHARLES DARWIN.


LETTER 33. TO T.H. HUXLEY.

(33/1. The following letter is one of the earliest of the long series
addressed to Mr. Huxley.)

Down, April 23rd [1854].

My dear Sir

I have got out all the specimens, which I have thought could by any
possibility be of any use to you; but I have not looked at them, and
know not what state they are in, but should be much pleased if they are
of the smallest use to you. I enclose a catalogue of habitats: I thought
my notes would have turned out of more use. I have copied out such few
points as perhaps would not be apparent in preserved specimens. The
bottle shall go to Mr. Gray on Thursday next by our weekly carrier.

I am very much obliged for your paper on the Mollusca (33/2. The paper
of Huxley's is "On the Morphology of the Cephalous Mollusca, etc."
("Phil. Trans. R. Soc." Volume 143, Part I., 1853, page 29.)); I have
read it all with much interest: but it would be ridiculous in me to make
any remarks on a subject on which I am so utterly ignorant; but I can
see its high importance. The discovery of the type or "idea" (33/3.
Huxley defines his use of the word "archetype" at page 50: "All that I
mean is the conception of a form embodying the most general propositions
that can be affirmed respecting the Cephalous Mollusca, standing in the
same relation to them as the diagram to a geometrical theorem, and like
it, at once, imaginary and true.") (in your sense, for I detest the word
as used by Owen, Agassiz & Co.) of each great class, I cannot doubt,
is one of the very highest ends of Natural History; and certainly most
interesting to the worker-out. Several of your remarks have interested
me: I am, however, surprised at what you say versus "anamorphism" (33/4.
The passage referred to is at page 63: "If, however, all Cephalous
Mollusks...be only modifications by excess or defect of the parts of
a definite archetype, then, I think, it follows as a necessary
consequence, that no anamorphism takes place in this group. There is
no progression from a lower to a higher type, but merely a more or
less complete evolution of one type." Huxley seems to use the term
anamorphism in a sense differing from that of some writers. Thus in
Jourdan's "Dictionnaire des Termes Usites dans les Sciences Naturelles,"
1834, it is defined as the production of an atypical form either by
arrest or excess of development.), I should have thought that the
archetype in imagination was always in some degree embryonic, and
therefore capable [of] and generally undergoing further development.

Is it not an extraordinary fact, the great difference in position of the
heart in different species of Cleodora? (33/5. A genus of Pteropods.) I
am a believer that when any part, usually constant, differs considerably
in different allied species that it will be found in some degree
variable within the limits of the same species. Thus, I should expect
that if great numbers of specimens of some of the species of Cleodora
had been examined with this object in view, the position of the heart in
some of the species would have been found variable. Can you aid me with
any analogous facts?

I am very much pleased to hear that you have not given up the idea of
noticing my cirripedial volume. All that I have seen since confirms
everything of any importance stated in that volume--more especially I
have been able rigorously to confirm in an anomalous species, by the
clearest evidence, that the actual cellular contents of the ovarian
tubes, by the gland-like action of a modified portion of the continuous
tube, passes into the cementing stuff: in fact cirripedes make glue out
of their own unformed eggs! (33/6. On Darwin's mistake in this point see
"Life and Letters," III., page 2.)

Pray believe me, Yours sincerely, C. DARWIN.

I told the above case to Milne Edwards, and I saw he did not place the
smallest belief in it.


LETTER 34. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, September 2nd, [1854].

My second volume on the everlasting barnacles is at last published
(34/1. "A Monograph of the Sub-class Cirripedia. II. The Balanidae, the
Verrucidae." Ray Society, 1854.), and I will do myself the pleasure of
sending you a copy to Jermyn Street next Thursday, as I have to send
another book then to Mr. Baily.

And now I want to ask you a favour--namely, to answer me two questions.
As you are so perfectly familiar with the doings, etc., of all
Continental naturalists, I want you to tell me a few names of those
whom you think would care for my volume. I do not mean in the light of
puffing my book, but I want not to send copies to those who from other
studies, age, etc., would view it as waste paper. From assistance
rendered me, I consider myself bound to send copies to: (1) Bosquet of
Maestricht, (2) Milne Edwards, (3) Dana, (4) Agassiz, (5) Muller, (6)
W. Dunker of Hesse Cassel. Now I have five or six other copies to
distribute, and will you be so very kind as to help me? I had thought of
Von Siebold, Loven, d'Orbigny, Kolliker, Sars, Kroyer, etc., but I know
hardly anything about any of them.

My second question, it is merely a chance whether you can answer,--it is
whether I can send these books or any of them (in some cases accompanied
by specimens), through the Royal Society: I have some vague idea of
having heard that the Royal Society did sometimes thus assist members.

I have just been reading your review of the "Vestiges" (34/2. In his
chapter on the "Reception of the Origin of Species" ("Life and Letters,"
II., pages 188-9), Mr. Huxley wrote: "and the only review I ever have
qualms of conscience about, on the ground of needless savagery, is one
I wrote on the 'Vestiges.'" The article is in the "British and Foreign
Medico-chirurgical Review," XIII., 1854, page 425. The "great man"
referred to below is Owen: see Huxley's review, page 439, and Huxley's
"Life." I., page 94.), and the way you handle a great Professor is
really exquisite and inimitable. I have been extremely interested in
other parts, and to my mind it is incomparably the best review I have
read on the "Vestiges"; but I cannot think but that you are rather hard
on the poor author. I must think that such a book, if it does no other
good, spreads the taste for Natural Science.

But I am perhaps no fair judge, for I am almost as unorthodox
about species as the "Vestiges" itself, though I hope not quite so
unphilosophical. How capitally you analyse his notion about law. I
do not know when I have read a review which interested me so much. By
Heavens, how the blood must have gushed into the capillaries when a
certain great man (whom with all his faults I cannot help liking) read
it!

I am rather sorry you do not think more of Agassiz's embryological
stages (34/3. See "Origin," Edition VI., page 310: also Letter 40,
Note.), for though I saw how exceedingly weak the evidence was, I was
led to hope in its truth.


LETTER 35. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down [1854].

With respect to "highness" and "lowness," my ideas are only eclectic and
not very clear. It appears to me that an unavoidable wish to compare all
animals with men, as supreme, causes some confusion; and I think that
nothing besides some such vague comparison is intended, or perhaps is
even possible, when the question is whether two kingdoms such as the
Articulata or Mollusca are the highest. Within the same kingdom I am
inclined to think that "highest" usually means that form which has
undergone most "morphological differentiation" from the common embryo or
archetype of the class; but then every now and then one is bothered
(as Milne Edwards has remarked) by "retrograde development," i.e.,
the mature animal having fewer and less important organs than its own
embryo. The specialisation of parts to different functions, or
"the division of physiological labour" (35/1. A slip of the pen for
"physiological division of labour.") of Milne Edwards exactly agrees
(and to my mind is the best definition, when it can be applied)
with what you state is your idea in regard to plants. I do not think
zoologists agree in any definite ideas on this subject; and my ideas are
not clearer than those of my brethren.


LETTER 36. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, July 2nd [1854].

I have had the house full of visitors, and when I talk I can do
absolutely nothing else; and since then I have been poorly enough,
otherwise I should have answered your letter long before this, for I
enjoy extremely discussing such points as those in your last note. But
what a villain you are to heap gratuitous insults on my ELASTIC theory:
you might as well call the virtue of a lady elastic, as the virtue of a
theory accommodating in its favours. Whatever you may say, I feel that
my theory does give me some advantages in discussing these points. But
to business: I keep my notes in such a way, viz., in bulk, that I cannot
possibly lay my hand on any reference; nor as far as the vegetable
kingdom is concerned do I distinctly remember having read any discussion
on general highness or lowness, excepting Schleiden (I fancy) on
Compositae being highest. Ad. de Jussieu (36/1. "Monographie de la
Famille des Malpighiacees," by Adrien de Jussieu, "Arch. du Museum."
Volume III., page 1, 1843.), in "Arch. du Museum," Tome 3, discusses
the value of characters of degraded flowers in the Malpighiaceae, but I
doubt whether this at all concerns you. Mirbel somewhere has discussed
some such question.

Plants lie under an enormous disadvantage in respect to such discussions
in not passing through larval stages. I do not know whether you
can distinguish a plant low from non-development from one low from
degradation, which theoretically, at least, are very distinct. I must
agree with Forbes that a mollusc may be higher than one articulate
animal and lower than another; if one was asked which was highest as a
whole, the Molluscan or Articulate Kingdom, I should look to and compare
the highest in each, and not compare their archetypes (supposing them to
be known, which they are not.)

But there are, in my opinion, more difficult cases than any we have
alluded to, viz., that of fish--but my ideas are not clear enough, and
I do not suppose you would care to hear what I obscurely think on this
subject. As far as my elastic theory goes, all I care about is that very
ancient organisms (when different from existing) should tend to resemble
the larval or embryological stages of the existing.

I am glad to hear what you say about parallelism: I am an utter
disbeliever of any parallelism more than mere accident. It is very
strange, but I think Forbes is often rather fanciful; his "Polarity"
(36/2. See Letter 41, Note.) makes me sick--it is like "magnetism"
turning a table.

If I can think of any one likely to take your "Illustrations" (36/3.
"Illustrations of Himalayan Plants from Drawings made by J.F. Cathcart."
Folio, 1855.), I will send the advertisement. If you want to make up
some definite number so as to go to press, I will put my name down with
PLEASURE (and I hope and believe that you will trust me in saying
so), though I should not in the course of nature subscribe to any
horticultural work:--act for me.


LETTER 37. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, [May] 29th, 1854.

I am really truly sorry to hear about your [health]. I entreat you
to write down your own case,--symptoms, and habits of life,--and then
consider your case as that of a stranger; and I put it to you, whether
common sense would not order you to take more regular exercise and work
your brain less. (N.B. Take a cold bath and walk before breakfast.) I
am certain in the long run you would not lose time. Till you have a
thoroughly bad stomach, you will not know the really great evil of
it, morally, physically, and every way. Do reflect and act resolutely.
Remember your troubled heart-action formerly plainly told how your
constitution was tried. But I will say no more--excepting that a man
is mad to risk health, on which everything, including his children's
inherited health, depends. Do not hate me for this lecture. Really I am
not surprised at your having some headache after Thursday evening, for
it must have been no small exertion making an abstract of all that was
said after dinner. Your being so engaged was a bore, for there were
several things that I should have liked to have talked over with you. It
was certainly a first-rate dinner, and I enjoyed it extremely, far more
than I expected. Very far from disagreeing with me, my London visits
have just lately taken to suit my stomach admirably; I begin to think
that dissipation, high-living, with lots of claret, is what I want,
and what I had during the last visit. We are going to act on this same
principle, and in a very profligate manner have just taken a pair of
season-tickets to see the Queen open the Crystal Palace. (37/1. Queen
Victoria opened the Crystal Palace at Sydenham on June 10th, 1854.) How
I wish there was any chance of your being there! The last grand thing we
were at together answered, I am sure, very well, and that was the Duke's
funeral.

Have you seen Forbes' introductory lecture (37/2. Edward Forbes
was appointed to a Professorship at Edinburgh in May, 1854.) in the
"Scotsman" (lent me by Horner)? it is really ADMIRABLY done, though
without anything, perhaps, very original, which could hardly be
expected: it has given me even a higher opinion than I before had, of
the variety and polish of his intellect. It is, indeed, an irreparable
loss to London natural history society. I wish, however, he would not
praise so much that old brown dry stick Jameson. Altogether, to my
taste, it is much the best introductory lecture I have ever read. I hear
his anniversary address is very good.

Adios, my dear Hooker; do be wise and good, and be careful of your
stomach, within which, as I know full well, lie intellect, conscience,
temper, and the affections.


LETTER 38. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, December 2nd [1854].

You are a pretty fellow to talk of funking the returning thanks at the
dinner for the medal. (38/1. The Royal medal was given to Sir Joseph
in 1854.) I heard that it was decidedly the best speech of the evening,
given "with perfect fluency, distinctness, and command of language," and
that you showed great self-possession: was the latter the proverbially
desperate courage of a coward? But you are a pretty fellow to be so
desperately afraid and then to make the crack speech. Many such an
ordeal may you have to go through! I do not know whether Sir William
[Hooker] would be contented with Lord Rosse's (38/2. President of the
Royal Society 1848-54.) speech on giving you the medal; but I am very
much pleased with it, and really the roll of what you have done was,
I think, splendid. What a great pity he half spoiled it by not having
taken the trouble just to read it over first. Poor Hofmann (38/3. August
Wilhelm Hofmann, the other medallist of 1854.) came off in this respect
even worse. It is really almost arrogant insolence against every one not
an astronomer.

The next morning I was at a very pleasant breakfast party at Sir R.
Inglis's. (38/4. Sir Robert Inglis, President of the British Association
in 1847. Apparently Darwin was present at the afternoon meeting, but
not at the dinner.) I have received, with very many thanks, the aberrant
genera; but I have not had time to consider them, nor your remarks on
Australian botanical geography.


LETTER 39. TO T.H. HUXLEY.

(39/1. The following letter shows Darwin's interest in the adjudication
of the Royal medals. The year 1855 was the last during which he served
on the Council of the Society. He had previously served in 1849-50.)

Down, March 31st, 1855.

I have thought and enquired much about Westwood, and I really think he
amply deserves the gold medal. But should you think of some one with
higher claim I am quite ready to give up. Indeed, I suppose without I
get some one to second it, I cannot propose him.

Will you be so kind as to read the enclosed, and return it to me? Should
I send it to Bell? That is, without you demur or convince me. I had
thought of Hancock, a higher class of labourer; but, as far as I can
weigh, he has not, as yet, done so much as Westwood. I may state that I
read the whole "Classification" (39/2. Possibly Westwood's "Introduction
to the Modern Classification of Insects" (1839).) before I was on the
Council, and ever thought on the subject of medals. I fear my remarks
are rather lengthy, but to do him justice I could not well shorten them.
Pray tell me frankly whether the enclosed is the right sort of thing,
for though I was once on the Council of the Royal, I never attended any
meetings, owing to bad health.

With respect to the Copley medal (39/3. The Copley Medal was given to
Lyell in 1858.), I have a strong feeling that Lyell has a high claim,
but as he has had the Royal Medal I presume that it would be thought
objectionable to propose him; and as I intend (you not objecting and
converting me) to propose W. for the Royal, it would, of course, appear
intolerably presumptuous to propose for the Copley also.


LETTER 40. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, June 10th, 1855.

Shall you attend the Council of the Royal Society on Thursday next? I
have not been very well of late, and I doubt whether I can attend; and
if I could do anything (pray conceal the scandalous fact), I want to
go to the Crystal Palace to meet the Horners, Lyells, and a party. So I
want to know whether you will speak for me most strongly for Barrande.
You know better than I do his admirable labours on the development of
trilobites, and his most important work on his Lower or Primordial Zone.
I enclose an old note of Lyell's to show what he thinks. With respect to
Dana, whom I also proposed, you know well his merits. I can speak most
highly of his classificatory work on crustacea and his Geographical
Distribution. His Volcanic Geology is admirable, and he has done much
good work on coral reefs.

If you attend, do not answer this; but if you cannot be at the Council,
please inform me, and I suppose I must, if I can, attend.

Thank you for your abstract of your lecture at the Royal Institution,
which interested me much, and rather grieved me, for I had hoped things
had been in a slight degree otherwise. (40/1. "On certain Zoological
Arguments commonly adduced in favour of the hypothesis of the
Progressive Development of Animal Life," Discourse, Friday, April 20,
1855: "Proceedings R.I." (1855). Published also in "Huxley's Scientific
Memoirs." The lecturer dwelt chiefly on the argument of Agassiz, which
he summarises as follows: "Homocercal fishes have in their embryonic
state heterocercal tails; therefore heterocercality is, so far, a mark
of an embryonic state as compared with homocercality, and the earlier
heterocercal fish are embryonic as compared with the later homocercal."
He shows that facts do not support this view, and concludes generally
"that there is no real parallel between the successive forms assumed in
the development of the life of the individual at present and those which
have appeared at different epochs in the past.") I heard some time ago
that before long I might congratulate you on becoming a married man.
(40/2. Mr. Huxley was married July 21st, 1855.) From my own experience
of some fifteen years, I am very sure that there is nothing in this
wide world which more deserves congratulation, and most sincerely and
heartily do I congratulate you, and wish you many years of as much
happiness as this world can afford.


LETTER 41. TO J.D. HOOKER.

(41/1. The following letter illustrates Darwin's work on aberrant
genera. In the "Origin," Edition I., page 429, he wrote: "The more
aberrant any form is, the greater must be the number of connecting forms
which, on my theory, have been exterminated and utterly lost. And we
have some evidence of aberrant forms having suffered severely from
extinction, for they are generally represented by extremely few species;
and such species as do occur are generally very distinct from each
other, which again implies extinction.")

Down, November 15th [1855?].

In Schoenherr's Catalogue of Curculionidae (41/2. "Genera et Species
Curculionidum." (C.J. Schoenherr: Paris, 1833-38.)), the 6,717 species
are on an average 10.17 to a genus. Waterhouse (who knows the group
well, and who has published on fewness of species in aberrant genera)
has given me a list of 62 aberrant genera, and these have on an average
7.6 species; and if one single genus be removed (and which I cannot yet
believe ought to be considered aberrant), then the 61 aberrant genera
would have only 4.91 species on an average. I tested these results in
another way. I found in Schoenherr 9 families, including only 11 genera,
and these genera (9 of which were in Waterhouse's list) I found included
only 3.36 species on an average.

This last result led me to Lindley's "Vegetable Kingdom," in which I
found (excluding thallogens and acrogens) that the genera include each
10.46 species (how near by chance to the Curculionidae), and I find 21
orders including single genera, and these 21 genera have on average 7.95
species; but if Lindley is right that Erythroxylon (with its 75 species)
ought to be amongst the Malpighiads, then the average would be only 4.6
per genus.

But here comes, as it appears to me, an odd thing (I hope I shall not
quite weary you out). There are 29 other orders, each with 2 genera,
and these 58 genera have on an average 15.07 species: this great number
being owing to the 10 genera in the Smilaceae, Salicaceae (with 220
species), Begoniaceae, Balsaminaceae, Grossulariaceae, without which the
remaining 48 genera have on an average only 5.91 species.

This case of the orders with only 2 genera, the genera notwithstanding
having 15.07 species each, seems to me very perplexing and upsets,
almost, the conclusion deducible from the orders with single genera.

I have gone higher, and tested the alliances with 1, 2, and 3 orders;
and in these cases I find both the genera few in each alliance, and the
species, less than the average of the whole kingdom, in each genus.

All this has amused me, but I daresay you will have a good sneer at me,
and tell me to stick to my barnacles. By the way, you agree with me that
sometimes one gets despondent--for instance, when theory and facts will
not harmonise; but what appears to me even worse, and makes me despair,
is, when I see from the same great class of facts, men like Barrande
deduce conclusions, such as his "Colonies" (41/3. Lyell briefly refers
to Barrande's Bohemian work in a letter (August 31st, 1856) to Fleming
("Life of Sir Charles Lyell," II., page 225): "He explained to me on the
spot his remarkable discovery of a 'colony' of Upper Silurian fossils,
3,400 feet deep, in the midst of the Lower Silurian group. This has made
a great noise, but I think I can explain away the supposed anomaly by,
etc." (See Letter 40, Note.) and his agreement with E. de Beaumont's
lines of Elevation, or such men as Forbes with his Polarity (41/4.
Edward Forbes "On the Manifestation of Polarity in the Distribution of
Organised Beings in Time" ("Edinburgh New Phil. Journal," Volume LVII.,
1854, page 332). The author points out that "the maximum development
of generic types during the Palaeozoic period was during its earlier
epochs; that during the Neozoic period towards its later periods." Thus
the two periods of activity are conceived to be at the two opposite
poles of a sphere which in some way represents for him the system of
Nature.); I have not a doubt that before many months are over I shall
be longing for the most dishonest species as being more honest than the
honestest theories. One remark more. If you feel any interest, or can
get any one else to feel any interest on the aberrant genera question,
I should think the most interesting way would be to take aberrant genera
in any great natural family, and test the average number of species to
the genera in that family.

How I wish we lived near each other! I should so like a talk with you on
geographical distribution, taken in its greatest features. I have been
trying from land productions to take a very general view of the world,
and I should so like to see how far it agrees with plants.


LETTER 42. TO MRS. LYELL.

(42/1. Mrs. Lyell is a daughter of the late Mr. Leonard Horner, and
widow of Lieut.-Col. Lyell, a brother of Sir Charles.)

Down, January 26th [1856].

I shall be very glad to be of any sort of use to you in regard to the
beetles. But first let me thank you for your kind note and offer of
specimens to my children. My boys are all butterfly hunters; and all
young and ardent lepidopterists despise, from the bottom of their souls,
coleopterists.

The simplest plan for your end and for the good of entomology, I should
think, would be to offer the collection to Dr. J.E. Gray for the British
Museum on condition that a perfect set was made out for you. If the
collection was at all valuable, I should think he would be very glad to
have this done. Whether any third set would be worth making out would
depend on the value of the collection. I do not suppose that you expect
the insects to be named, for that would be a most serious labour. If you
do not approve of this scheme, I should think it very likely that Mr.
Waterhouse would think it worth his while to set a series for you,
retaining duplicates for himself; but I say this only on a venture.
You might trust Mr. Waterhouse implicitly, which I fear, as [illegible]
goes, is more than can be said for all entomologists. I presume, if
you thought of either scheme, Sir Charles Lyell could easily see the
gentlemen and arrange it; but, if not, I could do so when next I come to
town, which, however, will not be for three or four weeks.

With respect to giving your children a taste for Natural History, I will
venture one remark--viz., that giving them specimens in my opinion would
tend to destroy such taste. Youngsters must be themselves collectors
to acquire a taste; and if I had a collection of English lepidoptera, I
would be systematically most miserly, and not give my boys half a dozen
butterflies in the year. Your eldest has the brow of an observer, if
there be the least truth in phrenology. We are all better, but we have
been of late a poor household.


LETTER 43. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down [1855].

I should have less scruple in troubling you if I had any confidence
what my work would turn out. Sometimes I think it will be good, at
other times I really feel as much ashamed of myself as the author of the
"Vestiges" ought to be of himself. I know well that your kindness and
friendship would make you do a great deal for me, but that is no reason
that I should be unreasonable. I cannot and ought not to forget that all
your time is employed in work certain to be valuable. It is superfluous
in me to say that I enjoy exceedingly writing to you, and that your
answers are of the greatest possible service to me. I return with
many thanks the proof on Aquilegia (43/1. This seems to refer to
the discussion on the genus Aquilegia in Hooker and Thomson's "Flora
Indica," 1855, Volume I., Systematic Part, page 44. The authors'
conclusion is that "all the European and many of the Siberian forms
generally recognised belong to one very variable species." With regard
to cirripedes, Mr. Darwin spoke of "certain just perceptible differences
which blend together and constitute varieties and not species" ("Life
and Letters," I., page 379).): it has interested me much. It is exactly
like my barnacles; but for my particular purpose, most unfortunately,
both Kolreuter and Gartner have worked chiefly on A. vulgaris and
canadensis and atro-purpurea, and these are just the species that you
seem not to have studied. N.B. Why do you not let me buy the Indian
Flora? You are too magnificent.

Now for a short ride on my chief (at present) hobbyhorse, viz. aberrant
genera. What you say under your remarks on Lepidodendron seems just the
case that I want, to give some sort of evidence of what we both believe
in, viz. how groups came to be anomalous or aberrant; and I think some
sort of proof is required, for I do not believe very many naturalists
would at all admit our view.

Thank you for the caution on large anomalous genera first catching
attention. I do not quite agree with your "grave objection to the whole
process," which is "that if you multiply the anomalous species by 100,
and divide the normal by the same, you will then reverse the names..."
For, to take an example, Ornithorhynchus and Echidna would not be less
aberrant if each had a dozen (I do not say 100, because we have no such
cases in the animal kingdom) species instead of one. What would really
make these two genera less anomalous would be the creation of many
genera and sub-families round and radiating from them on all sides.
Thus if Australia were destroyed, Didelphys in S. America would be
wonderfully anomalous (this is your case with Proteaceae), whereas now
there are so many genera and little sub-families of Marsupiata that the
group cannot be called aberrant or anomalous. Sagitta (and the earwig)
is one of the most anomalous animals in the world, and not a bit the
less because there are a dozen species. Now, my point (which, I think is
a slightly new point of view) is, if it is extinction which has made the
genus anomalous, as a general rule the same causes of extinction would
allow the existence of only a few species in such genera. Whenever we
meet (which will be on the 23rd [at the] Club) I shall much like to hear
whether this strikes you as sound. I feel all the time on the borders of
a circle of truism. Of course I could not think of such a request,
but you might possibly:--if Bentham does not think the whole subject
rubbish, ask him some time to pick out the dozen most anomalous genera
in the Leguminosae, or any great order of which there is a monograph by
which I could calculate the ordinary percentage of species to genera. I
am the more anxious, as the more I enquire, the fewer are the cases
in which it can be done. It cannot be done in birds, or, I fear, in
mammifers. I doubt much whether in any other class of insects [other
than Curculionidae].

I saw your nice notice of poor Forbes in the "Gardeners' Chronicle,"
and I see in the "Athenaeum" a notice of meeting on last Saturday of his
friends. Of course I shall wish to subscribe as soon as possible to any
memorial...

I have just been testing practically what disuse does in reducing
parts. I have made [skeletons] of wild and tame duck (oh the smell of
well-boiled, high duck!), and I find the tame duck ought, according to
scale of wild prototype, to have its two wings 360 grains in weight; but
it has only 317, or 43 grains too little, or 1/7 of [its] own two wings
too little in weight. This seems rather interesting to me. (43/2. On
the conclusions drawn from these researches, see Mr. Platt Ball, "The
Effects of Use and Disuse" (Nature Series), 1890, page 55. With regard
to his pigeons, Darwin wrote, in November 1855: "I love them to that
extent that I cannot bear to kill and skeletonise them.")

P.S.--I do not know whether you will think this worth reading over. I
have worked it out since writing my letter, and tabulate the whole.

21 orders with 1 genus, having 7.95 species (or 4.6?).

29 orders with 2 genera, having 15.05 species on an average.

23 orders each with 3 genera, and these genera include on an average 8.2
species.

20 orders each with 4 genera, and these genera include on an average
12.2 species.

27 orders each with above 50 genera (altogether 4716 genera), and these
genera on an average have 9.97 species.

From this I conclude, whether there be many or few genera in an order,
the number of species in a genus is not much affected; but perhaps when
[there is] only one genus in an order it will be affected, and this will
depend whether the [genus] Erythroxylon be made a family of.


LETTER 44. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, April 8th [1856].

I have been particularly glad to get your splendid eloge of Lindley. His
name had been lately passing through my head, and I had hoped that Miers
would have proposed him for the Royal medal. I most entirely agree that
the Copley (44/1. The late Professor Lindley never attained the honour
of the Copley medal. The Royal medal was awarded to him in 1857.) is
more appropriate, and I daresay he would not have valued the Royal. From
skimming through many botanical books, and from often consulting the
"Vegetable Kingdom," I had (ignorant as I am) formed the highest opinion
of his claims as a botanist. If Sharpey will stick up strong for him,
we should have some chance; but the natural sciences are but feebly
represented in the Council. Sir P. Egerton, I daresay, would be strong
for him. You know Bell is out. Now, my only doubt is, and I hope that
you will consider this, that the natural sciences being weak on the
Council, and (I fancy) the most powerful man in the Council, Col.
S[abine], being strong against Lindley, whether we should have any
chance of succeeding. It would be so easy to name some eminent man whose
name would be well-known to all the physicists. Would Lindley hear of
and dislike being proposed for the Copley and not succeeding? Would it
not be better on this view to propose him for the Royal? Do think of
this. Moreover, if Lindley is not proposed for the Royal, I fear both
Royal medals would go [to] physicists; for I, for one, should not like
to propose another zoologist, though Hancock would be a very good man,
and I fancy there would be a feeling against medals to two botanists.
But for whatever Lindley is proposed, I will do my best. We will talk
this over here.


LETTER 45. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, May 9th [1856].

...With respect to Huxley, I was on the point of speaking to Crawford
and Strezlecki (who will be on Committee of the Athenaeum) when I
bethought me of how Owen would look and what he would say. Cannot you
fancy him, with slow and gentle voice, asking "Will Mr. Crawford tell
me what Mr. Huxley has done, deserving this honour; I only know that
he differs from, and disputes the authority of Cuvier, Ehrenberg, and
Agassiz as of no weight at all." And when I began to tell Mr. Crawford
what to say, I was puzzled, and could refer him only to some excellent
papers in the "Phil. Trans." for which the medal had been awarded. But
I doubt, with an opposing faction, whether this would be considered
enough, for I believe real scientific merit is not thought enough,
without the person is generally well known. Now I want to hear what you
deliberately think on this head: it would be bad to get him proposed and
then rejected; and Owen is very powerful.


LETTER 46. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down [1856].

I have got the Lectures, and have read them. (46/1. The reference is
presumably to the Royal Institution Lectures given in 1854-56. Those
which we have seen--namely, those reprinted in the "Scientific Memoirs,"
Volume I.--"On the Common Plan of Animal Form," page 281; "On certain
Zoological Arguments, etc." page 300; "On Natural History as Knowledge,
Discipline, and Power," page 305, do not seem to us to contain anything
likely to offend; but Falconer's attack in the "Ann. and Mag. of Nat.
Hist." June 1856, on the last-named lecture, shows strong feeling. A
reply by Mr. Huxley appeared in the July number of the same Journal. The
most heretical discussion from a modern standpoint is at page 311, where
he asks how it is conceivable that the bright colours of butterflies and
shells or the elegant forms of Foraminifera can possibly be of service
to their possessors; and it is this which especially struck Darwin,
judging by the pencil notes on his copy of the Lecture.) Though I
believe, as far as my knowledge goes, that Huxley is right, yet I think
his tone very much too vehement, and I have ventured to say so in a
note to Huxley. I had not thought of these lectures in relation to the
Athenaeum (46/2. Mr. Huxley was in 1858 elected to the Athenaeum Club
under Rule 2, which provides for the annual election of "a certain
number of persons of distinguished eminence in science, literature, or
the arts, or for public services."), but I am inclined quite to agree
with you, and that we had better pause before anything is said...(N.B.
I found Falconer very indignant at the manner in which Huxley treated
Cuvier in his Royal Institution lectures; and I have gently told Huxley
so.) I think we had better do nothing: to try in earnest to get a great
naturalist into the Athenaeum and fail, is far worse than doing nothing.

How strange, funny, and disgraceful that nearly all (Faraday and Sir J.
Herschel at least exceptions) our great men are in quarrels in couplets;
it never struck me before...


LETTER 47. C. LYELL TO CHARLES DARWIN.

(47/1. In the "Life and Letters," II., page 72, is given a letter (June
16th, 1856) to Lyell, in which Darwin exhales his indignation over
the "extensionists" who created continents ad libitum to suit the
convenience of their theories. On page 74 a fuller statement of his
views is given in a letter dated June 25th. We have not seen Lyell's
reply to this, but his reply to Darwin's letter of June 16th is extant,
and is here printed for the first time.)

53, Harley Street, London, June 17th, 1856.

I wonder you did not also mention D. Sharpe's paper (47/2. "On the Last
Elevation of the Alps, etc." ("Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc." Volume XII.,
1856, page 102.), just published, by which the Alps were submerged
as far as 9,000 feet of their present elevation above the sea in the
Glacial period and then since uplifted again. Without admitting this,
you would probably convey the alpine boulders to the Jura by marine
currents, and if so, make the Alps and Jura islands in the glacial sea.
And would not the Glacial theory, as now very generally understood,
immerse as much of Europe as I did in my original map of Europe, when I
simply expressed all the area which at some time or other had been under
water since the commencement of the Eocene period? I almost suspect the
glacial submergence would exceed it.

But would not this be a measure of the movement in every other
area, northern (arctic), antarctic, or tropical, during an equal
period--oceanic or continental? For the conversion of sea into land
would always equal the turning of much land into sea.

But all this would be done in a fraction of the Pliocene period; the
Glacial shells are barely 1 per cent. extinct species. Multiply this by
the older Pliocene and Miocene epochs.

You also forget an author who, by means of atolls, contrived to submerge
archipelagoes (or continents?), the mountains of which must originally
have differed from each other in height 8,000 (or 10,000?) feet, so
that they all just rose to the surface at one level, or their sites are
marked by buoys of coral. I could never feel sure whether he meant
this tremendous catastrophe, all brought about by what Sedgwick called
"Lyell's niggling operations," to have been effected during the era of
existing species of corals. Perhaps you can tell me, for I am really
curious to know...(47/3. The author referred to is of course Darwin.)

Now, although there is nothing in my works to warrant the building up
of continents in the Atlantic and Pacific even since the Eocene period,
yet, as some of the rocks in the central Alps are in part Eocene, I
begin to think that all continents and oceans may be chiefly, if not
all, post-Eocene, and Dana's "Atlantic Ocean" of the Lower Silurian is
childish (see the Anniversary Address, 1856). (47/4. Probably Dana's
Anniversary Address to the "American Association for the Advancement of
Science," published in the "Proceedings" 1856.) But how far you are at
liberty to call up continents from "the vasty deep" as often as you
want to convey a Helix from the United States to Europe in Miocene or
Pliocene periods is a question; for the ocean is getting deeper of late,
and Haughton says the mean depth is eleven miles! by his late paper
on tides. (47/5. "On the Depth of the Sea deducible from Tidal
Observations" ("Proc. Irish Acad." Volume VI., page 354, 1853-54).) I
shall be surprised if this turns out true by soundings.

I thought your mind was expanding so much in regard to time that
you would have been going ahead in regard to the possibility of
mountain-chains being created in a fraction of the period required to
convert a swan into a goose, or vice versa. Nine feet did the Rimutaka
chain of New Zealand gain in height in January, 1855, and a great
earthquake has occurred in New Zealand every seven years for half
a century nearly. The "Washingtonia" (Californian conifer) (47/6.
Washingtonia, or Wellingtonia, better known as Sequoia. Asa Gray,
writing in 1872, states his belief that "no Sequoia now alive can
sensibly antedate the Christian era" ("Scientific Papers," II., page
144).) lately exhibited was four thousand years old, so that one
individual might see a chain of hills rise, and rise with it, much
[more] a species--and those islands which J. Hooker describes as covered
with New Zealand plants three hundred (?) miles to the N.E. (?) of New
Zealand may have been separated from the mainland two or three or four
generations of Washingtonia ago.

If the identity of the land-shells of all the hundreds of British Isles
be owing to their having been united since the Glacial period, and the
discordance, almost total, of the shells of Porto Santo and Madeira be
owing to their having been separated [during] all the newer and possibly
older Pliocene periods, then it gives us a conception of time which will
aid you much in your conversion of species, if immensity of time will do
all you require; for the Glacial period is thus shown, as we might have
anticipated, to be contemptible in duration or in distance from us,
as compared to the older Pliocene, let alone the Miocene, when our
contemporary species were, though in a minority, already beginning to
flourish.

The littoral shells, according to MacAndrew, imply that Madeira and the
Canaries were once joined to the mainland of Europe or Africa, but that
those isles were disjoined so long ago that most of the species came
in since. In short, the marine shells tell the same story as the land
shells. Why do the plants of Porto Santo and Madeira agree so nearly?
And why do the shells which are the same as European or African species
remain quite unaltered, like the Crag species, which returned unchanged
to the British seas after being expelled from them by glacial cold,
when two millions (?) of years had elapsed, and after such migration to
milder seas? Be so good as to explain all this in your next letter.


LETTER 48. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, July 5th [1856].

I write this morning in great tribulation about Tristan d'Acunha. (48/1.
See "Flora Antarctica," page 216. Though Tristan d'Acunha is "only 1,000
miles distant from the Cape of Good Hope, and 3,000 from the Strait of
Magalhaens, the botany of this island is far more intimately allied to
that of Fuegia than Africa.") The more I reflect on your Antarctic flora
the more I am astounded. You give all the facts so clearly and fully,
that it is impossible to help speculating on the subject; but it drives
me to despair, for I cannot gulp down your continent; and not being able
to do so gives, in my eyes, the multiple creationists an awful triumph.
It is a wondrous case, and how strange that A. De Candolle should have
ignored it; which he certainly has, as it seems to me. I wrote Lyell a
long geological letter (48/2. "Life and Letters," II., page 74.) about
continents, and I have had a very long and interesting answer; but
I cannot in the least gather his opinion about all your continental
extensionists; and I have written again beseeching a verdict. (48/3.
In the tenth edition of the "Principles," 1872, Lyell added a chapter
(Chapter XLI., page 406) on insular floras and faunas in relation to the
origin of species; he here (page 410) gives his reasons against Forbes
as an extensionist.) I asked him to send to you my letter, for as it
was well copied it would not be troublesome to read; but whether worth
reading I really do not know; I have given in it the reasons which make
me strongly opposed to continental extensions.

I was very glad to get your note some days ago: I wish you would think
it worth while, as you intend to have the Laburnum case translated, to
write to "Wien" (that unknown place) (48/4. There is a tradition that
Darwin once asked Hooker where "this place Wien is, where they publish
so many books."), and find out how the Laburnum has been behaving: it
really ought to be known.

The Entada is a beast. (48/5. The large seeds of Entada scandens are
occasionally floated across the Atlantic and cast on the shores of
Europe.); I have never differed from you about the growth of a plant in
a new island being a FAR harder trial than transportal, though certainly
that seems hard enough. Indeed I suspect I go even further than you in
this respect; but it is too long a story.

Thank you for the Aristolochia and Viscum cases: what species were
they? I ask, because oddly these two very genera I have seen advanced
as instances (I forget at present by whom, but by good men) in which
the agency of insects was absolutely necessary for impregnation. In
our British dioecious Viscum I suppose it must be necessary. Was there
anything to show that the stigma was ready for pollen in these two
cases? for it seems that there are many cases in which pollen is shed
long before the stigma is ready. As in our Viscum, insects carry,
sufficiently regularly for impregnation, pollen from flower to flower,
I should think that there must be occasional crosses even in an
hermaphrodite Viscum. I have never heard of bees and butterflies, only
moths, producing fertile eggs without copulation.

With respect to the Ray Society, I profited so enormously by its
publishing my Cirrepedia, that I cannot quite agree with you on
confining it to translations; I know not how else I could possibly have
published.

I have just sent in my name for 20 pounds to the Linnaean Society, but
I must confess I have done it with heavy groans, whereas I daresay you
gave your 20 pounds like a light-hearted gentleman...

P.S. Wollaston speaks strongly about the intermediate grade between
two varieties in insects and mollusca being often rarer than the two
varieties themselves. This is obviously very important for me, and
not easy to explain. I believe I have had cases from you. But, if you
believe in this, I wish you would give me a sentence to quote from
you on this head. There must, I think, be a good deal of truth in it;
otherwise there could hardly be nearly distinct varieties under any
species, for we should have instead a blending series, as in brambles
and willows.


LETTER 49. TO J.D. HOOKER. July 13th, 1856.

What a book a devil's chaplain might write on the clumsy, wasteful,
blundering, low, and horribly cruel works of nature! With respect to
crossing, from one sentence in your letter I think you misunderstand me.
I am very far from believing in hybrids: only in crossing of the same
species or of close varieties. These two or three last days I have been
observing wheat, and have convinced myself that L. Deslongchamps is
in error about impregnation taking place in closed flowers; i.e., of
course, I can judge only from external appearances. By the way, R. Brown
once told me that the use of the brush on stigma of grasses was unknown.
Do you know its use?...

You say most truly about multiple creations and my notions. If any one
case could be proved, I should be smashed; but as I am writing my book,
I try to take as much pains as possible to give the strongest cases
opposed to me, and often such conjectures as occur to me. I have been
working your books as the richest (and vilest) mine against me; and
what hard work I have had to get up your New Zealand Flora! As I have
to quote you so often, I should like to refer to Muller's case of
the Australian Alps. Where is it published? Is it a book? A correct
reference would be enough for me, though it is wrong even to quote
without looking oneself. I should like to see very much Forbes's sheets,
which you refer to; but I must confess (I hardly know why) I have got
rather to mistrust poor dear Forbes.

There is wonderful ill logic in his famous and admirable memoir on
distribution, as it appears to me, now that I have got it up so as to
give the heads in a page. Depend on it, my saying is a true one--viz.
that a compiler is a great man, and an original man a commonplace man.
Any fool can generalise and speculate; but oh, my heavens, to get up at
second hand a New Zealand Flora, that is work...

And now I am going to beg almost as great a favour as a man can beg of
another: and I ask some five or six weeks before I want the favour done,
that it may appear less horrid. It is to read, but well copied out, my
pages (about forty!!) on Alpine floras and faunas, Arctic and Antarctic
floras and faunas, and the supposed cold mundane period. It would be
really an enormous advantage to me, as I am sure otherwise to make
botanical blunders. I would specify the few points on which I most want
your advice. But it is quite likely that you may object on the ground
that you might be publishing before me (I hope to publish in a year at
furthest), so that it would hamper and bother you; and secondly you may
object to the loss of time, for I daresay it would take an hour and a
half to read. It certainly would be of immense advantage to me; but of
course you must not think of doing it if it would interfere with your
own work.

I do not consider this request in futuro as breaking my promise to give
no more trouble for some time.

From Lyell's letters, he is coming round at a railway pace on the
mutability of species, and authorises me to put some sentences on this
head in my preface.

I shall meet Lyell on Wednesday at Lord Stanhope's, and will ask him to
forward my letter to you; though, as my arguments have not struck him,
they cannot have force, and my head must be crotchety on the subject;
but the crotchets keep firmly there. I have given your opinion on
continuous land, I see, too strongly.


LETTER 50. TO S.P. WOODWARD. Down, July 18th [1856].

Very many thanks for your kindness in writing to me at such length, and
I am glad to say for your sake that I do not see that I shall have to
beg any further favours. What a range and what a variability in the
Cyrena! (50/1. A genus of Lamellibranchs ranging from the Lias to the
present day.) Your list of the ranges of the land and fresh-water shells
certainly is most striking and curious, and especially as the antiquity
of four of them is so clearly shown.

I have got Harvey's seaside book, and liked it; I was not particularly
struck with it, but I will re-read the first and last chapters.

I am growing as bad as the worst about species, and hardly have a
vestige of belief in the permanence of species left in me; and this
confession will make you think very lightly of me, but I cannot help
it. Such has become my honest conviction, though the difficulties and
arguments against such heresy are certainly most weighty.


LETTER 51. TO C. LYELL. November 10th [1856].

I know you like all cases of negative geological evidence being upset.
I fancied that I was a most unwilling believer in negative evidence; but
yet such negative evidence did seem to me so strong that in my "Fossil
Lepadidae" I have stated, giving reasons, that I did not believe there
could have existed any sessile cirripedes during the Secondary ages.
Now, the other day Bosquet of Maestricht sends me a perfect drawing of a
perfect Chthamalus (a recent genus) from the Chalk! (51/1. Chthamalus,
a genus of Cirripedia. ("A Monograph on the Sub-class Cirripedia," by
Charles Darwin, page 447. London, 1854.) A fossil species of this genus
of Upper Cretaceous age was named by Bosquet Chthamalus Darwini. See
"Origin," Edition VI., page 284; also Zittel, "Traite de Paleontologie,"
Traduit par Dr. C. Barrois, Volume II., page 540, figure 748. Paris,
1887.) Indeed, it is stretching a point to make it specifically distinct
from our living British species. It is a genus not hitherto found in any
Tertiary bed.


LETTER 52. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, July 9th, 1857.

I am extremely much obliged to you for having so fully entered on my
point. I knew I was on unsafe ground, but it proves far unsafer than I
had thought. I had thought that Brulle (52/1. This no doubt refers to A.
Brulle's paper in the "Comptes rendus" 1844, of which a translation is
given in the "Annals and Mag. of Natural History," 1844, page 484. In
speaking of the development of the Articulata, the author says "that the
appendages are manifested at an earlier period of the existence of an
Articulate animal the more complex its degree of organisation, and vice
versa that they make their appearance the later, the fewer the number
of transformations which it has to undergo.") had a wider basis for his
generalisation, for I made the extract several years ago, and I
presume (I state it as some excuse for myself) that I doubted it, for,
differently from my general habit, I have not extracted his grounds.
It was meeting with Barneoud's paper which made me think there might be
truth in the doctrine. (52/2. Apparently Barneoud "On the Organogeny
of Irregular Corollas," from the "Comptes rendus," 1847, as given in
"Annals and Mag. of Natural History," 1847, page 440. The paper chiefly
deals with the fact that in their earliest condition irregular flowers
are regular. The view attributed to Barneoud does not seem so definitely
given in this paper as in a previous one ("Ann. Sc. Nat." Bot., Tom.
VI., page 268.) Your instance of heart and brain of fish seems to me
very good. It was a very stupid blunder on my part not thinking of
the posterior part of the time of development. I shall, of course, not
allude to this subject, which I rather grieve about, as I wished it
to be true; but, alas! a scientific man ought to have no wishes, no
affections--a mere heart of stone.

There is only one point in your letter which at present I cannot quite
follow you in: supposing that Barneoud's (I do not say Brulle's) remarks
were true and universal--i.e., that the petals which have to undergo
the greatest amount of development and modification begin to change the
soonest from the simple and common embryonic form of the petal--if this
were a true law, then I cannot but think that it would throw light on
Milne Edwards' proposition that the wider apart the classes of animals
are, the sooner do they diverge from the common embryonic plan--which
common embryonic [plan] may be compared with the similar petals in
the early bud, the several petals in one flower being compared to the
distinct but similar embryos of the different classes. I much wish that
you would so far keep this in mind, that whenever we meet I might hear
how far you differ or concur in this. I have always looked at Barneoud's
and Brulle's proposition as only in some degree analogous.

P.S. I see in my abstract of Milne Edwards' paper, he speaks of "the
most perfect and important organs" as being first developed, and I
should have thought that this was usually synonymous with the most
developed or modified.


LETTER 53. TO J.D. HOOKER.

(53/1. The following letter is chiefly of interest as showing the amount
and kind of work required for Darwin's conclusions on "large genera
varying," which occupy no more than two or three pages in the "Origin"
(Edition I., page 55). Some correspondence on the subject is given in
the "Life and Letters," II., pages 102-5.)

Down, August 22nd [1857].

Your handwriting always rejoices the cockles of my heart; though you
have no reason to be "overwhelmed with shame," as I did not expect to
hear.

I write now chiefly to know whether you can tell me how to write to
Hermann Schlagenheit (is this spelt right?) (53/2. Schlagintweit.), for
I believe he is returned to England, and he has poultry skins for me
from W. Elliot of Madras.

I am very glad to hear that you have been tabulating some Floras about
varieties. Will you just tell me roughly the result? Do you not find it
takes much time? I am employing a laboriously careful schoolmaster, who
does the tabulating and dividing into two great cohorts, more carefully
than I can. This being so, I should be very glad some time to have Koch,
Webb's Canaries, and Ledebour, and Grisebach, but I do not know even
where Rumelia is. I shall work the British flora with three separate
Floras; and I intend dividing the varieties into two classes, as Asa
Gray and Henslow give the materials, and, further, A. Gray and H.C.
Watson have marked for me the forms, which they consider real species,
but yet are very close to others; and it will be curious to compare
results. If it will all hold good it is very important for me; for it
explains, as I think, all classification, i.e. the quasi-branching and
sub-branching of forms, as if from one root, big genera increasing and
splitting up, etc., as you will perceive. But then comes in, also, what
I call a principle of divergence, which I think I can explain, but which
is too long, and perhaps you would not care to hear. As you have been on
this subject, you might like to hear what very little is complete (for
my schoolmaster has had three weeks' holidays)--only three cases as yet,
I see.

   BABINGTON--British Flora.

   593 species in genera of 5 and   593 (odd chance equal) in
   upwards have in a thousand       genera of 3 and downwards have
   species presenting vars.         in a thousand presenting vars.
   134/1000.*                       37/1000.

   (*53/3.  This sentence may be interpreted as follows:  The number of
   species which present varieties are 134 per thousand in genera of 5 species
   and upwards.  The result is obtained from tabulation of 593 species.)

   HOOKER--New Zealand.

   Genera with 4 species and        With 3 species and downwards
   upwards, 150/1000.               114/1000.

   GODRON--Central France.

   With 5 species and upwards       With 3 species and downwards
   160/1000.                        105/1000.

I do not enter into details on omitting introduced plants and very
varying genera, as Rubus, Salix, Rosa, etc., which would make the result
more in favour.

I enjoyed seeing Henslow extremely, though I was a good way from well at
the time. Farewell, my dear Hooker: do not forget your visit here some
time.


LETTER 54. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, November 14th [1857].

On Tuesday I will send off from London, whither I go on that day,
Ledebour's three remaining volumes, Grisebach and Cybele, i.e., all that
I have, and most truly am I obliged to you for them. I find the rule, as
yet, of the species varying most in the large genera universal, except
in Miquel's very brief and therefore imperfect list of the Holland
flora, which makes me very anxious to tabulate a fuller flora of
Holland. I shall remain in London till Friday morning, and if quite
convenient to send me two volumes of D.C. Prodromus, I could take them
home and tabulate them. I should think a volume with a large best known
natural family, and a volume with several small broken families would
be best, always supposing that the varieties are conspicuously marked in
both. Have you the volume published by Lowe on Madeira? If so and if any
varieties are marked I should much like to see it, to see if I can make
out anything about habitats of vars. in so small an area--a point on
which I have become very curious. I fear there is no chance of your
possessing Forbes and Hancock "British Shells," a grand work, which I
much wish to tabulate.

Very many thanks for seed of Adlumia cirrhosa, which I will carefully
observe. My notice in the G. Ch. on Kidney Beans (54.1 "On the Agency
of Bees in the Fertilisation of Papilionaceous Flowers" ("Gardeners'
Chronicle," 1857, page 725).) has brought me a curious letter from an
intelligent gardener, with a most remarkable lot of beans, crossed in a
marvellous manner IN THE FIRST GENERATION, like the peas sent to you by
Berkeley and like those experimentalised on by Gartner and by Wiegmann.
It is a very odd case; I shall sow these seeds and see what comes up.
How very odd that pollen of one form should affect the outer coats and
size of the bean produced by pure species!...


LETTER 55. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down [1857?].

You know how I work subjects: namely, if I stumble on any general
remark, and if I find it confirmed in any other very distinct class,
then I try to find out whether it is true,--if it has any bearing on my
work. The following, perhaps, may be important to me. Dr. Wight remarks
that Cucurbitaceae (55/1. Wight, "Remarks on the Fruit of the Natural
Order Cucurbitaceae" ("Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist." VIII., page 261). R. Wight,
F.R.S. (1796-1872) was Superintendent of the Madras Botanic Garden.)
is a very isolated family, and has very diverging affinities. I find,
strongly put and illustrated, the very same remark in the genera of
hymenoptera. Now, it is not to me at first apparent why a very distinct
and isolated group should be apt to have more divergent affinities than
a less isolated group. I am aware that most genera have more affinities
than in two ways, which latter, perhaps, is the commonest case. I see
how infinitely vague all this is; but I should very much like to know
what you and Mr. Bentham (if he will read this), who have attended so
much to the principles of classification, think of this. Perhaps the
best way would be to think of half a dozen most isolated groups of
plants, and then consider whether the affinities point in an unusual
number of directions. Very likely you may think the whole question too
vague to be worth consideration.


LETTER 56. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, April 8th [1857].

I now want to ask your opinion, and for facts on a point; and as I shall
often want to do this during the next year or two, so let me say, once
for all, that you must not take trouble out of mere good nature (of
which towards me you have a most abundant stock), but you must consider,
in regard to the trouble any question may take, whether you think it
worth while--as all loss of time so far lessens your original work--to
give me facts to be quoted on your authority in my work. Do not think
I shall be disappointed if you cannot spare time; for already I have
profited enormously from your judgment and knowledge. I earnestly beg
you to act as I suggest, and not take trouble solely out of good-nature.

My point is as follows: Harvey gives the case of Fucus varying
remarkably, and yet in same way under most different conditions. D. Don
makes same remark in regard to Juncus bufonius in England and India.
Polygala vulgaris has white, red, and blue flowers in Faroe, England,
and I think Herbert says in Zante. Now such cases seem to me very
striking, as showing how little relation some variations have to
climatal conditions.

Do you think there are many such cases? Does Oxalis corniculata present
exactly the same varieties under very different climates?

How is it with any other British plants in New Zealand, or at the foot
of the Himalaya? Will you think over this and let me hear the result?

One other question: do you remember whether the introduced Sonchus in
New Zealand was less, equally, or more common than the aboriginal stock
of the same species, where both occurred together? I forget whether
there is any other case parallel with this curious one of the Sonchus...

I have been making good, though slow, progress with my book, for facts
have been falling nicely into groups, enlightening each other.


LETTER 57. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Moor Park, Farnham, Surrey [1857?].

Your letter has been forwarded to me here, where I am profiting by a
few weeks' rest and hydropathy. Your letter has interested and amused me
much. I am extremely glad you have taken up the Aphis (57/1. Professor
Huxley's paper on the organic reproduction of Aphis is in the "Trans.
Linn. Soc." XXII. (1858), page 193. Prof. Owen had treated the subject
in his introductory Hunterian lecture "On Parthenogenesis" (1849).
His theory cannot be fully given here. Briefly, he holds that
parthenogenesis is due to the inheritance of a "remnant of spermatic
virtue": when the "spermatic force" or "virtue" is exhausted fresh
impregnation occurs. Huxley severely criticises both Owen's facts and
his theory.) question, but, for Heaven's sake, do not come the mild
Hindoo (whatever he may be) to Owen; your father confessor trembles for
you. I fancy Owen thinks much of this doctrine of his; I never from
the first believed it, and I cannot but think that the same power is
concerned in producing aphides without fertilisation, and producing, for
instance, nails on the amputated stump of a man's fingers, or the new
tail of a lizard. By the way, I saw somewhere during the last week or
so a statement of a man rearing from the same set of eggs winged and
wingless aphides, which seemed new to me. Does not some Yankee say that
the American viviparous aphides are winged? I am particularly glad that
you are ruminating on the act of fertilisation: it has long seemed to me
the most wonderful and curious of physiological problems. I have
often and often speculated for amusement on the subject, but quite
fruitlessly. Do you not think that the conjugation of the Diatomaceae
will ultimately throw light on the subject? But the other day I came to
the conclusion that some day we shall have cases of young being produced
from spermatozoa or pollen without an ovule. Approaching the subject
from the side which attracts me most, viz., inheritance, I have
lately been inclined to speculate, very crudely and indistinctly, that
propagation by true fertilisation will turn out to be a sort of
mixture, and not true fusion, of two distinct individuals, or rather of
innumerable individuals, as each parent has its parents and ancestors.
I can understand on no other view the way in which crossed forms go back
to so large an extent to ancestral forms. But all this, of course, is
infinitely crude. I hope to be in London in the course of this month,
and there are two or three points which, for my own sake, I want to
discuss briefly with you.


LETTER 58. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, September 26th [1857].

Thanks for your very pleasant note. It amuses me to see what a bug-bear
I have made myself to you; when having written some very pungent and
good sentence it must be very disagreeable to have my face rise up like
an ugly ghost. (58/1. This probably refers to Darwin's wish to moderate
a certain pugnacity in Huxley.) I have always suspected Agassiz of
superficiality and wretched reasoning powers; but I think such men
do immense good in their way. See how he stirred up all Europe about
glaciers. By the way, Lyell has been at the glaciers, or rather their
effects, and seems to have done good work in testing and judging what
others have done...

In regard to classification and all the endless disputes about the
"Natural System," which no two authors define in the same way, I
believe it ought, in accordance to my heterodox notions, to be simply
genealogical. But as we have no written pedigrees you will, perhaps,
say this will not help much; but I think it ultimately will, whenever
heterodoxy becomes orthodoxy, for it will clear away an immense amount
of rubbish about the value of characters, and will make the difference
between analogy and homology clear. The time will come, I believe,
though I shall not live to see it, when we shall have very fairly true
genealogical trees of each great kingdom of Nature.


LETTER 59. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, December 16th [1857].

In my opinion your Catalogue (59/1. It appears from a letter to Sir
J.D. Hooker (December 25th, 1857) that the reference is to the proofs of
Huxley's "Explanatory Preface to the Catalogue of the Palaeontological
Collection in the Museum of Practical Geology," by T.H. Huxley and R.
Etheridge, 1865. Mr. Huxley appends a note at page xlix: "It should
be noted that these pages were written before the appearance of Mr.
Darwin's book on 'The Origin of Species'--a work which has effected a
revolution in biological speculation.") is simply the very best resume,
by far, on the whole science of Natural History, which I have ever seen.
I really have no criticisms: I agree with every word. Your metaphors
and explanations strike me as admirable. In many parts it is curious how
what you have written agrees with what I have been writing, only with
the melancholy difference for me that you put everything in twice as
striking a manner as I do. I append, more for the sake of showing that I
have attended to the whole than for any other object, a few most trivial
criticisms.

I was amused to meet with some of the arguments, which you advanced
in talk with me, on classification; and it pleases me, [that] my long
proses were so far not thrown away, as they led you to bring out here
some good sentences. But on classification (59/2. This probably refers
to Mr. Huxley's discussion on "Natural Classification," a subject
hardly susceptible of fruitful treatment except from an evolutionary
standpoint.) I am not quite sure that I yet wholly go with you, though
I agree with every word you have here said. The whole, I repeat, in my
opinion is admirable and excellent.


LETTER 60. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, February 28th [1858].

Hearty thanks for De Candolle received. I have put the big genera in
hand. Also many thanks for your valuable remarks on the affinities
of the species in great genera, which will be of much use to me in my
chapter on classification. Your opinion is what I had expected from what
little I knew, but I much wanted it confirmed, and many of your remarks
were more or less new to me and all of value.

You give a poor picture of the philosophy of Botany. From my ignorance,
I suppose, I can hardly persuade myself that things are quite as bad as
you make them,--you might have been writing remarks on Ornithology! I
shall meditate much on your remarks, which will also come in very useful
when I write and consider my tables of big and small genera. I grieve
for myself to say that Watson agrees with your view, but with much
doubt. I gave him no guide what your opinion was. I have written to A.
Gray and to X., who--i.e. the latter--on this point may be looked at as
S. Smith's Foolometer.

I am now working several of the large local Floras, with leaving out
altogether all the smallest genera. When I have done this, and seen what
the sections of the largest genera say, and seen what the results are
of range and commonness of varying species, I must come to some definite
conclusion whether or not entirely to give up the ghost. I shall then
show how my theory points, how the facts stand, then state the nature of
your grievous assault and yield entirely or defend the case as far as I
can honestly.

Again I thank you for your invaluable assistance. I have not felt
the blow [Hooker's criticisms] so much of late, as I have been beyond
measure interested on the constructive instinct of the hive-bee. Adios,
you terrible worrier of poor theorists!


LETTER 61. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down [1858?]

Many thanks for Ledebour and still more for your letter, with its
admirable resume of all your objections. It is really most kind of you
to take so very much trouble about what seems to you, and probably is,
mere vagaries.

I will earnestly try and be cautious. I will write out my tables and
conclusion, and (when well copied out) I hope you will be so kind as
to read it. I will then put it by and after some months look at it with
fresh eyes. I will briefly work in all your objections and Watson's. I
labour under a great difficulty from feeling sure that, with what very
little systematic work I have done, small genera were more interesting
and therefore more attracted my attention.

One of your remarks I do not see the bearing of under your point of
view--namely, that in monotypic genera "the variation and variability"
are "much more frequently noticed" than in polytypic genera. I hardly
like to ask, but this is the only one of your arguments of which I do
not see the bearing; and I certainly should be very glad to know. I
believe I am the slowest (perhaps the worst) thinker in England; and I
now consequently fully admit the full hostility of Urticaceae, which I
will give in my tables.

I will make no remarks on your objections, as I do hope you will read my
MS., which will not cost you much trouble when fairly copied out. From
my own experience, I hardly believe that the most sagacious observers,
without counting, could have predicted whether there were more or fewer
recorded varieties in large or small genera; for I found, when actually
making the list, that I could never strike a balance in my mind,--a good
many varieties occurring together, in small or in large genera, always
threw me off the balance...

P.S.--I have just thought that your remark about the much variation of
monotypic genera was to show me that even in these, the smallest genera,
there was much variability. If this be so, then do not answer; and I
will so understand it.


LETTER 62. TO J.D. HOOKER. February 23rd [1858].

Will you think of some of the largest genera with which you are well
acquainted, and then suppose 4/5 of the species utterly destroyed and
unknown in the sections (as it were) as much as possible in the centre
of such great genera. Then would the remaining 1/5 of the species,
forming a few sections, be, according to the general practice of average
good Botanists, ranked as distinct genera? Of course they would in that
case be closely related genera. The question, in fact, is, are all the
species in a gigantic genus kept together in that genus, because they
are really so very closely similar as to be inseparable? or is it
because no chasms or boundaries can be drawn separating the many
species? The question might have been put for Orders.


LETTER 63. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, February 9th [1858].

I should be very much obliged for your opinion on the enclosed. You may
remember in the three first volumes tabulated, all orders went right
except Labiatae. By the way, if by any extraordinary chance you have
not thrown away the scrap of paper with former results, I wish you would
return it, for I have lost my copy, and I shall have all the division
to do again; but DO NOT hunt for it, for in any case I should have gone
over the calculation again.

Now I have done the three other volumes. You will see that all species
in the six volumes together go right, and likewise all orders in the
three last volumes, except Verbenaceae. Is not Verbenaceae very closely
allied to Labiatae? If so, one would think that it was not mere chance,
this coincidence. The species in Labiatae and Verbenaceae together
are between 1/5 and 1/6 of all the species (15,645), which I have now
tabulated.

Now, bearing in mind the many local Floras which I have tabulated
(belting the whole northern hemisphere), and considering that they (and
authors of D.C. Prodromus) would probably take different degrees of care
in recording varieties, and the genera would be divided on different
principles by different men, etc., I am much surprised at the uniformity
of the result, and I am satisfied that there must be truth in the rule
that the small genera vary less than the large. What do you think?
Hypothetically I can conjecture how the Labiatae might fail--namely, if
some small divisions of the Order were now coming into importance in the
world and varying much and making species. This makes me want to
know whether you could divide the Labiatae into a few great natural
divisions, and then I would tabulate them separately as sub-orders. I
see Lindley makes so many divisions that there would not be enough in
each for an average. I send the table of the Labiatae for the chance
of your being able to do this for me. You might draw oblique lines
including and separating both large and small genera. I have also
divided all the species into two equal masses, and my rule holds good
for all the species in a mass in the six volumes; but it fails
in several (four) large Orders--viz. Labiatae, Scrophulariaceae,
Acanthaceae, and Proteaceae. But, then, when the species are divided
into two almost exactly equal divisions, the divisions with large genera
are so very few: for instance, in Solanaceae, Solanum balances all
others. In Labiatae seven gigantic genera balance all others (viz. 113),
and in Proteaceae five genera balance all others. Now, according to
my hypothetical notions, I am far from supposing that all genera go on
increasing forever, and therefore I am not surprised at this result,
when the division is so made that only a very few genera are on one
side. But, according to my notions, the sections or sub-genera of the
gigantic genera ought to obey my rule (i.e., supposing a gigantic genus
had come to its maximum, whatever increase was still going on ought to
be going on in the larger sub-genera). Do you think that the sections
of the gigantic genera in D.C. Prodromus are generally NATURAL: i.e.
not founded on mere artificial characters? If you think that they are
generally made as natural as they can be, then I should like very
much to tabulate the sub-genera, considering them for the time as good
genera. In this case, and if you do not think me unreasonable to ask it,
I should be very glad of the loan of Volumes X., XI., XII., and
XIV., which include Acanthaceae, Scrophulariaceae, Labiatae, and
Proteaceae,--that is, the orders which, when divided quite equally, do
not accord with my rule, and in which a very few genera balance all the
others.

I have written you a tremendous long prose.


LETTER 64. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, June 8th [1858].

I am confined to the sofa with boils, so you must let me write in
pencil. You would laugh if you could know how much your note pleased me.
I had the firmest conviction that you would say all my MS. was bosh, and
thank God, you are one of the few men who dare speak the truth. Though I
should not have much cared about throwing away what you have seen, yet
I have been forced to confess to myself that all was much alike, and
if you condemned that you would condemn all my life's work, and that I
confess made me a little low; but I could have borne it, for I have the
conviction that I have honestly done my best. The discussion comes in at
the end of the long chapter on variation in a state of nature, so that I
have discussed, as far as I am able, what to call varieties. I will try
to leave out all allusion to genera coming in and out in this part,
till when I discuss the "Principle of Divergence," which, with "Natural
Selection," is the keystone of my book; and I have very great confidence
it is sound. I would have this discussion copied out, if I could really
think it would not bore you to read,--for, believe me, I value to the
full every word of criticism from you, and the advantage which I have
derived from you cannot be told...

I am glad to hear that poor old Brown is dying so easily...

You will think it paltry, but as I was asked to pay for printing the
Diploma [from a Society of which he had been made an honorary member],
I did not like to refuse, so I send 1 pound. But I think it a shabby
proceeding. If a gentleman did me some service, though unasked to do it,
and then demanded payment, I should pay him, and think him a shabby dog;
and on this principle I send my 1 pound.


(65/1. The following four letters refer to an inquiry instituted in 1858
by the Trustees of the British Museum as to the disposal of the Natural
History Collections. The inquiry was one of the first steps towards the
establishment of the Cromwell Road Museum, which was effected in 1875.)


LETTER 65. TO R.I. MURCHISON. Down, June 19th [1858].

I have just received your note. Unfortunately I cannot attend at the
British Museum on Monday. I do not suppose my opinion on the subject
of your note can be of any value, as I have not much considered the
subject, or had the advantage of discussing it with other naturalists.
But my impression is, that there is much weight in what you say about
not breaking up the natural history collection of the British Museum. I
think a national collection ought to be in London. I can, however, see
that some weighty arguments might be advanced in favour of Kew, owing to
the immense value of Sir W. Hooker's collection and library; but these
are private property, and I am not aware that there is any certainty
of their always remaining at Kew. Had this been the case, I should have
thought that the botanical collection might have been removed there
without endangering the other branches of the collections. But I think
it would be the greatest evil which could possibly happen to natural
science in this country if the other collections were ever to be removed
from the British Museum and Library.


LETTER 66. TO T.H. HUXLEY.

(66/1. The memorial referred to in the following letter was addressed
on November 18th to the Chancellor of the Exchequer. It was signed
by Huxley, Bentham, W.H. Harvey, Henfrey, Henslow, Lindley, Busk,
Carpenter, and Darwin. The memorial, which is accessible, as published
in the "Gardeners' Chronicle," November 27th, 1858, page 861,
recommended, speaking generally, the consolidation of the National
Botanical collections at Kew.

In February, 1900, a Committee was appointed by the Lords Commissioners
of the Treasury "to consider the present arrangements under which
botanical work is done and collections maintained by the Trustees of
the British Museum, and under the First Commissioner of Works at Kew,
respectively; and to report what changes (if any) in those arrangements
are necessary or desirable in order to avoid duplication of work and
collections at the two institutions." The Committee published their
report in March, 1901, recommending an arrangement similar to that
proposed in 1858.)

Down, October 23rd [1858].

The names which you give as supporting your memorial make me quite
distrust my own judgment; but, as I must say yea or nay, I am forced
to say that I doubt the wisdom of the movement, and am not willing
at present to sign. My reasons, perhaps of very little value, are as
follows. The governing classes are thoroughly unscientific, and the men
of art and of archaeology have much greater weight with Government than
we have. If we make a move to separate from the British Museum, I cannot
but fear that we may go to the dogs. I think we owe our position in
large part to the hundreds of thousands of people who visit the British
Museum, attracted by the heterogeneous mixture of objects. If we lost
this support, as I think we should--for a mere collection of animals
does not seem very attractive to the masses (judging from the Museum
of the Zoological Society, formerly in Leicester Square)--then I do
not think we should get nearly so much aid from Government. Therefore I
should be inclined to stick to the mummies and Assyrian gods as long as
we could. If we knew that Government was going to turn us out, then,
and not till then, I should be inclined to make an energetic move. If we
were to separate, I do not believe that we should have funds granted for
the many books required for occasional reference: each man must speak
from his own experience. I have so repeatedly required to see old
Transactions and old Travels, etc., that I should regret extremely, when
at work at the British Museum, to be separated from the entire library.
The facilities for working at certain great classes--as birds, large
fossils, etc.--are no doubt as bad as possible, or rather impossible, on
the open days; but I have found the working rooms of the Assistants very
convenient for all other classes on all days.

In regard to the botanical collections, I am too ignorant to express any
opinion. The point seems to be how far botanists would object to
travel to Kew; but there are evidently many great advantages in the
transportation.

If I had my own way, I would make the British Museum collection only a
typical one for display, which would be quite as amusing and far more
instructive to the populace (and I think to naturalists) than the
present enormous display of birds and mammals. I would save expense of
stuffing, and would keep all skins, except a few "typicals," in drawers.
Thus much room would be saved, and a little more space could be given to
real workers, who could work all day. Rooms fitted up with thousands of
drawers would cost very little. With this I should be contented. Until I
had pretty sure information that we were going to be turned out, I would
not stir in the matter. With such opponents as you name, I daresay I am
quite wrong; but this is my best, though doubtful, present judgment...

It seems to me dangerous even to hint at a new Scientific Museum--a
popular Museum, and to subsidise the Zoological Gardens; it would, I
think, frighten any Government.


LETTER 67. TO J.D. HOOKER. Moor Park, Farnham, Surrey [October] 29th
[1858].

As you say that you have good private information that Government does
intend to remove the collection from the British Museum, the case to
me individually is wholly changed; and as the memorial now stands, with
such expression at its head, I have no objection whatever to sign. I
must express a very strong opinion that it would be an immense evil to
remove to Kensington, not on account of the men of science so much
as for the masses in the whole eastern and central part of London. I
further think it would be a great evil to separate a typical collection
(which I can by no means look at as only popular) from the collection in
full. Might not some expression be added, even stronger than those now
used, on the display (which is a sort of vanity in the curators) of such
a vast number of birds and mammals, with such a loss of room. I am low
at the conviction that Government will never give money enough for a
really good library.

I do not want to be crotchety, but I should hate signing without some
expression about the site being easily accessible to the populace of the
whole of London.

I repeat, as things now stand, I shall be proud to sign.


LETTER 68. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, November 3rd [1858].

I most entirely subscribe to all you say in your note. I have had some
correspondence with Hooker on the subject. As it seems certain that
a movement in the British Museum is generally anticipated, my main
objection is quite removed; and, as I have told Hooker, I have no
objection whatever to sign a memorial of the nature of the one he sent
me or that now returned. Both seem to me very good. I cannot help being
fearful whether Government will ever grant money enough for books. I can
see many advantages in not being under the unmotherly wing of art and
archaeology, and my only fear was that we were not strong enough to live
without some protection, so profound, I think, is the contempt for and
ignorance of Natural Science amongst the gentry of England. Hooker tells
me that I should be converted into favour of Kensington Gore if I heard
all that could be said in its favour; but I cannot yet help thinking
so western a locality a great misfortune. Has Lyell been consulted? His
would be a powerful name, and such names go for much with our ignorant
Governors. You seem to have taken much trouble in the business, and I
honour you for it.


LETTER 69. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, November 9th [1858].

I am quite delighted to hear about the Copley and Lyell. (69/1. The
Copley Medal of the Royal Society was awarded to Lyell in 1858.) I have
grown hot with indignation many times thinking of the way the proposal
was met last year, according to your account of it. I am also very glad
to hear of Hancock (Albany Hancock received a Royal Medal in 1858.); it
will show the provincials are not neglected. Altogether the medals are
capital. I shall be proud and bound to help in any way about the eloge,
which is rather a heavy tax on proposers of medals, as I found about
Richardson and Westwood; but Lyell's case will be twenty times as
difficult. I will begin this very evening dotting down a few remarks
on Lyell; though, no doubt, most will be superfluous, and several
would require deliberate consideration. Anyhow, such notes may be a
preliminary aid to you; I will send them in a few days' time, and will
do anything else you may wish...

P.S.--I have had a letter from Henslow this morning. He comes here on
[Thursday] 25th, and I shall be delighted to see him; but it stops my
coming to the Club, as I had arranged to do, and now I suppose I shall
not be in London till December 16th, if odds and ends do not compel me
to come sooner. Of course I have not said a word to Henslow of my change
of plans. I had looked forward with pleasure to a chat with you and
others.

P.S. 2.--I worked all yesterday evening in thinking, and have written
the paper sent by this post this morning. Not one sentence would do, but
it is the sort of rough sketch which I should have drawn out if I had
had to do it. God knows whether it will at all aid you. It is miserably
written, with horridly bad metaphors, probably horrid bad grammar. It
is my deliberate impression, such as I should have written to any friend
who had asked me what I thought of Lyell's merits. I will do anything
else which you may wish, or that I can.

LETTER 70. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, December 30th [1858].

I have had this copied to save you trouble, as it was vilely written,
and is now vilely expressed.

Your letter has interested me greatly; but how inextricable are the
subjects which we are discussing! I do not think I said that I thought
the productions of Asia were HIGHER (70/1. On the use of the terms
"higher" and "lower" see Letters 35 and 36.) than those of Australia. I
intend carefully to avoid this expression (70/2. In a paper of pencilled
notes pinned into Darwin's copy of the "Vestiges" occur the words:
"Never use the word (sic) higher and lower."), for I do not think that
any one has a definite idea what is meant by higher, except in classes
which can loosely be compared with man. On our theory of Natural
Selection, if the organisms of any area belonging to the Eocene or
Secondary periods were put into competition with those now existing in
the same area (or probably in any part of the world) they (i.e. the old
ones) would be beaten hollow and be exterminated; if the theory be true,
this must be so. In the same manner, I believe, a greater number of
the productions of Asia, the largest territory in the world, would beat
those of Australia, than conversely. So it seems to be between Europe
and North America, for I can hardly believe in the difference of the
stream of commerce causing so great a difference in the proportions
of immigrants. But this sort of highness (I wish I could invent some
expression, and must try to do so) is different from highness in the
common acceptation of the word. It might be connected with degradation
of organisation: thus the blind degraded worm-like snake (Typhlops)
might supplant the true earthworm. Here then would be degradation in
the class, but certainly increase in the scale of organisation in the
general inhabitants of the country. On the other hand, it would be quite
as easy to believe that true earthworms might beat out the Typhlops. I
do not see how this "competitive highness" can be tested in any way by
us. And this is a comfort to me when mentally comparing the Silurian
and Recent organisms. Not that I doubt a long course of "competitive
highness" will ultimately make the organisation higher in every sense of
the word; but it seems most difficult to test it. Look at the Erigeron
canadensis on the one hand and Anacharis (70/3. Anacharis (Elodea
canadensis) and Erigeron canadensis are both successful immigrants
from America.) on the other; these plants must have some advantage over
European productions, to spread as they have. Yet who could discover it?
Monkeys can co-exist with sloths and opossums, orders at the bottom
of the scale; and the opossums might well be beaten by placental
insectivores, coming from a country where there were no monkeys, etc.
I should be sorry to give up the view that an old and very large
continuous territory would generally produce organisms higher in the
competitive sense than a smaller territory. I may, of course, be quite
wrong about the plants of Australia (and your facts are, of course,
quite new to me on their highness), but when I read the accounts of the
immense spreading of European plants in Australia, and think of the wool
and corn brought thence to Europe, and not one plant naturalised, I
can hardly avoid the suspicion that Europe beats Australia in its
productions. If many (i.e. more than one or two) Australian plants are
TRULY naturalised in India (N.B. Naturalisation on Indian mountains
hardly quite fair, as mountains are small islands in the land) I must
strike my colours. I should be glad to hear whether what I have written
very obscurely on this point produces ANY effect on you; for I want to
clear my mind, as perhaps I should put a sentence or two in my abstract
on this subject. (70/4. Abstract was Darwin's name for the "Origin"
during parts of 1858 and 1859.)

I have always been willing to strike my colours on former immense tracts
of land in oceans, if any case required it in an eminent degree.
Perhaps yours may be a case, but at present I greatly prefer land in
the Antarctic regions, where now there is only ice and snow, but which
before the Glacial period might well have been clothed by vegetation.
You have thus to invent far less land, and that more central; and aid is
got by floating ice for transporting seed.

I hope I shall not weary you by scribbling my notions at this length.
After writing last to you I began to think that the Malay Land might
have existed through part of the Glacial epoch. Why I at first doubted
was from the difference of existing mammals in different islands;
but many are very close, and some identical in the islands, and I am
constantly deceiving myself from thinking of the little change which
the shells and plants, whilst all co-existing in their own northern
hemisphere, have undergone since the Glacial epoch; but I am convinced
that this is most false reasoning, for the relations of organism to new
organisms, when thrown together, are by far the most important.

When you speak of plants having undergone more change since old
geological periods than animals, are you not rather comparing plants
with higher animals? Think how little some, indeed many, mollusca have
changed. Remember Silurian Nautilus, Lingula and other Brachiopods, and
Nucula, and amongst Echinoderms, the Silurian Asterias, etc.

What you say about lowness of brackish-water plants interests me.
I remember that they are apt to be social (i.e. many individuals in
comparison to specific forms), and I should be tempted to look at this
as a case of a very small area, and consequently of very few individuals
in comparison with those on the land or in pure fresh-water; and hence
less development (odious word!) than on land or fresh-water. But here
comes in your two-edged sword! I should like much to see any paper on
plants of brackish water or on the edge of the sea; but I suppose such
has never been published.

Thanks about Nelumbium, for I think this was the very plant which from
the size of seed astonished me, and which A. De Candolle adduced as
a marvellous case of almost impossible transport. I now find to my
surprise that herons do feed sometimes on [illegible] fruit; and grebes
on seeds of Compositae.

Many thanks for offer of help about a grant for the Abstract; but I
should hope it would sell enough to pay expenses.

I am reading your letter and scribbling as I go on.

Your oak and chestnut case seems very curious; is it not the more so as
beeches have gone to, or come from the south? But I vehemently protest
against you or any one making such cases especial marvels, without you
are prepared to say why each species in any flora is twice or thrice,
etc., rarer than each other species which grows in the same soil. The
more I think, the more evident is it to me how utterly ignorant we are
of the thousand contingencies on which range, frequency, and extinction
of each species depend.

I have sometimes thought, from Edentata (70/5. No doubt a slip of the
pen for Monotremata.) and Marsupialia, that Australia retains a remnant
of the former and ancient state of the fauna of the world, and I suppose
that you are coming to some such conclusion for plants; but is not the
relation between the Cape and Australia too special for such views? I
infer from your writings that the relation is too special between Fuegia
and Australia to allow us to look at the resemblances in certain plants
as the relics of mundane resemblances. On the other hand, [have] not
the Sandwich Islands in the Northern Hemisphere some odd relations
to Australia? When we are dead and gone what a noble subject will be
Geographical Distribution!

You may say what you like, but you will never convince me that I do not
owe you ten times as much as you can owe me. Farewell, my dear Hooker. I
am sorry to hear that you are both unwell with influenza. Do not bother
yourself in answering anything in this, except your general impression
on the battle between N. and S.



CHAPTER 1.III.--EVOLUTION, 1859-1863.


LETTER 71. TO A.R. WALLACE. Down, April 6th, 1859.

I this morning received your pleasant and friendly note of November
30th. The first part of my MS. is in Murray's hands to see if he likes
to publish it. There is no preface, but a short introduction, which
must be read by every one who reads my book. The second paragraph in the
introduction (71/1. "Origin of Species," Edition I., 1859, pages 1 and
2.) I have had copied verbatim from my foul copy, and you will, I hope,
think that I have fairly noticed your paper in the "Linn. Journal."
(71/2. "On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties, and on the
Perpetuation of Varieties and Species by Natural Means of Selection." By
Charles Darwin and Alfred Russell Wallace. Communicated by Sir Charles
Lyell and J.D. Hooker. "Journ. Linn. Soc." Volume III., page 45, 1859.
(Read July 1st, 1858.)) You must remember that I am now publishing only
an abstract, and I give no references. I shall, of course, allude to
your paper on distribution (71/3. "On the Law which has regulated the
Introduction of New Species" (A.R. Wallace). "Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist."
Volume XVI., page 184, 1855. The law alluded to is thus stated by
Wallace: "Every species has come into existence coincident both in space
and time with a pre-existing closely allied species" (loc. cit., page
186).); and I have added that I know from correspondence that your
explanation of your law is the same as that which I offer. You are
right, that I came to the conclusion that selection was the principle
of change from the study of domesticated productions; and then, reading
Malthus, I saw at once how to apply this principle. Geographical
distribution and geological relations of extinct to recent inhabitants
of South America first led me to the subject: especially the case of
the Galapagos Islands. I hope to go to press in the early part of next
month. It will be a small volume of about five hundred pages or so. I
will of course send you a copy. I forget whether I told you that Hooker,
who is our best British botanist and perhaps the best in the world, is a
full convert, and is now going immediately to publish his confession
of faith; and I expect daily to see proof-sheets. (71/4. "The Flora of
Australia, etc., an Introductory Essay to the Flora of Tasmania." London
1859.) Huxley is changed, and believes in mutation of species: whether a
convert to us, I do not quite know. We shall live to see all the younger
men converts. My neighbour and an excellent naturalist, J. Lubbock,
is an enthusiastic convert. I see that you are doing great work in the
Archipelago; and most heartily do I sympathise with you. For God's sake
take care of your health. There have been few such noble labourers in
the cause of Natural Science as you are.

P.S. You cannot tell how I admire your spirit, in the manner in which
you have taken all that was done about publishing all our papers. I
had actually written a letter to you, stating that I would not publish
anything before you had published. I had not sent that letter to the
post when I received one from Lyell and Hooker, urging me to send some
MS. to them, and allow them to act as they thought fair and honestly to
both of us; and I did so.

(71/5. The following is the passage from the Introduction to the "Origin
of Species," referred to in the first paragraph of the above letter.)

"My work is now nearly finished; but as it will take me two or three
years more to complete it, and as my health is far from strong, I have
been urged to publish this Abstract. I have more especially been induced
to do this, as Mr. Wallace, who is now studying the Natural History of
the Malay Archipelago, has arrived at almost exactly the same general
conclusions that I have on the origin of species. Last year he sent to
me a memoir on this subject, with a request that I would forward it
to Sir Charles Lyell, who sent it to the Linnean Society, and it is
published in the third volume of the Journal of that Society. Sir C.
Lyell and Dr. Hooker, who both knew of my work--the latter having read
my sketch of 1844--honoured me by thinking it advisable to publish,
with Mr. Wallace's excellent memoir, some brief extracts from my
manuscripts."


LETTER 72. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, May 3rd, 1859.

With respect to reversion, I have been raking up vague recollections of
vague facts; and the impression on my mind is rather more in favour of
reversion than it was when you were here.

In my abstract (72/1. "The Origin of Species.") I give only a paragraph
on the general case of reversion, though I enter in detail on some cases
of reversion of a special character. I have not as yet put all my facts
on this subject in mass, so can come to no definite conclusion. But as
single characters may revert, I must say that I see no improbability in
several reverting. As I do not believe any well-founded experiments or
facts are known, each must form his opinion from vague generalities.
I think you confound two rather distinct considerations; a variation
arises from any cause, and reversion is not opposed to this, but solely
to its inheritance. Not but what I believe what we must call perhaps
a dozen distinct laws are all struggling against each other in every
variation which ever arises. To give my impression, if I were forced
to bet whether or not, after a hundred generations of growth in a poor
sandy soil, a cauliflower and red cabbage would or would not revert to
the same form, I must say I would rather stake my money that they would.
But in such a case the conditions of life are changed (and here comes
the question of direct influence of condition), and there is to be no
selection, the comparatively sudden effect of man's selection are left
to the free play of reversion.

In short, I dare not come to any conclusion without comparing all facts
which I have collected, and I do not think there are many.

Please do not say to any one that I thought my book on species would be
fairly popular and have a fairly remunerative sale (which was the height
of my ambition), for if it prove a dead failure it would make me the
more ridiculous.


LETTER 73. TO W.H. MILLER. Down, June 5th [1859].

I thank you much for your letter. Had I seen the interest of my remark
I would have made many more measurements, though I did make several.
I stated the facts merely to give the general reader an idea of the
thickness of the walls. (73/1. The walls of bees' cells: see Letter
173.)

Especially if I had seen that the fact had any general bearing, I should
have stated that as far as I could measure, the walls are by no means
perfectly of the same thickness. Also I should have stated that the
chief difference is when the thickness of walls of the upper part of
the hexagon and of the pyramidal basal plates are contrasted. Will you
oblige me by looking with a strong lens at the bit of comb, brushing off
with a knife the upper thickened edges, and then compare, by eye alone,
the thickness of the walls there with the thickness of the basal plates,
as seen in any cross section. I should very much like to hear whether,
even in this way, the difference is not perceptible. It is generally
thus perceptible by comparing the thickness of the walls of the hexagon
(if not taken very close to the angle) near to the basal plates, where
the comparison by eye is of course easier. Your letter actually turned
me sick with panic; from not seeing any great importance [in the]
fact, till I looked at my notes, I did not remember that I made several
measurements. I have now repeated the same measurements, roughly with
the same general results, but the difference, I think, is hardly double.

I should not have mentioned the thickness of the basal plates at all,
had I not thought it would give an unfair notion of the thickness of the
walls to state the lesser measurements alone.


LETTER 74. TO W.H. MILLER. [1859]

I had no thought that you would measure the thickness of the walls of
the cells; but if you will, and allow me to give your measurements,
it will be an immense advantage. As it is no trouble, I send more
specimens. If you measure, please observe that I measured the thickness
of the walls of the hexagonal prisms not very near the base; but from
your very interesting remarks the lower part of the walls ought to be
measured.

Thank you for the suggestion about how bees judge of angles and
distances. I will keep it in mind. It is a complete perplexity to me,
and yet certainly insects can rudely somehow judge of distance. There
are special difficulties on account of the gradation in size between the
worker-scells and the larger drone-cells. I am trying to test the case
practically by getting combs of different species, and of our own bee
from different climates. I have lately had some from the W. Indies of
our common bee, but the cells SEEM certainly to be larger; but they have
not yet been carefully measured. I will keep your suggestion in mind
whenever I return to experiments on living bees; but that will not be
soon.

As you have been considering my little discussion in relation to Lord
Brougham (74/1. Lord Brougham's paper on "The Mathematical Structure
of Bees' Cells," read before the National Institute of France in May,
1858.), and as I have been more vituperated for this part than for
almost any other, I should like just to tell you how I think the case
stands. The discussion viewed by itself is worth little more than the
paper on which it is printed, except in so far as it contains three or
four certainly new facts. But to those who are inclined to believe the
general truth of the conclusion that species and their instincts are
slowly modified by what I call Natural Selection, I think my discussion
nearly removes a very great difficulty. I believe in its truth chiefly
from the existence of the Melipona, which makes a comb so intermediate
in structure between that of the humble and hive-bee, and especially
from the new and curious fact of the bees making smooth cups or saucers
when they excavated in a thick piece of wax, which saucers stood so
close that hexagons were built on their intersecting edges. And, lastly,
because when they excavated on a thin slip of wax, the excavation on
both sides of similar smooth basins was stopped, and flat planes left
between the nearly opposed basins. If my view were wholly false these
cases would, I think, never have occurred. Sedgwick and Co. may abuse me
to their hearts' content, but I shall as yet continue to think that mine
is a rational explanation (as far as it goes) of their method of work.


LETTER 75. TO W.H. MILLER.

Down, December 1st [1859].

Some months ago you were so kind as to say you would measure the
thickness of the walls of the basal and side plates of the cell of the
bee. Could you find time to do so soon? Why I want it soon, is that I
have lately heard from Murray that he sold at his sale far more copies
than he has of the "Origin of Species," and that I must immediately
prepare a new edition, which I am now correcting. By the way, I hear
from Murray that all the attacks heaped on my book do not seem to have
at all injured the sale, which will make poor dear old Sedgwick groan.
If the basal plates and walls do differ considerably in thickness, as
they certainly did in the one or two cells which I measured without
particular care (as I never thought the point of any importance), will
you tell me the bearing of the fact as simply as you can, for the chance
of one so stupid as I am in geometry being able to understand?

Would the greater thickness of the basal plates and of the rim of the
hexagons be a good adaptation to carry the vertical weight of the cells
filled with honey and supporting clusters of living bees?

Will you endeavour to screw out time and grant me this favour?

P.S. If the result of your measurement of the thickness of the walls
turns out at all what I have asserted, would it not be worth while to
write a little bit of a paper on the subject of your former note; and
"pluck" the bees if they deserve this degradation? Many mathematicians
seem to have thought the subject worthy of attention. When the cells are
full of honey and hang vertically they have to support a great weight.
Can the thicker basal plates be a contrivance to give strength to the
whole comb, with less consumption of wax, than if all the sides of the
hexagons were thickened?

This crude notion formerly crossed my mind; but of course it is beyond
me even to conjecture how the case would be.

A mathematician, Mr. Wright, has been writing on the geometry of
bee-cells in the United States in consequence of my book; but I can
hardly understand his paper. (75/1. Chauncey Wright, "Remarks on the
Architecture of Bees" ("Amer. Acad. Proc." IV., 1857-60, page 432.)


LETTER 76. TO T.H. HUXLEY.

(76/1. The date of this letter is unfortunately doubtful, otherwise
it would prove that at an early date he was acquainted with Erasmus
Darwin's views on evolution, a fact which has not always been
recognised. We can hardly doubt that it was written in 1859, for at
this time Mr. Huxley was collecting facts about breeding for his lecture
given at the Royal Institution on February 10th, 1860, on "Species and
Races and their Origin." See "Life and Letters," II., page 281.)

Down [June?] 9 [1859?].

If on the 11th you have half an hour to spare, you might like to see a
very good show of pigeons, and the enclosed card will admit you.

The history of error is quite unimportant, but it is curious to observe
how exactly and accurately my grandfather (in "Zoonomia," Volume I.,
page 504, 1794) gives Lamarck's theory. I will quote one sentence.
Speaking of birds' beaks, he says: "All which seem to have been
gradually produced during many generations by the perpetual endeavour of
the creatures to supply the want of food, and to have been delivered
to their posterity with constant improvement of them for the purposes
required." Lamarck published "Hist. Zoolog." in 1809. The "Zoonomia" was
translated into many languages.


LETTER 77. TO C. LYELL. Down, 28 [June 1859].

It is not worth while troubling you, but my conscience is uneasy at
having forgotten to thank you for your "Etna" (77/1. "On the Structure
of Lavas which have been consolidated on Steep Slopes, with remarks
on the Mode of Origin of Mount Etna, and on the Theory of 'Craters of
Elevation'" ("Phil. Trans. R. Soc." Volume CXLVIII., 1858, page 703).),
which seems to me a magnificent contribution to volcanic geology, and I
should think you might now rest on your oars in this department.

As soon as ever I can get a copy of my book (77/2. "The Origin of
Species," London, 1859.) ready, in some six weeks' or two months' time,
it shall be sent you; and if you approve of it, even to a moderate
extent, it will be the highest satisfaction which I shall ever receive
for an amount of labour which no one will ever appreciate.


LETTER 78. TO J.D. HOOKER.

(78/1. The reference in the following letter is to the proofs of
Hooker's "Australian Flora.")

Down, 28 [July 1859].

The returned sheet is chiefly that which I received in MS. Parts seem to
me (though perhaps it may be forgetfulness) much improved, and I retain
my former impression that the whole discussion on the Australian flora
is admirably good and original. I know you will understand and not
object to my thus expressing my opinion (for one must form one) so
presumptuously. I have no criticisms, except perhaps I should like
you somewhere to say, when you refer to me, that you refer only to the
notice in the "Linnean Journal;" not that, on my deliberate word of
honour, I expect that you will think more favourably of the whole than
of the suggestion in the "Journal." I am far more than satisfied at what
you say of my work; yet it would be as well to avoid the appearance of
your remarks being a criticism on my fuller work.

I am very sorry to hear you are so hard-worked. I also get on very
slowly, and have hardly as yet finished half my volume...I returned on
last Tuesday from a week's hydropathy.

Take warning by me, and do not work too hard. For God's sake, think of
this.

It is dreadfully uphill work with me getting my confounded volume
finished.

I wish you well through all your labours. Adios.


LETTER 79. TO ASA GRAY. Down, November 29th [1859].

This shall be such an extraordinary note as you have never received from
me, for it shall not contain one single question or request. I thank you
for your impression on my views. Every criticism from a good man is of
value to me. What you hint at generally is very, very true: that my work
will be grievously hypothetical, and large parts by no means worthy of
being called induction, my commonest error being probably induction from
too few facts. I had not thought of your objection of my using the term
"natural selection" as an agent. I use it much as a geologist does the
word denudation--for an agent, expressing the result of several combined
actions. I will take care to explain, not merely by inference, what I
mean by the term; for I must use it, otherwise I should incessantly have
to expand it into some such (here miserably expressed) formula as
the following: "The tendency to the preservation (owing to the severe
struggle for life to which all organic beings at some time or generation
are exposed) of any, the slightest, variation in any part, which is of
the slightest use or favourable to the life of the individual which
has thus varied; together with the tendency to its inheritance." Any
variation, which was of no use whatever to the individual, would not be
preserved by this process of "natural selection." But I will not weary
you by going on, as I do not suppose I could make my meaning clearer
without large expansion. I will only add one other sentence: several
varieties of sheep have been turned out together on the Cumberland
mountains, and one particular breed is found to succeed so much better
than all the others that it fairly starves the others to death. I should
here say that natural selection picks out this breed, and would tend to
improve it, or aboriginally to have formed it...

You speak of species not having any material base to rest on, but is
this any greater hardship than deciding what deserves to be called a
variety, and be designated by a Greek letter? When I was at systematic
work, I know I longed to have no other difficulty (great enough) than
deciding whether the form was distinct enough to deserve a name, and not
to be haunted with undefined and unanswerable questions whether it was a
true species. What a jump it is from a well-marked variety, produced by
natural cause, to a species produced by the separate act of the hand
of God! But I am running on foolishly. By the way, I met the other day
Phillips, the palaeontologist, and he asked me, "How do you define a
species?" I answered, "I cannot." Whereupon he said, "at last I have
found out the only true definition,--any form which has ever had a
specific name!"...


LETTER 80. TO C. LYELL. Ilkley, October 31st [1859].

That you may not misunderstand how far I go with Pallas and his many
disciples I should like to add that, though I believe that our domestic
dogs have descended from several wild forms, and though I must think
that the sterility, which they would probably have evinced, if crossed
before being domesticated, has been eliminated, yet I go but a very
little way with Pallas & Co. in their belief in the importance of
the crossing and blending of the aboriginal stocks. (80/1. "With our
domesticated animals, the various races when crossed together are quite
fertile; yet in many cases they are descended from two or more wild
species. From this fact we must conclude either that the aboriginal
parent-species at first produced perfectly fertile hybrids, or that the
hybrids subsequently reared under domestication became quite fertile.
This latter alternative, which was first propounded by Pallas, seems by
far the most probable, and can, indeed, hardly be doubted" ("Origin of
Species," Edition VI., page 240).) You will see this briefly put in the
first chapter. Generally, with respect to crossing, the effects may be
diametrically opposite. If you cross two very distinct races, you may
make (not that I believe such has often been made) a third and new
intermediate race; but if you cross two exceedingly close races, or two
slightly different individuals of the same race, then in fact you annul
and obliterate the difference. In this latter way I believe crossing is
all-important, and now for twenty years I have been working at flowers
and insects under this point of view. I do not like Hooker's terms,
centripetal and centrifugal (80/2. Hooker's "Introductory Essay to the
Flora of Tasmania," pages viii. and ix.): they remind me of Forbes' bad
term of Polarity. (80/3. Forbes, "On the Manifestation of Polarity in
the Distribution of Organised Beings in Time."--"R. Institution Proc."
I., 1851-54.)

I daresay selection by man would generally work quicker than Natural
Selection; but the important distinction between them is, that man can
scarcely select except external and visible characters, and secondly, he
selects for his own good; whereas under nature, characters of all kinds
are selected exclusively for each creature's own good, and are well
exercised; but you will find all this in Chapter IV.

Although the hound, greyhound, and bull-dog may possibly have descended
from three distinct stocks, I am convinced that their present great
amount of difference is mainly due to the same causes which have made
the breeds of pigeons so different from each other, though these breeds
of pigeons have all descended from one wild stock; so that the Pallasian
doctrine I look at as but of quite secondary importance.

In my bigger book I have explained my meaning fully; whether I have in
the Abstract I cannot remember.


LETTER 81. TO C. LYELL. [December 5th, 1859.]

I forget whether you take in the "Times;" for the chance of your not
doing so, I send the enclosed rich letter. (81/1. See the "Times,"
December 1st and December 5th, 1859: two letters signed "Senex," dealing
with "Works of Art in the Drift.") It is, I am sure, by Fitz-Roy...It
is a pity he did not add his theory of the extinction of Mastodon, etc.,
from the door of the Ark being made too small. (81/2. A postscript to
this letter, here omitted, is published in the "Life and Letters," II.,
page 240.)


LETTER 82. FRANCIS GALTON TO CHARLES DARWIN. 42, Rutland Gate, London,
S.W., December 9th, 1859.

Pray let me add a word of congratulation on the completion of your
wonderful volume, to those which I am sure you will have received from
every side. I have laid it down in the full enjoyment of a feeling that
one rarely experiences after boyish days, of having been initiated into
an entirely new province of knowledge, which, nevertheless, connects
itself with other things in a thousand ways. I hear you are engaged on a
second edition. There is a trivial error in page 68, about rhinoceroses
(82/1. Down (loc. cit.) says that neither the elephant nor the
rhinoceros is destroyed by beasts of prey. Mr. Galton wrote that the
wild dogs hunt the young rhinoceros and "exhaust them to death; they
pursue them all day long, tearing at their ears, the only part their
teeth can fasten on." The reference to the rhinoceros is omitted in
later editions of the "Origin."), which I thought I might as well point
out, and have taken advantage of the same opportunity to scrawl down
half a dozen other notes, which may, or may not, be worthless to you.


(83/1. The three next letters refer to Huxley's lecture on Evolution,
given at the Royal Institution on February 10th, 1860, of which the
peroration is given in "Life and Letters," II., page 282, together with
some letters on the subject.)


LETTER 83. TO T.H. HUXLEY. November 25th [1859].

I rejoice beyond measure at the lecture. I shall be at home in a
fortnight, when I could send you splendid folio coloured drawings of
pigeons. Would this be in time? If not, I think I could write to my
servants and have them sent to you. If I do NOT hear I shall understand
that about fifteen or sixteen days will be in time.

I have had a kind yet slashing letter against me from poor dear old
Sedgwick, "who has laughed till his sides ached at my book."

Phillips is cautious, but decidedly, I fear, hostile. Hurrah for the
Lecture--it is grand!


LETTER 84. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, December 13th [1859].

I have got fine large drawings (84/1. For Mr. Huxley's R.I. lecture.)
of the Pouter, Carrier, and Tumbler; I have only drawings in books of
Fantails, Barbs, and Scanderoon Runts. If you had them, you would have
a grand display of extremes of diversity. Will they pay at the Royal
Institution for copying on a large size drawings of these birds? I could
lend skulls of a Carrier and a Tumbler (to show the great difference)
for the same purpose, but it would not probably be worth while.

I have been looking at my MS. What you want I believe is about hybridism
and breeding. The chapter on hybridism is in a pretty good state--about
150 folio pages with notes and references on the back. My first
chapter on breeding is in too bad and imperfect a state to send; but
my discussion on pigeons (in about 100 folio pages) is in a pretty good
state. I am perfectly convinced that you would never have patience to
read such volumes of MS. I speak now in the palace of truth, and pray do
you: if you think you would read them I will send them willingly up by
my servant, or bring them myself next week. But I have no copy, and I
never could possibly replace them; and without you really thought that
you would use them, I had rather not risk them. But I repeat I will
willingly bring them, if you think you would have the vast patience to
use them. Please let me hear on this subject, and whether I shall send
the book with small drawings of three other breeds or skulls. I have
heard a rumour that Busk is on our side in regard to species. Is this
so? It would be very good.

LETTER 85. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, December 16th [1859].

I thank you for your very pleasant and amusing note and invitation
to dinner, which I am sorry to say I cannot accept. I shall come up
(stomach willing) on Thursday for Phil. Club dinner, and return on
Saturday, and I am engaged to my brother for Friday. But I should very
much like to call at the Museum on Friday or Saturday morning and see
you. Would you let me have one line either here or at 57, Queen Anne
Street, to say at what hour you generally come to the Museum, and
whether you will be probably there on Friday or Saturday? Even if you
are at the Club, it will be a mere chance if we sit near each other.

I will bring up the articles on Thursday afternoon, and leave them under
charge of the porter at the Museum. They will consist of large
drawings of a Pouter, a Carrier, and rather smaller drawings of some
sub-varieties (which breed nearly true) of short-faced Tumblers. Also
a small drawing of Scanderoon, a kind of Runt, and a very remarkable
breed. Also a book with very moderately good drawings of Fantail and
Barb, but I very much doubt whether worth the trouble of enlarging.

Also a box (for Heaven's sake, take care!) with a skull of Carrier and
short-faced Tumbler; also lower jaws (largest size) of Runt, middle
size of Rock-pigeon, and the broad one of Barb. The form of ramus of jaw
differs curiously in these jaws.

Also MS. of hybridism and pigeons, which will just weary you to death.
I will call myself for or send a servant for the MS. and bones whenever
you have done with them; but do not hurry.

You have hit on the exact plan, which, on the advice of Lyell, Murray,
etc., I mean to follow--viz., bring out separate volumes in detail--and
I shall begin with domestic productions; but I am determined to try
and [work] very slowly, so that, if possible, I may keep in a somewhat
better state of health. I had not thought of illustrations; that
is capital advice. Farewell, my good and admirable agent for the
promulgation of damnable heresies!


LETTER 86. TO L. HORNER. Down, December 23rd [1859].

I must have the pleasure of thanking you for your extremely kind letter.
I am very much pleased that you approve of my book, and that you are
going to pay me the extraordinary compliment of reading it twice. I fear
that it is tough reading, but it is beyond my powers to make the subject
clearer. Lyell would have done it admirably.

You must enjoy being a gentlemen at your ease, and I hear that you have
returned with ardour to work at the Geological Society. We hope in the
course of the winter to persuade Mrs. Horner and yourself and daughters
to pay us a visit. Ilkley did me extraordinary good during the latter
part of my stay and during my first week at home; but I have gone back
latterly to my bad ways, and fear I shall never be decently well and
strong.

P.S.--When any of your party write to Mildenhall I should be much
obliged if you would say to Bunbury that I hope he will not forget,
whenever he reads my book, his promise to let me know what he thinks
about it; for his knowledge is so great and accurate that every one must
value his opinions highly. I shall be quite contented if his belief in
the immutability of species is at all staggered.


LETTER 87. TO C. LYELL.

(87/1. In the "Origin of Species" a section of Chapter X. is devoted to
"The succession of the same types within the same areas, during the late
Tertiary period" (Edition I., page 339). Mr. Darwin wrote as follows:
"Mr. Clift many years ago showed that the fossil mammals from the
Australian caves were closely allied to the living marsupials of that
continent." After citing other instances illustrating the same agreement
between fossil and recent types, Mr. Darwin continues: "I was so much
impressed with these facts that I strongly insisted, in 1839 and
1845, on this 'law of the succession of types,' on 'this wonderful
relationship in the same continent between the dead and the living.'
Professor Owen has subsequently extended the same generalisation to the
mammals of the Old World.")

Down, [December] 27th [1859].

Owen wrote to me to ask for the reference to Clift. As my own notes
for the late chapters are all in chaos, I bethought me who was the most
trustworthy man of all others to look for references, and I answered
myself, "Of course Lyell." In the ["Principles of Geology"], edition of
1833, Volume III., chapter xi., page 144, you will find the reference to
Clift in the "Edinburgh New Phil Journal," No. XX., page 394. (87/2. The
correct reference to Clift's "Report" on fossil bones from New Holland
is "Edinburgh New Phil. Journal," 1831, page 394.) You will also find
that you were greatly struck with the fact itself (87/3. This refers to
the discovery of recent and fossil species of animals in an Australian
cave-breccia. Mr. Clift is quoted as having identified one of the bones,
which was much larger than the rest, as that of a hippopotamus.), which
I had quite forgotten. I copied the passage, and sent it to Owen. Why
I gave in some detail references to my own work is that Owen (not the
first occasion with respect to myself and others) quietly ignores my
having ever generalised on the subject, and makes a great fuss on more
than one occasion at having discovered the law of succession. In fact,
this law, with the Galapagos distribution, first turned my mind on the
origin of species. My own references are [to the "Naturalist's Voyage"]:

     Large 8vo,     Murray,
     Edition 1839   Edition 1845

     Page 210       Page 173        On succession.

     Page 153       Pages 131-32    On splitting up of old
                                    geographical provinces.


Long before Owen published I had in MS. worked out the succession of
types in the Old World (as I remember telling Sedgwick, who of course
disbelieved it).

Since receiving your last letter on Hooker, I have read his introduction
as far as page xxiv (87/4. "On the Flora of Australia, etc.; being an
Introductory Essay to the Flora of Tasmania": London, 1859.), where
the Australian flora begins, and this latter part I liked most in
the proofs. It is a magnificent essay. I doubt slightly about some
assertions, or rather should have liked more facts--as, for instance, in
regard to species varying most on the confines of their range. Naturally
I doubt a little his remarks about divergence (87/5. "Variation is
effected by graduated changes; and the tendency of varieties, both in
nature and under cultivation, when further varying, is rather to depart
more and more widely from the original type than to revert to it." On
the margin Darwin wrote: "Without selection doubtful" (loc. cit., page
viii).), and about domestic races being produced under nature without
selection. It would take much to persuade me that a Pouter Pigeon, or
a Carrier, etc., could have been produced by the mere laws of variation
without long continued selection, though each little enlargement of crop
and beak are due to variation. I demur greatly to his comparison of the
products of sinking and rising islands (87/6. "I venture to anticipate
that a study of the vegetation of the islands with reference to
the peculiarities of the generic types on the one hand, and of the
geological conditions (whether as rising or sinking) on the other,
may, in the present state of our knowledge, advance other subjects of
distribution and variation considerably" (loc. cit., page xv).); in the
Indian Ocean he compares exclusively many rising volcanic and sinking
coral islands. The latter have a most peculiar soil, and are excessively
small in area, and are tenanted by very few species; moreover, such low
coral islands have probably been often, during their subsidence, utterly
submerged, and restocked by plants from other islands. In the Pacific
Ocean the floras of all the best cases are unknown. The comparison ought
to have been exclusively between rising and fringed volcanic islands,
and sinking and encircled volcanic islands. I have read Naudin (87/7.
Naudin, "Revue Horticole," 1852?.), and Hooker agrees that he does not
even touch on my views.


LETTER 88. J.D. HOOKER TO CHARLES DARWIN. [1859 or 1860.]

I have had another talk with Bentham, who is greatly agitated by your
book: evidently the stern, keen intellect is aroused, and he finds that
it is too late to halt between two opinions. How it will go we shall
see. I am intensely interested in what we shall come to, and never
broach the subject to him. I finished the geological evidence chapters
yesterday; they are very fine and very striking, but I cannot see they
are such forcible objections as you still hold them to be. I would say
that you still in your secret soul underrate the imperfection of the
Geological Record, though no language can be stronger or arguments
fairer and sounder against it. Of course I am influenced by Botany, and
the conviction that we have not in a fossilised condition a fraction of
the plants that have existed, and that not a fraction of those we have
are recognisable specifically. I never saw so clearly put the fact that
it is not intermediates between existing species we want, but between
these and the unknown tertium quid.

You certainly make a hobby of Natural Selection, and probably ride it
too hard; that is a necessity of your case. If the improvement of
the creation-by-variation doctrine is conceivable, it will be by
unburthening your theory of Natural Selection, which at first sight
seems overstrained--i.e., to account for too much. I think, too, that
some of your difficulties which you override by Natural Selection may
give way before other explanations. But, oh Lord! how little we do
know and have known to be so advanced in knowledge by one theory. If we
thought ourselves knowing dogs before you revealed Natural Selection,
what d--d ignorant ones we must surely be now we do know that law.

I hear you may be at the Club on Thursday. I hope so. Huxley will not be
there, so do not come on that ground.


LETTER 89. TO T.H. HUXLEY. January 1st [1860].

I write one line merely to thank you for your pleasant note, and to say
that I will keep your secret. I will shake my head as mysteriously
as Lord Burleigh. Several persons have asked me who wrote that "most
remarkable article" in the "Times." (89/1. The "Times," December 26th,
1859, page 8. The opening paragraphs were by one of the staff of
the "Times." See "Life and Letters," II., page 255, for Mr. Huxley's
interesting account of his share in the matter.) As a cat may look at a
king, so I have said that I strongly suspected you. X was so sharp that
the first sentence revealed the authorship. The Z's (God save the
mark) thought it was Owen's! You may rely on it that it has made a deep
impression, and I am heartily glad that the subject and I owe you
this further obligation. But for God's sake, take care of your health;
remember that the brain takes years to rest, whilst the muscles take
only hours. There is poor Dana, to whom I used to preach by letter,
writes to me that my prophecies are come true: he is in Florence quite
done up, can read nothing and write nothing, and cannot talk for half an
hour. I noticed the "naughty sentence" (89/2. Mr. Huxley, after speaking
of the rudimental teeth of the whale, of rudimental jaws in insects
which never bite, and rudimental eyes in blind animals, goes on: "And
we would remind those who, ignorant of the facts, must be moved by
authority, that no one has asserted the incompetence of the doctrine
of final causes, in its application to physiology and anatomy, more
strongly than our own eminent anatomist, Professor Owen, who, speaking
of such cases, says ("On the Nature of Limbs," pages 39, 40), 'I think
it will be obvious that the principle of final adaptations fails to
satisfy all the conditions of the problem.'"--"The Times," December
26th, 1859.) about Owen, though my wife saw its bearing first. Farewell
you best and worst of men!

That sentence about the bird and the fish dinners charmed us. Lyell
wrote to me--style like yours.

Have you seen the slashing article of December 26th in the "Daily News,"
against my stealing from my "master," the author of the "Vestiges?"


LETTER 90. TO J.L.A. DE QUATREFAGES. [Undated]

How I should like to know whether Milne Edwards has read the copy which
I sent him, and whether he thinks I have made a pretty good case on
our side of the question. There is no naturalist in the world for whose
opinion I have so profound a respect. Of course I am not so silly as to
expect to change his opinion.


LETTER 91. TO C. LYELL.

(91/1. The date of this letter is doubtful; but as it evidently refers
to the 2nd edition of the "Origin," which appeared on January 7th, 1860,
we believe that December 9th, 1859, is right. The letter of Sedgwick's
is doubtless that given in the "Life and Letters," II., page 247; it is
there dated December 24th, 1859, but from other evidence it was probably
written on November 24th)

[December?] 9th [1859].

I send Sedgwick's letter; it is terribly muddled, and really the first
page seems almost childish.

I am sadly over-worked, so will not write to you. I have worked in
a number of your invaluable corrections--indeed, all as far as time
permits. I infer from a letter from Huxley that Ramsay (91/2. See a
letter to Huxley, November 27th, 1859, "Life and Letters," II., page
282.) is a convert, and I am extremely glad to get pure geologists, as
they will be very few. Many thanks for your very pleasant note. What
pleasure you have given me. I believe I should have been miserable had
it not been for you and a few others, for I hear threatening of attacks
which I daresay will be severe enough. But I am sure that I can now bear
them.


LETTER 92. TO T.H. HUXLEY.

(92/1. The point here discussed is one to which Mr. Huxley attached
great, in our opinion too great, importance.)

Down, January 11th [1860?].

I fully agree that the difficulty is great, and might be made much of by
a mere advocate. Will you oblige me by reading again slowly from pages
267 to 272. (92/2. The reference is to the "Origin," Edition I.: the
section on "The Fertility of Varieties when crossed, and of their
Mongrel Offspring" occupies pages 267-72.) I may add to what is there
said, that it seems to me quite hopeless to attempt to explain why
varieties are not sterile, until we know the precise cause of sterility
in species.

Reflect for a moment on how small and on what very peculiar causes the
unequal reciprocity of fertility in the same two species must depend.
Reflect on the curious case of species more fertile with foreign pollen
than their own. Reflect on many cases which could be given, and shall
be given in my larger book (independently of hybridity) of very slight
changes of conditions causing one species to be quite sterile and not
affecting a closely allied species. How profoundly ignorant we are on
the intimate relation between conditions of life and impaired fertility
in pure species!

The only point which I might add to my short discussion on this subject,
is that I think it probable that the want of adaptation to uniform
conditions of life in our domestic varieties has played an important
part in preventing their acquiring sterility when crossed. For the want
of uniformity, and changes in the conditions of life, seem the
only cause of the elimination of sterility (when crossed) under
domestication. (92/3. The meaning which we attach to this obscure
sentence is as follows: Species in a state of nature are closely adapted
to definite conditions of life, so that the sexual constitution of
species A is attuned, as it were, to a condition different from that to
which B is attuned, and this leads to sterility. But domestic varieties
are not strictly adapted by Natural Selection to definite conditions,
and thus have less specialised sexual constitutions.) This elimination,
though admitted by many authors, rests on very slight evidence, yet I
think is very probably true, as may be inferred from the case of
dogs. Under nature it seems improbable that the differences in the
reproductive constitution, on which the sterility of any two species
when crossed depends, can be acquired directly by Natural Selection; for
it is of no advantage to the species. Such differences in reproductive
constitution must stand in correlation with some other differences; but
how impossible to conjecture what these are! Reflect on the case of
the variations of Verbascum, which differ in no other respect whatever
besides the fluctuating element of the colour of the flower, and yet it
is impossible to resist Gartner's evidence, that this difference in the
colour does affect the mutual fertility of the varieties.

The whole case seems to me far too mysterious to rest (92/4. The word
"rest" seems to be used in place of "to serve as a foundation for.") a
valid attack on the theory of modification of species, though, as you
say, it offers excellent ground for a mere advocate.

I am surprised, considering how ignorant we are on very many points,
[that] more weak parts in my book have not as yet been pointed out to
me. No doubt many will be. H.C. Watson founds his objection in MS. on
there being no limit to infinite diversification of species: I have
answered this, I think, satisfactorily, and have sent attack and answer
to Lyell and Hooker. If this seems to you a good objection, I would
send papers to you. Andrew Murray "disposes of" the whole theory by an
ingenious difficulty from the distribution of blind cave insects (92/5.
See "Life and Letters, Volume II., page 265. The reference here is to
Murray's address before the Botanical Society, Edinburgh. Mr. Darwin
seems to have read Murray's views only in a separate copy reprinted from
the "Proc. R. Soc. Edin." There is some confusion about the date of the
paper; the separate copy is dated January 16th, while in the volume of
the "Proc. R. Soc." it is February 20th. In the "Life and Letters," II.,
page 261 it is erroneously stated that these are two different papers.);
but it can, I think, be fairly answered.


LETTER 93. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, [February] 2nd [1860].

I have had this morning a letter from old Bronn (93/1. See "Life and
Letters, II., page 277.) (who, to my astonishment, seems slightly
staggered by Natural Selection), and he says a publisher in Stuttgart is
willing to publish a translation, and that he, Bronn, will to a certain
extent superintend. Have you written to Kolliker? if not, perhaps I had
better close with this proposal--what do you think? If you have written,
I must wait, and in this case will you kindly let me hear as soon as you
hear from Kolliker?

My poor dear friend, you will curse the day when you took up the
"general agency" line; but really after this I will not give you any
more trouble.

Do not forget the three tickets for us for your lecture, and the ticket
for Baily, the poulterer.

Old Bronn has published in the "Year-book for Mineralogy" a notice of
the "Origin" (93/2. "Neues Jahrb. fur Min." 1860, page 112.); and says
he has himself published elsewhere a foreboding of the theory!


LETTER 94. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, February 14th [1860].

I succeeded in persuading myself for twenty-four hours that Huxley's
lecture was a success. (94/1. At the Royal Institution. See "Life and
Letters," II., page 282.) Parts were eloquent and good, and all very
bold; and I heard strangers say, "What a good lecture!" I told Huxley
so; but I demurred much to the time wasted in introductory remarks,
especially to his making it appear that sterility was a clear and
manifest distinction of species, and to his not having even alluded to
the more important parts of the subject. He said that he had much more
written out, but time failed. After conversation with others and more
reflection, I must confess that as an exposition of the doctrine the
lecture seems to me an entire failure. I thank God I did not think so
when I saw Huxley; for he spoke so kindly and magnificently of me, that
I could hardly have endured to say what I now think. He gave no just
idea of Natural Selection. I have always looked at the doctrine of
Natural Selection as an hypothesis, which, if it explained several
large classes of facts, would deserve to be ranked as a theory deserving
acceptance; and this, of course, is my own opinion. But, as Huxley
has never alluded to my explanation of classification, morphology,
embryology, etc., I thought he was thoroughly dissatisfied with all this
part of my book. But to my joy I find it is not so, and that he agrees
with my manner of looking at the subject; only that he rates higher than
I do the necessity of Natural Selection being shown to be a vera
causa always in action. He tells me he is writing a long review in the
"Westminster." It was really provoking how he wasted time over the idea
of a species as exemplified in the horse, and over Sir J. Hall's old
experiment on marble. Murchison was very civil to me over my book after
the lecture, in which he was disappointed. I have quite made up my mind
to a savage onslaught; but with Lyell, you, and Huxley, I feel confident
we are right, and in the long run shall prevail. I do not think Asa Gray
has quite done you justice in the beginning of the review of me. (94/2.
"Review of Darwin's Theory on the Origin of Species by means of Natural
Selection," by "A.G." ("Amer. Jour. Sci." Volume XXIX., page 153, 1860).
In a letter to Asa Gray on February 18th, 1860, Darwin writes: "Your
review seems to me admirable; by far the best which I have read." ("Life
and Letters," II., 1887, page 286.) The review seemed to me very good,
but I read it very hastily.


LETTER 95. TO C. LYELL. Down, [February] 18th [1860].

I send by this post Asa Gray, which seems to me very good, with the
stamp of originality on it. Also Bronn's "Jahrbuch fur Mineralogie."
(95/1. See Letter 93.)

The united intellect of my family has vainly tried to make it out. I
never tried such confoundedly hard german; nor does it seem worth the
labour. He sticks to Priestley's Green Matter, and seems to think that
till it can be shown how life arises it is no good showing how the forms
of life arise. This seems to me about as logical (comparing very great
things with little) as to say it was no use in Newton showing the laws
of attraction of gravity and the consequent movement of the planets,
because he could not show what the attraction of gravity is.

The expression "Wahl der Lebens-Weise" (95/2. "Die fruchtbarste und
allgemeinste Ursache der Varietaten-Bildung ist jedoch die Wahl
der Lebens-Weise" (loc. cit., page 112).) makes me doubt whether B.
understands what I mean by Natural Selection, as I have told him. He
says (if I understand him) that you ought to be on the same side with
me.

P.S. Sunday afternoon.--I have kept back this to thank you for your
letter, with much news, received this morning. My conscience is uneasy
at the time you waste in amusing and interesting me. I was very
curious to hear about Phillips. The review in the "Annals" is, as I was
convinced, by Wollaston, for I have had a very cordial letter from him
this morning. (95/3. A bibliographical Notice "On the Origin of Species
by means of Natural Selection; or the Preservation of Favoured Races
in the Struggle for Life." ("Annals and Mag." Volume V., pages 132-43,
1860). The notice is not signed. Referring to the article, in a
letter to Lyell, February 15th, 1860, Darwin writes: "I am perfectly
convinced...that the review in the "Annals" is by Wollaston; no one else
in the world would have used so many parentheses" ("Life and Letters,"
II., page 284).)

I send by this post an attack in the "Gardeners' Chronicle" by Harvey
(a first-rate botanist, as you probably know). (95/4. In the "Gardeners'
Chronicle" of February 18th, 1860, W.H. Harvey described a case of
monstrosity in Begonia frigida, which he argued was hostile to the
theory of Natural Selection. The passage about Harvey's attack was
published in the "Life and Letters," II., page 275.) It seems to me
rather strange; he assumes the permanence of monsters, whereas monsters
are generally sterile, and not often inheritable. But grant his case,
it comes [to this], that I have been too cautious in not admitting great
and sudden variations. Here again comes in the mischief of my abstract.
In fuller MS. I have discussed the parallel case of a normal fish like a
monstrous gold-fish.

I end my discussion by doubting, because all cases of monstrosities
which resemble normal structures which I could find were not in allied
groups. Trees like Aspicarpa (95/5. Aspicarpa, an American genus of
Malpighiaceae, is quoted in the "Origin" (Edition VI., page 367) as an
illustration of Linnaeus' aphorism that the characters do not give
the genus, but the genus gives the characters. During several years'
cultivation in France Aspicarpa produced only degraded flowers, which
differed in many of the most important points of structure from the
proper type of the order; but it was recognised by M. Richard that the
genus should be retained among the Malpighiaceae. "This case," adds
Darwin, "well illustrates the spirit of our classification."), with
flowers of two kinds (in the "Origin"), led me also to speculate on the
same subject; but I could find only one doubtfully analogous case of
species having flowers like the degraded or monstrous flowers. Harvey
does not see that if only a few (as he supposes) of the seedlings
inherited being monstrosities, Natural Selection would be necessary
to select and preserve them. You had better return the "Gardeners'
Chronicle," etc., to my brother's. The case of Begonia (95/6. Harvey's
criticism was answered by Sir J.D. Hooker in the following number of the
"Gardeners' Chronicle" (February 25th, 1860, page 170).) in itself is
very curious; I am tempted to answer the notice, but I will refrain, for
there would be no end to answers.

With respect to your objection of a multitude of still living simple
forms, I have not discussed it anywhere in the "Origin," though I have
often thought it over. What you say about progress being only occasional
and retrogression not uncommon, I agree to; only that in the animal
kingdom I greatly doubt about retrogression being common. I have always
put it to myself--What advantage can we see in an infusory animal, or an
intestinal worm, or coral polypus, or earthworm being highly developed?
If no advantage, they would not become highly developed: not but what
all these animals have very complex structures (except infusoria), and
they may well be higher than the animals which occupied similar places
in the economy of nature before the Silurian epoch. There is a blind
snake with the appearances and, in some respects, habits of earthworms;
but this blind snake does not tend, as far as we can see, to replace and
drive out worms. I think I must in a future edition discuss a few more
such points, and will introduce this and H.C. Watson's objection about
the infinite number of species and the general rise in organisation. But
there is a directly opposite objection to yours which is very difficult
to answer--viz. how at the first start of life, when there were only
the simplest organisms, how did any complication of organisation profit
them? I can only answer that we have not facts enough to guide any
speculation on the subject.

With respect to Lepidosiren, Ganoid fishes, perhaps Ornithorhynchus, I
suspect, as stated in the "Origin," (95/7. "Origin of Species" (Edition
VI.), page 83.), that they have been preserved, from inhabiting
fresh-water and isolated parts of the world, in which there has been
less competition and less rapid progress in Natural Selection, owing
to the fewness of individuals which can inhabit small areas; and where
there are few individuals variation at most must be slower. There are
several allusions to this notion in the "Origin," as under Amblyopsis,
the blind cave-fish (95/8. "Origin," page 112.), and under Heer (95/9.
"Origin," page 83.) about Madeira plants resembling the fossil and
extinct plants of Europe.


LETTER 96. TO JAMES LAMONT. Down, March 5th [1860?].

I am much obliged for your long and interesting letter. You have indeed
good right to speak confidently about the habits of wild birds and
animals; for I should think no one beside yourself has ever sported in
Spitzbergen and Southern Africa. It is very curious and interesting
that you should have arrived at the conclusion that so-called "Natural
Selection" had been efficient in giving their peculiar colours to our
grouse. I shall probably use your authority on the similar habits of our
grouse and the Norwegian species.

I am particularly obliged for your very curious fact of the effect
produced by the introduction of the lowland grouse on the wildness of
the grouse in your neighbourhood. It is a very striking instance of what
crossing will do in affecting the character of a breed. Have you ever
seen it stated in any sporting work that game has become wilder in this
country? I wish I could get any sort of proof of the fact, for your
explanation seems to me equally ingenious and probable. I have myself
witnessed in South America a nearly parallel [case] with that which
you mention in regard to the reindeer in Spitzbergen, with the Cervus
campestris of La Plata. It feared neither man nor the sound of shot of
a rifle, but was terrified at the sight of a man on horseback; every one
in that country always riding. As you are so great a sportsman, perhaps
you will kindly look to one very trifling point for me, as my neighbours
here think it too absurd to notice--namely, whether the feet of birds
are dirty, whether a few grains of dirt do not adhere occasionally to
their feet. I especially want to know how this is in the case of birds
like herons and waders, which stalk in the mud. You will guess that this
relates to dispersal of seeds, which is one of my greatest difficulties.
My health is very indifferent, and I am seldom able to attend the
scientific meetings, but I sincerely hope that I may some time have the
pleasure of meeting you.

Pray accept my cordial thanks for your very kind letter.


LETTER 97. TO G.H.K. THWAITES. Down, March 21st [1860].

I thank you very sincerely for your letter, and am much pleased that you
go a little way with me. You will think it presumptuous, but I am well
convinced from my own mental experience that if you keep the subject at
all before your mind you will ultimately go further. The present volume
is a mere abstract, and there are great omissions. One main one, which
I have rectified in the foreign editions, is an explanation (which has
satisfied Lyell, who made the same objection with you) why many forms do
not progress or advance (and I quite agree about some retrograding). I
have also a MS. discussion on beauty; but do you really suppose that for
instance Diatomaceae were created beautiful that man, after millions of
generations, should admire them through the microscope? (97/1. Thwaites
(1811-82) published several papers on the Diatomaceae ("On Conjugation
in the Diatomaceae," "Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist." Volume XX., 1847, pages
9-11, 343-4; "Further Observations on the Diatomaceae," loc. cit., 1848,
page 161). See "Life and Letters" II., page 292.) I should attribute
most of such structures to quite unknown laws of growth; and mere
repetition of parts is to our eyes one main element of beauty. When any
structure is of use (and I can show what curiously minute particulars
are often of highest use), I can see with my prejudiced eyes no limit to
the perfection of the coadaptations which could be effected by Natural
Selection. I rather doubt whether you see how far, as it seems to me,
the argument for homology and embryology may be carried. I do not look
at this as mere analogy. I would as soon believe that fossil shells were
mere mockeries of real shells as that the same bones in the foot of a
dog and wing of a bat, or the similar embryo of mammal and bird, had
not a direct signification, and that the signification can be unity of
descent or nothing. But I venture to repeat how much pleased I am that
you go some little way with me. I find a number of naturalists do
the same, and as their halting-places are various, and I must think
arbitrary, I believe they will all go further. As for changing at once
one's opinion, I would not value the opinion of a man who could do so;
it must be a slow process. (97/2. Darwin wrote to Woodward in regard to
the "Origin": "It may be a vain and silly thing to say, but I believe
my book must be read twice carefully to be fully understood. You will
perhaps think it by no means worth the labour.") Thank you for telling
me about the Lantana (97/3. An exotic species of Lantana (Verbenaceae)
grows vigorously in Ceylon, and is described as frequently making its
appearance after the firing of the low-country forests (see H.H.W.
Pearson, "The Botany of the Ceylon Patanas," "Journal Linn. Soc." Volume
XXXIV., page 317, 1899). No doubt Thwaites' letter to Darwin referred
to the spreading of the introduced Lantana, comparable to that of the
cardoon in La Plata and of other plants mentioned by Darwin in the
"Origin of Species" (Edition VI., page 51).), and I should at any time
be most grateful for any information which you think would be of use
to me. I hope that you will publish a list of all naturalised plants
in Ceylon, as far as known, carefully distinguishing those confined to
cultivated soils alone. I feel sure that this most important subject has
been greatly undervalued.


LETTER 98. TO T.H. HUXLEY.

(98/1. The reference here is to the review on the "Origin of Species"
generally believed to be by the late Sir R. Owen, and published in
the April number of the "Edinburgh Review," 1860. Owen's biographer
is silent on the subject, and prints, without comment, the following
passage in an undated letter from Sedgwick to Owen: "Do you know who was
the author of the article in the "Edinburgh" on the subject of Darwin's
theory? On the whole, I think it very good. I once suspected that you
must have had a hand in it, and I then abandoned that thought. I have
not read it with any care" (Owen's "Life," Volume II., page 96).

April 9th [1860].

I never saw such an amount of misrepresentation. At page 530 (98/2.
"Lasting and fruitful conclusions have, indeed, hitherto been based
only on the possession of knowledge; now we are called upon to accept an
hypothesis on the plea of want of knowledge. The geological record,
it is averred, is so imperfect!"--"Edinburgh Review," CXI., 1860, page
530.) he says we are called on to accept the hypothesis on the plea of
ignorance, whereas I think I could not have made it clearer that I admit
the imperfection of the Geological Record as a great difficulty.

The quotation (98/3. "We are appealed to, or at least 'the young and
rising naturalists with plastic minds,* [On the Nature of the Limbs,
page 482] are adjured." It will be seen that the inverted comma after
"naturalists" is omitted; the asterisk referring, in a footnote (here
placed in square brackets), to page 482 of the "Origin," seems to
have been incorrectly assumed by Mr. Darwin to show the close of the
quotation.--Ibid., page 512.) on page 512 of the "Review" about "young
and rising naturalists with plastic minds," attributed to "nature of
limbs," is a false quotation, as I do not use the words "plastic minds."

At page 501 (98/4. The passage ("Origin," Edition I., page 483) begins,
"But do they really believe...," and shows clearly that the author
considers such a belief all but impossible.) the quotation is garbled,
for I only ask whether naturalists believe about elemental atoms
flashing, etc., and he changes it into that I state that they do
believe.

At page 500 (98/5. "All who have brought the transmutation speculation
to the test of observed facts and ascertained powers in organic life,
and have published the results, usually adverse to such speculations,
are set down by Mr. Darwin as 'curiously illustrating the blindness of
preconceived opinion.'" The passage in the "Origin," page 482, begins
by expressing surprise at the point of view of some naturalists: "They
admit that a multitude of forms, which till lately they themselves
thought were special creations,...have been produced by variation, but
they refuse to extend the same view to other and very slightly
different forms...They admit variation as a vera causa in one case, they
arbitrarily reject it in another, without assigning any distinction in
the two cases. The day will come when this will be given as a curious
illustration of the blindness of preconceived opinion.") it is very
false to say that I imply by "blindness of preconceived opinion" the
simple belief of creation. And so on in other cases. But I beg pardon
for troubling you. I am heartily sorry that in your unselfish endeavours
to spread what you believe to be truth, you should have incurred so
brutal an attack. (98/6. The "Edinburgh" Reviewer, referring to Huxley's
Royal Institution Lecture given February 10th, 1860, "On Species and
Races and their Origin," says (page 521), "We gazed with amazement at
the audacity of the dispenser of the hour's intellectual amusement,
who, availing himself of the technical ignorance of the majority of his
auditors, sought to blind them as to the frail foundations of 'natural
selection' by such illustrations as the subjoined": And then follows
a critique of the lecturer's comparison of the supposed descent of
the horse from the Palaeothere with that of various kinds of domestic
pigeons from the Rock-pigeon.) And now I will not think any more of this
false and malignant attack.


LETTER 99. TO MAXWELL MASTERS. Down, April 13th [1860].

I thank you very sincerely for your two kind notes. The next time you
write to your father I beg you to give him from me my best thanks, but I
am sorry that he should have had the trouble of writing when ill. I have
been much interested by the facts given by him. If you think he would
in the least care to hear the result of an artificial cross of two sweet
peas, you can send the enclosed; if it will only trouble him, tear it
up. There seems to be so much parallelism in the kind of variation from
my experiment, which was certainly a cross, and what Mr. Masters has
observed, that I cannot help suspecting that his peas were crossed by
bees, which I have seen well dusted with the pollen of the sweet pea;
but then I wish this, and how hard it is to prevent one's wish biassing
one's judgment!

I was struck with your remark about the Compositae, etc. I do not see
that it bears much against me, and whether it does or not is of
course of not the slightest importance. Although I fully agree that
no definition can be drawn between monstrosities and slight variations
(such as my theory requires), yet I suspect there is some distinction.
Some facts lead me to think that monstrosities supervene generally at
an early age; and after attending to the subject I have great doubts
whether species in a state of nature ever become modified by such sudden
jumps as would result from the Natural Selection of monstrosities. You
cannot do me a greater service than by pointing out errors. I sincerely
hope that your work on monstrosities (99/1. "Vegetable Teratology,"
London, 1869 (Ray Soc.).) will soon appear, for I am sure it will be
highly instructive.

Now for your notes, for which let me again thank you.

1. Your conclusion about parts developed (99/2. See "Origin of Species,"
Edition I., page 153, on the variability of parts "developed in an
extraordinary manner in any one species, compared with the other species
of the same genus." See "Life and Letters," II., pages 97, 98, also
Letter 33.) not being extra variable agrees with Hooker's. You will see
that I have stated that the rule apparently does not hold with plants,
though it ought, if true, to hold good with them.

2. I cannot now remember in what work I saw the statement about Peloria
affecting the axis, but I know it was one which I thought might be
trusted. I consulted also Dr. Falconer, and I think that he agreed to
the truth of it; but I cannot now tell where to look for my notes. I had
been much struck with finding a Laburnum tree with the terminal
flowers alone in each raceme peloric, though not perfectly regular. The
Pelargonium case in the "Origin" seems to point in the same direction.
(99/3. "Origin of Species," Edition I., page 145.)

3. Thanks for the correction about furze: I found the seedlings just
sprouting, and was so much surprised and their appearance that I sent
them to Hooker; but I never plainly asked myself whether they were
cotyledons or first leaves. (99/4. The trifoliate leaves of furze
seedlings are not cotyledons, but early leaves: see Lubbock's
"Seedlings," I., page 410.)

4. That is a curious fact about the seeds of the furze, the more curious
as I found with Leguminosae that immersion in plain cold water for a
very few days killed some kinds.

If at any time anything should occur to you illustrating or opposing my
notions, and you have leisure to inform me, I should be truly grateful,
for I can plainly see that you have wealth of knowledge.

With respect to advancement or retrogression in organisation in
monstrosities of the Compositae, etc., do you not find it very difficult
to define which is which?

Anyhow, most botanists seem to differ as widely as possible on this
head.


LETTER 100. TO J.S. HENSLOW. Down, May 8th [1860].

Very many thanks about the Elodea, which case interests me much. I
wrote to Mr. Marshall (100/1. W. Marshall was the author of "Anacharis
alsinastrum, a new water-weed": four letters to the "Cambridge
Independent Press," reprinted as a pamphlet, 1852.) at Ely, and in due
time he says he will send me whatever information he can procure.

Owen is indeed very spiteful. (100/2. Owen was believed to be the author
of the article in the "Edinburgh Review," April, 1860. See Letter 98.)
He misrepresents and alters what I say very unfairly. But I think his
conduct towards Hooker most ungenerous: viz., to allude to his essay
(Australian Flora), and not to notice the magnificent results on
geographical distribution. The Londoners say he is mad with envy because
my book has been talked about; what a strange man to be envious of a
naturalist like myself, immeasurably his inferior! From one conversation
with him I really suspect he goes at the bottom of his hidden soul as
far as I do.

I wonder whether Sedgwick noticed in the "Edinburgh Review" about
the "Sacerdotal revilers,"--so the revilers are tearing each other
to pieces. I suppose Sedgwick will be very fierce against me at the
Philosophical Society. (100/3. The meeting of the "Cambridge Phil.
Soc." was held on May 7th, 1860, and fully reported in the "Cambridge
Chronicle," May 19th. Sedgwick is reported to have said that "Darwin's
theory is not inductive--is not based on a series of acknowledged
facts, leading to a general conclusion evolved, logically out of the
facts...The only facts he pretends to adduce, as true elements of
proof, are the varieties produced by domestication and the artifices
of crossbreeding." Sedgwick went on to speak of the vexatious
multiplication of supposed species, and adds, "In this respect Darwin's
theory may help to simplify our classifications, and thereby do good
service to modern science. But he has not undermined any grand truth
in the constancy of natural laws, and the continuity of true species.")
Judging from his notice in the "Spectator," (100/4. March 24th, 1860;
see "Life and Letters," II., page 297.) he will misrepresent me, but it
will certainly be unintentionally done. In a letter to me, and in
the above notice, he talks much about my departing from the spirit of
inductive philosophy. I wish, if you ever talk on the subject to him,
you would ask him whether it was not allowable (and a great step) to
invent the undulatory theory of light, i.e. hypothetical undulations,
in a hypothetical substance, the ether. And if this be so, why may I not
invent the hypothesis of Natural Selection (which from the analogy
of domestic productions, and from what we know of the struggle for
existence and of the variability of organic beings, is, in some very
slight degree, in itself probable) and try whether this hypothesis of
Natural Selection does not explain (as I think it does) a large
number of facts in geographical distribution--geological succession,
classification, morphology, embryology, etc. I should really much like
to know why such an hypothesis as the undulation of the ether may be
invented, and why I may not invent (not that I did invent it, for I
was led to it by studying domestic varieties) any hypothesis, such as
Natural Selection.

Pray forgive me and my pen for running away with me, and scribbling on
at such length.

I can perfectly understand Sedgwick (100/5. See "Life and Letters," II.,
page 247; the letter is there dated December 24th, but must, we think,
have been written in November at latest.) or any one saying that Natural
Selection does not explain large classes of facts; but that is very
different from saying that I depart from right principles of scientific
investigation.


LETTER 101. TO J.S. HENSLOW. Down, May 14th [1860].

I have been greatly interested by your letter to Hooker, and I must
thank you from my heart for so generously defending me, as far as you
could, against my powerful attackers. Nothing which persons say hurts
me for long, for I have an entire conviction that I have not been
influenced by bad feelings in the conclusions at which I have arrived.
Nor have I published my conclusions without long deliberation, and they
were arrived at after far more study than the public will ever know of,
or believe in. I am certain to have erred in many points, but I do not
believe so much as Sedgwick and Co. think.

Is there any Abstract or Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical
Society published? (101/1. Henslow's remarks are not given in the
above-mentioned report in the "Cambridge Chronicle.") If so, and you
could get me a copy, I should like to have one.

Believe me, my dear Henslow, I feel grateful to you on this occasion,
and for the multitude of kindnesses you have done me from my earliest
days at Cambridge.


LETTER 102. TO C. LYELL. Down, May 22nd [1860].

Hooker has sent me a letter of Thwaites (102/1. See Letter 97.), of
Ceylon, who makes exactly the same objections which you did at first
about the necessity of all forms advancing, and therefore the difficulty
of simple forms still existing. There was no worse omission than this in
my book, and I had the discussion all ready.

I am extremely glad to hear that you intend adding new arguments about
the imperfection of the Geological Record. I always feel this acutely,
and am surprised that such men as Ramsay and Jukes do not feel it more.

I quite agree on insufficient evidence about mummy wheat. (102/2. See
notes appended to a letter to Lyell, September 1843 (Botany).

When you can spare it, I should like (but out of mere curiosity) to see
Binney on Coal marine marshes.

I once made Hooker very savage by saying that I believed the Coal plants
grew in the sea, like mangroves. (102/3. See "Life and Letters," I.,
page 356.)


LETTER 103. TO J.D. HOOKER.

(103/1. This letter is of interest as containing a strong expression
upon the overwhelming importance of selection.)

Down [1860].

Many thanks for Harvey's letter (103/2. W.H. Harvey had been
corresponding with Sir J.D. Hooker on the "Origin of Species."), which
I will keep a little longer and then return. I will write to him and
try to make clear from analogy of domestic productions the part which I
believe selection has played. I have been reworking my pigeons and other
domestic animals, and I am sure that any one is right in saying that
selection is the efficient cause, though, as you truly say, variation
is the base of all. Why I do not believe so much as you do in physical
agencies is that I see in almost every organism (though far more
clearly in animals than in plants) adaptation, and this except in rare
instances, must, I should think, be due to selection.

Do not forget the Pyrola when in flower. (103/3. In a letter to Hooker,
May 22nd, 1860, Darwin wrote: "Have you Pyrola at Kew? if so, for
heaven's sake observe the curvature of the pistil towards the gangway to
the nectary." The fact of the stigma in insect-visited flowers being so
placed that the visitor must touch it on its way to the nectar, was a
point which early attracted Darwin's attention and strongly impressed
him.) My blessed little Scaevola has come into flower, and I will try
artificial fertilisation on it.

I have looked over Harvey's letter, and have assumed (I hope rightly)
that he could not object to knowing that you had forwarded it to me.


LETTER 104. TO ASA GRAY. Down, June 8th [1860].

I have to thank you for two notes, one through Hooker, and one with
some letters to be posted, which was done. I anticipated your request by
making a few remarks on Owen's review. (104/1. "The Edinburgh Review,"
April, 1860.) Hooker is so weary of reviews that I do not think you
will get any hints from him. I have lately had many more "kicks than
halfpence." A review in the last Dublin "Nat. Hist. Review" is the most
unfair thing which has appeared,--one mass of misrepresentation. It
is evidently by Haughton, the geologist, chemist and mathematician.
It shows immeasurable conceit and contempt of all who are not
mathematicians. He discusses bees' cells, and puts a series which I have
never alluded to, and wholly ignores the intermediate comb of Melipona,
which alone led me to my notions. The article is a curiosity of
unfairness and arrogance; but, as he sneers at Malthus, I am content,
for it is clear he cannot reason. He is a friend of Harvey, with whom
I have had some correspondence. Your article has clearly, as he admits,
influenced him. He admits to a certain extent Natural Selection, yet I
am sure does not understand me. It is strange that very few do, and I
am become quite convinced that I must be an extremely bad explainer. To
recur for a moment to Owen: he grossly misrepresents and is very unfair
to Huxley. You say that you think the article must be by a pupil of
Owen; but no one fact tells so strongly against Owen, considering his
former position at the College of Surgeons, as that he has never reared
one pupil or follower. In the number just out of "Fraser's Magazine"
(104/2. See "Life and Letters," II., page 314.) there is an article or
review on Lamarck and me by W. Hopkins, the mathematician, who, like
Haughton, despises the reasoning power of all naturalists. Personally he
is extremely kind towards me; but he evidently in the following number
means to blow me into atoms. He does not in the least appreciate the
difference in my views and Lamarck's, as explaining adaptation, the
principle of divergence, the increase of dominant groups, and the almost
necessary extinction of the less dominant and smaller groups, etc.


LETTER 105. TO C. LYELL. Down, June 17th [1860].

One word more upon the Deification (105/1. "If we confound 'Variation'
or 'Natural Selection' with such creational laws, we deify secondary
causes or immeasurably exaggerate their influence" (Lyell, "The
Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man, with Remarks on Theories
on the Origin of Species by Variation," page 469, London, 1863). See
Letter 131.) of Natural Selection: attributing so much weight to it
does not exclude still more general laws, i.e. the ordering of the whole
universe. I have said that Natural Selection is to the structure of
organised beings what the human architect is to a building. The very
existence of the human architect shows the existence of more general
laws; but no one, in giving credit for a building to the human
architect, thinks it necessary to refer to the laws by which man has
appeared.

No astronomer, in showing how the movements of planets are due to
gravity, thinks it necessary to say that the law of gravity was designed
that the planets should pursue the courses which they pursue. I cannot
believe that there is a bit more interference by the Creator in the
construction of each species than in the course of the planets. It
is only owing to Paley and Co., I believe, that this more special
interference is thought necessary with living bodies. But we shall never
agree, so do not trouble yourself to answer.

I should think your remarks were very just about mathematicians not
being better enabled to judge of probabilities than other men of
common-sense.

I have just got more returns about the gestation of hounds. The
period differs at least from sixty-one to seventy-four days, just as I
expected.

I was thinking of sending the "Gardeners' Chronicle" to you, on account
of a paper by me on the fertilisation of orchids by insects (105/2.
"Fertilisation of British Orchids by Insect Agency." This article in
the "Gardeners' Chronicle" of June 9th, 1860, page 528, begins with a
request that observations should be made on the manner of fertilisation
in the bee-and in the fly-orchis.), as it involves a curious point, and
as you cared about my paper on kidney beans; but as you are so busy, I
will not.


LETTER 106. TO C. LYELL. Down [June?] 20th [1860].

I send Blyth (106/1. See Letter 27.); it is a dreadful handwriting; the
passage is on page 4. In a former note he told me he feared there was
hardly a chance of getting money for the Chinese expedition, and spoke
of your kindness.

Many thanks for your long and interesting letter. I wonder at, admire,
and thank you for your patience in writing so much. I rather demur to
Deinosaurus not having "free will," as surely we have. I demur also
to your putting Huxley's "force and matter" in the same category with
Natural Selection. The latter may, of course, be quite a false view; but
surely it is not getting beyond our depth to first causes.

It is truly very remarkable that the gestation of hounds (106/2. In
a letter written to Lyell on June 25th, 1860, the following paragraph
occurs: "You need not believe one word of what I said about gestation
of dogs. Since writing to you I have had more correspondence with the
master of hounds, and I see his [record?] is worth nothing. It may,
of course, be correct, but cannot be trusted. I find also different
statements about the wolf: in fact, I am all abroad.") should vary so
much, while that of man does not. It may be from multiple origin. The
eggs from the Musk and the common duck take an intermediate period in
hatching; but I should rather look at it as one of the ten thousand
cases which we cannot explain--namely, when one part or function varies
in one species and not in another.

Hooker has told me nothing about his explanation of few Arctic forms; I
knew the fact before. I had speculated on what I presume, from what you
say, is his explanation (106/3. "Outlines of the Distribution of Arctic
Plants," J.D. Hooker, "Trans. Linn. Soc." Volume XXIII., page 251, 1862.
[read June 21st, 1860.] In this paper Hooker draws attention to the
exceptional character of the Greenland flora; but as regards the paucity
of its species and in its much greater resemblance to the floras of
Arctic Europe than to those of Arctic America, he considers it difficult
to account for these facts, "unless we admit Mr. Darwin's hypotheses"
(see "Origin," Edition VI., 1872, Chapter XII., page 330) of a southern
migration due to the cold of the glacial period and the subsequent
return of the northern types during the succeeding warmer period. Many
of the Greenland species, being confined to the peninsula, "would, as it
were, be driven into the sea--that is exterminated" (Hooker, op. cit.,
pages 253-4).); but there must have been at all times an Arctic region.
I found the speculation got too complex, as it seemed to me, to be worth
following out.

I have been doing some more interesting work with orchids. Talk of
adaptation in woodpeckers (106/4. "Can a more striking instance of
adaptation be given than that of a woodpecker for climbing trees and
seizing insects in the chinks of the bark?" (Origin of Species," Edition
HAVE I., page 141).), some of the orchids beat it.

I showed the case to Elizabeth Wedgwood, and her remark was, "Now you
have upset your own book, for you won't persuade me that this could be
effected by Natural Selection."


LETTER 107. TO T.H. HUXLEY. July 20th [1860].

Many thanks for your pleasant letter. I agree to every word you say
about "Fraser" and the "Quarterly." (107/1. Bishop Wilberforce's review
of the "Origin" in the "Quarterly Review," July, 1860, was republished
in his "Collected Essays," 1874. See "Life and Letters, II., page 182,
and II., page 324, where some quotations from the review are given.
For Hopkins' review in "Fraser's Magazine," June, 1860, see "Life and
Letters," II., 314.) I have had some really admirable letters
from Hopkins. I do not suppose he has ever troubled his head about
geographical distribution, classification, morphologies, etc., and it
is only those who have that will feel any relief in having some sort of
rational explanation of such facts. Is it not grand the way in which the
Bishop asserts that all such facts are explained by ideas in God's mind?
The "Quarterly" is uncommonly clever; and I chuckled much at the way
my grandfather and self are quizzed. I could here and there see Owen's
hand. By the way, how comes it that you were not attacked? Does Owen
begin to find it more prudent to leave you alone? I would give five
shillings to know what tremendous blunder the Bishop made; for I see
that a page has been cancelled and a new page gummed in.

I am indeed most thoroughly contented with the progress of opinion.
From all that I hear from several quarters, it seems that Oxford did
the subject great good. (107/2. An account of the meeting of the British
Association at Oxford in 1860 is given in the "Life and Letters,"
II., page 320, and a fuller account in the one-volume "Life of Charles
Darwin," 1892, page 236. See also the "Life and Letters of T.H. Huxley,"
Volume I., page 179, and the amusing account of the meeting in Mr.
Tuckwell's "Reminiscences of Oxford," London, 1900, page 50.) It is of
enormous importance the showing the world that a few first-rate men
are not afraid of expressing their opinion. I see daily more and more
plainly that my unaided book would have done absolutely nothing. Asa
Gray is fighting admirably in the United States. He is thorough master
of the subject, which cannot be said by any means of such men as even
Hopkins.

I have been thinking over what you allude to about a natural history
review. (107/3. In the "Life and Letters of T.H. Huxley," Volume I.,
page 209, some account of the founding of the "Natural History Review"
is given in a letter to Sir J.D. Hooker of July 17th, 1860. On August
2nd Mr. Huxley added: "Darwin wrote me a very kind expostulation about
it, telling me I ought not to waste myself on other than original work.
In reply, however, I assured him that I MUST waste myself willy-nilly,
and that the 'Review' was only a save-all.") I suppose you mean really
a REVIEW and not journal for original communications in Natural History.
Of the latter there is now superabundance. With respect to a good
review, there can be no doubt of its value and utility; nevertheless, if
not too late, I hope you will consider deliberately before you decide.
Remember what a deal of work you have on your shoulders, and though you
can do much, yet there is a limit to even the hardest worker's power of
working. I should deeply regret to see you sacrificing much time which
could be given to original research. I fear, to one who can review as
well as you do, there would be the same temptation to waste time, as
there notoriously is for those who can speak well.

A review is only temporary; your work should be perennial. I know well
that you may say that unless good men will review there will be no good
reviews. And this is true. Would you not do more good by an occasional
review in some well-established review, than by giving up much time
to the editing, or largely aiding, if not editing, a review which from
being confined to one subject would not have a very large circulation?
But I must return to the chief idea which strikes me--viz., that it
would lessen the amount of original and perennial work which you could
do. Reflect how few men there are in England who can do original work
in the several lines in which you are excellently fitted. Lyell, I
remember, on analogous grounds many years ago resolved he would write no
more reviews. I am an old slowcoach, and your scheme makes me tremble.
God knows in one sense I am about the last man in England who ought to
throw cold water on any review in which you would be concerned, as I
have so immensely profited by your labours in this line.

With respect to reviewing myself, I never tried: any work of that kind
stops me doing anything else, as I cannot possibly work at odds and
ends of time. I have, moreover, an insane hatred of stopping my regular
current of work. I have now materials for a little paper or two, but I
know I shall never work them up. So I will not promise to help; though
not to help, if I could, would make me feel very ungrateful to you. You
have no idea during how short a time daily I am able to work. If I had
any regular duties, like you and Hooker, I should do absolutely nothing
in science.

I am heartily glad to hear that you are better; but how such labour as
volunteer-soldiering (all honour to you) does not kill you, I cannot
understand.

For God's sake remember that your field of labour is original research
in the highest and most difficult branches of Natural History. Not that
I wish to underrate the importance of clever and solid reviews.


LETTER 108. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Sudbrook Park, Richmond, Thursday [July,
1860].

I must send you a line to say what a good fellow you are to send me so
long an account of the Oxford doings. I have read it twice, and sent
it to my wife, and when I get home shall read it again: it has so much
interested me. But how durst you attack a live bishop in that fashion? I
am quite ashamed of you! Have you no reverence for fine lawn sleeves?
By Jove, you seem to have done it well. If any one were to ridicule any
belief of the bishop's, would he not blandly shrug his shoulders and be
inexpressibly shocked? I am very, very sorry to hear that you are not
well; but am not surprised after all your self-imposed labour. I hope
you will soon have an outing, and that will do you real good.

I am glad to hear about J. Lubbock, whom I hope to see soon, and
shall tell him what you have said. Have you read Hopkins in the last
"Fraser?"--well put, in good spirit, except soul discussion bad, as I
have told him; nothing actually new, takes the weak points alone, and
leaves out all other considerations.

I heard from Asa Gray yesterday; he goes on fighting like a Trojan.

God bless you!--get well, be idle, and always reverence a bishop.


LETTER 109. TO J.D. DANA. Down, July 30th [1860].

I received several weeks ago your note telling me that you could not
visit England, which I sincerely regretted, as I should most heartily
have liked to have made your personal acquaintance. You gave me an
improved, but not very good, account of your health. I should at some
time be grateful for a line to tell me how you are. We have had a
miserable summer, owing to a terribly long and severe illness of
my eldest girl, who improves slightly but is still in a precarious
condition. I have been able to do nothing in science of late. My kind
friend Asa Gray often writes to me and tells me of the warm discussions
on the "Origin of Species" in the United States. Whenever you are
strong enough to read it, I know you will be dead against me, but I know
equally well that your opposition will be liberal and philosophical.
And this is a good deal more than I can say of all my opponents in
this country. I have not yet seen Agassiz's attack (109/1. "Silliman's
Journal," July, 1860. A passage from Agassiz's review is given by Mr.
Huxley in Darwin's "Life and Letters," II., page 184.), but I hope to
find it at home when I return in a few days, for I have been for several
weeks away from home on my daughter's account. Prof. Silliman sent me an
extremely kind message by Asa Gray that your Journal would be open to
a reply by me. I cannot decide till I see it, but on principle I have
resolved to avoid answering anything, as it consumes much time,
often temper, and I have said my say in the "Origin." No one person
understands my views and has defended them so well as A. Gray, though he
does not by any means go all the way with me. There was much discussion
on the subject at the British Association at Oxford, and I had many
defenders, and my side seems (for I was not there) almost to have got
the best of the battle. Your correspondent and my neighbour, J. Lubbock,
goes on working at such spare time as he has. This is an egotistical
note, but I have not seen a naturalist for months. Most sincerely and
deeply do I hope that this note may find you almost recovered.


LETTER 110. TO W.H. HARVEY.

(110/1. See Letter 95, note. This letter was written in reply to a
long one from W.H. Harvey, dated August 24th, 1860. Harvey had already
published a serio-comic squib and a review, to which references are
given in the "Life and Letters," II., pages 314 and 375; but apparently
he had not before this time completed the reading of the "Origin.")

[August, 1860.]

I have read your long letter with much interest, and I thank you for
your great liberality in sending it me. But, on reflection, I do not
wish to attempt answering any part, except to you privately. Anything
said by myself in defence would have no weight; it is best to be
defended by others, or not at all. Parts of your letter seem to me, if
I may be permitted to say so, very acute and original, and I feel it
a great compliment your giving up so much time to my book. But, on the
whole, I am disappointed; not from your not concurring with me, for I
never expected that, and, indeed, in your remarks on Chapters XII. and
XIII., you go much further with me (though a little way) than I ever
anticipated, and am much pleased at the result. But on the whole I am
disappointed, because it seems to me that you do not understand what I
mean by Natural Selection, as shown at page 11 (110/2. Harvey speaks of
the perpetuation or selection of the useful, pre-supposing "a vigilant
and intelligent agent," which is very much like saying that an
intelligent agent is needed to see that the small stones pass through
the meshes of a sieve and the big ones remain behind.) of your letter
and by several of your remarks. As my book has failed to explain my
meaning, it would be hopeless to attempt it in a letter. You speak in
the early part of your letter, and at page 9, as if I had said that
Natural Selection was the sole agency of modification, whereas I
have over and over again, ad nauseam, directly said, and by order of
precedence implied (what seems to me obvious) that selection can do
nothing without previous variability (see pages 80, 108, 127, 468, 469,
etc.), "nothing can be effected unless favourable variations occur."
I consider Natural Selection as of such high importance, because it
accumulates successive variations in any profitable direction, and
thus adapts each new being to its complex conditions of life. The term
"selection," I see, deceives many persons, though I see no more reason
why it should than elective affinity, as used by the old chemists. If I
had to rewrite my book, I would use "natural preservation" or "naturally
preserved." I should think you would as soon take an emetic as re-read
any part of my book; but if you did, and were to erase selection and
selected, and insert preservation and preserved, possibly the subject
would be clearer. As you are not singular in misunderstanding my book, I
should long before this have concluded that my brains were in a haze had
I not found by published reviews, and especially by correspondence, that
Lyell, Hooker, Asa Gray, H.C. Watson, Huxley, and Carpenter, and many
others, perfectly comprehend what I mean. The upshot of your remarks at
page 11 is that my explanation, etc., and the whole doctrine of Natural
Selection, are mere empty words, signifying the "order of nature." As
the above-named clear-headed men, who do comprehend my views, all go a
certain length with me, and certainly do not think it all moonshine, I
should venture to suggest a little further reflection on your part. I do
not mean by this to imply that the opinion of these men is worth much as
showing that I am right, but merely as some evidence that I have
clearer ideas than you think, otherwise these same men must be even
more muddle-headed than I am; for they have no temptation to deceive
themselves. In the forthcoming September (110/3. "American Journal of
Science and Arts," September 1860, "Design versus Necessity," reprinted
in Asa Gray's "Darwiniana," 1876, page 62.) number of the "American
Journal of Science" there is an interesting and short theological
article (by Asa Gray), which gives incidentally with admirable clearness
the theory of Natural Selection, and therefore might be worth your
reading. I think that the theological part would interest you.

You object to all my illustrations. They are all necessarily
conjectural, and may be all false; but they were the best I could give.
The bear case (110/4. "Origin of Species," Edition I., page 184. See
Letter 120.) has been well laughed at, and disingenuously distorted by
some into my saying that a bear could be converted into a whale. As it
offended persons, I struck it out in the second edition; but I still
maintain that there is no especial difficulty in a bear's mouth
being enlarged to any degree useful to its changing habits,--no more
difficulty than man has found in increasing the crop of the pigeon, by
continued selection, until it is literally as big as the whole rest of
the body. If this had not been known, how absurd it would have appeared
to say that the crop of a bird might be increased till it became like a
balloon!

With respect to the ostrich, I believe that the wings have been reduced,
and are not in course of development, because the whole structure of a
bird is essentially formed for flight; and the ostrich is essentially
a bird. You will see at page 182 of the "Origin" a somewhat analogous
discussion. At page 450 of the second edition I have pointed out the
essential distinction between a nascent and rudimentary organ. If you
prefer the more complex view that the progenitor of the ostrich lost its
wings, and that the present ostrich is regaining them, I have nothing to
say in opposition.

With respect to trees on islands, I collected some cases, but took the
main facts from Alph. De Candolle, and thought they might be trusted. My
explanation may be grossly wrong; but I am not convinced it is so, and I
do not see the full force of your argument of certain herbaceous orders
having been developed into trees in certain rare cases on continents.
The case seems to me to turn altogether on the question whether
generally herbaceous orders more frequently afford trees and bushes on
islands than on continents, relatively to their areas. (110/5. In
the "Origin," Edition I., page 392, the author points out that in the
presence of competing trees an herbaceous plant would have little chance
of becoming arborescent; but on an island, with only other herbaceous
plants as competitors, it might gain an advantage by overtopping its
fellows, and become tree-like. Harvey writes: "What you say (page
392) of insular trees belonging to orders which elsewhere include only
herbaceous species seems to me to be unsupported by sufficient evidence.
You cite no particular trees, and I may therefore be wrong in guessing
that the orders you allude to are Scrophularineae and Compositae; and
the insular trees the Antarctic Veronicas and the arborescent
Compositae of St. Helena, Tasmania, etc. But in South Africa Halleria
(Scrophularineae) is often as large and woody as an apple tree; and
there are several South African arborescent Compositae (Senecio and
Oldenburgia). Besides, in Tasmania at least, the arborescent Composites
are not found competing with herbaceous plants alone, and growing taller
and taller by overtopping them...; for the most arborescent of them all
(Eurybia argophylla, the Musk tree) grows...in Eucalyptus forests. And
so of the South African Halleria, which is a tree among trees. What the
conditions of the arborescent Gerania of the Sandwich Islands may be
I am unable to say...I cannot remember any other instances, nor can I
accept your explanation in any other of the cases I have cited.")

In page 4 of your letter you say you give up many book-species as
separate creations: I give up all, and you infer that our difference
is only in degree and not in kind. I dissent from this; for I give a
distinct reason how far I go in giving up species. I look at all forms,
which resemble each other homologically or embryologically, as certainly
descended from the same species.

You hit me hard and fairly (110/6. Harvey writes: "You ask--were all the
infinitely numerous kinds of animals and plants created as eggs or seed,
or as full grown? To this it is sufficient to reply, was your primordial
organism, or were your four or five progenitors created as egg, seed,
or full grown? Neither theory attempts to solve this riddle, nor yet the
riddle of the Omphalos." The latter point, which Mr. Darwin refuses to
give up, is at page 483 of the "Origin," "and, in the case of mammals,
were they created bearing the false marks of nourishment from the
mother's womb?" In the third edition of the "Origin," 1861, page 517,
the author adds, after the last-cited passage: "Undoubtedly these same
questions cannot be answered by those who, under the present state of
science, believe in the creation of a few aboriginal forms, or of some
one form of life. In the sixth edition, probably with a view to the
umbilicus, he writes (page 423): "Undoubtedly some of these same
questions," etc., etc. From notes in Mr. Darwin's copy of the second
edition it is clear that the change in the third edition was chiefly
due to Harvey's letter. See Letter 115.) about my question (page 483,
"Origin") about creation of eggs or young, etc., (but not about mammals
with the mark of the umbilical cord), yet I still have an illogical sort
of feeling that there is less difficulty in imagining the creation of an
asexual cell, increasing by simple division.

Page 5 of your letter: I agree to every word about the antiquity of the
world, and never saw the case put by any one more strongly or more ably.
It makes, however, no more impression on me as an objection than does
the astronomer when he puts on a few hundred million miles to the
distance of the fixed stars. To compare very small things with great,
Lingula, etc., remaining nearly unaltered from the Silurian epoch to
the present day, is like the dovecote pigeons still being identical with
wild Rock-pigeons, whereas its "fancy" offspring have been immensely
modified, and are still being modified, by means of artificial
selection.

You put the difficulty of the first modification of the first protozoon
admirably. I assure you that immediately after the first edition was
published this occurred to me, and I thought of inserting it in the
second edition. I did not, because we know not in the least what the
first germ of life was, nor have we any fact at all to guide us in our
speculations on the kind of change which its offspring underwent. I
dissent quite from what you say of the myriads of years it would take to
people the world with such imagined protozoon. In how very short a time
Ehrenberg calculated that a single infusorium might make a cube of rock!
A single cube on geometrical progression would make the solid globe
in (I suppose) under a century. From what little I know, I cannot help
thinking that you underrate the effects of the physical conditions of
life on these low organisms. But I fully admit that I can give no sort
of answer to your objections; yet I must add that it would be marvellous
if any man ever could, assuming for the moment that my theory is true.
You beg the question, I think, in saying that Protococcus would be
doomed to eternal similarity. Nor can you know that the first germ
resembled a Protococcus or any other now living form.

Page 12 of your letter: There is nothing in my theory necessitating in
each case progression of organisation, though Natural Selection tends in
this line, and has generally thus acted. An animal, if it become
fitted by selection to live the life, for instance, of a parasite, will
generally become degraded. I have much regretted that I did not make
this part of the subject clearer. I left out this and many other
subjects, which I now see ought to have been introduced. I have inserted
a discussion on this subject in the foreign editions. (110/7. In the
third Edition a discussion on this point is added in Chapter IV.) In
no case will any organic being tend to retrograde, unless such
retrogradation be an advantage to its varying offspring; and it is
difficult to see how going back to the structure of the unknown supposed
original protozoon could ever be an advantage.

Page 13 of your letter: I have been more glad to read your discussion
on "dominant" forms than any part of your letter. (110/8. Harvey
writes: "Viewing organic nature in its widest aspect, I think it is
unquestionable that the truly dominant races are not those of high, but
those of low organisation"; and goes on to quote the potato disease,
etc. In the third edition of the "Origin," page 56, a discussion is
introduced defining the author's use of the term "dominant.") I can now
see that I have not been cautious enough in confining my definition
and meaning. I cannot say that you have altered my views. If Botrytis
[Phytophthora] had exterminated the wild potato, a low form would have
conquered a high; but I cannot remember that I have ever said (I am
sure I never thought) that a low form would never conquer a high. I have
expressly alluded to parasites half exterminating game-animals, and
to the struggle for life being sometimes between forms as different as
possible: for instance, between grasshoppers and herbivorous quadrupeds.
Under the many conditions of life which this world affords, any group
which is numerous in individuals and species and is widely distributed,
may properly be called dominant. I never dreamed of considering that
any one group, under all conditions and throughout the world, would be
predominant. How could vertebrata be predominant under the conditions
of life in which parasitic worms live? What good would their perfected
senses and their intellect serve under such conditions? When I have
spoken of dominant forms, it has been in relation to the multiplication
of new specific forms, and the dominance of any one species has been
relative generally to other members of the same group, or at least to
beings exposed to similar conditions and coming into competition. But I
daresay that I have not in the "Origin" made myself clear, and space has
rendered it impossible. But I thank you most sincerely for your valuable
remarks, though I do not agree with them.

About sudden jumps: I have no objection to them--they would aid me in
some cases. All I can say is, that I went into the subject, and found
no evidence to make me believe in jumps; and a good deal pointing in the
other direction. You will find it difficult (page 14 of your letter) to
make a marked line of separation between fertile and infertile crosses.
I do not see how the apparently sudden change (for the suddenness of
change in a chrysalis is of course largely only apparent) in larvae
during their development throws any light on the subject.

I wish I could have made this letter better worth sending to you. I have
had it copied to save you at least the intolerable trouble of reading
my bad handwriting. Again I thank you for your great liberality and
kindness in sending me your criticisms, and I heartily wish we were
a little nearer in accord; but we must remain content to be as wide
asunder as the poles, but without, thank God, any malice or other
ill-feeling.


LETTER 111. TO T.H. HUXLEY.

(111/1. Dr. Asa Gray's articles in the "Atlantic Monthly," July, August,
and October, 1860, were published in England as a pamphlet, and form
Chapter III. in his "Darwiniana" (1876). See "Life and Letters," II.,
page 338. The article referred to in the present letter is that in the
August number.)

Down, September 10th [1860].

I send by this post a review by Asa Gray, so good that I should like you
to see it; I must beg for its return. I want to ask, also, your opinion
about getting it reprinted in England. I thought of sending it to the
Editor of the "Annals and Mag. of Nat. Hist." in which two hostile
reviews have appeared (although I suppose the "Annals" have a very poor
circulation), and asking them in the spirit of fair play to print this,
with Asa Gray's name, which I will take the responsibility of adding.
Also, as it is long, I would offer to pay expenses.

It is very good, in addition, as bringing in Pictet so largely.
(111/2. Pictet (1809-72) wrote a "perfectly fair" review opposed to the
"Origin." See "Life and Letters," II., page 297.) Tell me briefly what
you think.

What an astonishing expedition this is of Hooker's to Syria! God knows
whether it is wise.

How are you and all yours? I hope you are not working too hard. For
Heaven's sake, think that you may become such a beast as I am. How goes
on the "Nat. Hist. Review?" Talking of reviews, I damned with a good
grace the review in the "Athenaeum" (111/3. Review of "The Glaciers of
the Alps" ("Athenaeum," September 1, 1860, page 280).) on Tyndall with a
mean, scurvy allusion to you. It is disgraceful about Tyndall,--in fact,
doubting his veracity.

I am very tired, and hate nearly the whole world. So good-night, and
take care of your digestion, which means brain.


LETTER 112. TO C. LYELL. 15, Marine Parade, Eastbourne, 26th [September
1860].

It has just occurred to me that I took no notice of your questions on
extinction in St. Helena. I am nearly sure that Hooker has information
on the extinction of plants (112/1. "Principles of Geology," Volume II.
(Edition X., 1868), page 453. Facts are quoted from Hooker illustrating
the extermination of plants in St. Helena.), but I cannot remember
where I have seen it. One may confidently assume that many insects were
exterminated.

By the way, I heard lately from Wollaston, who told me that he had just
received eminently Madeira and Canary Island insect forms from the Cape
of Good Hope, to which trifling distance, if he is logical, he will have
to extend his Atlantis! I have just received your letter, and am very
much pleased that you approve. But I am utterly disgusted and ashamed
about the dingo. I cannot think how I could have misunderstood the paper
so grossly. I hope I have not blundered likewise in its co-existence
with extinct species: what horrid blundering! I am grieved to hear that
you think I must work in the notes in the text; but you are so much
better a judge that I will obey. I am sorry that you had the trouble of
returning the Dog MS., which I suppose I shall receive to-morrow.

I mean to give good woodcuts of all the chief races of pigeons. (112/2.
"The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication," 1868.)

Except the C. oenas (112/3. The Columba oenas of Europe roosts on trees
and builds its nest in holes, either in trees or the ground ("Var.
of Animals," Volume I., page 183).) (which is partly, indeed almost
entirely, a wood pigeon), there is no other rock pigeon with which
our domestic pigeon would cross--that is, if several exceedingly close
geographical races of C. livia, which hardly any ornithologist looks at
as true species, be all grouped under C. livia. (112/4. Columba livia,
the Rock-pigeon. "We may conclude with confidence that all the domestic
races, notwithstanding their great amount of difference, are descended
from the Columba livia, including under this name certain wild races"
(op. cit., Volume I., page 223).)

I am writing higgledy-piggledy, as I re-read your letter. I thought that
my letter had been much wilder than yours. I quite feel the comfort of
writing when one may "alter one's speculations the day after." It is
beyond my knowledge to weigh ranks of birds and monotremes; in the
respiratory and circulatory system and muscular energy I believe birds
are ahead of all mammals.

I knew that you must have known about New Guinea; but in writing to you
I never make myself civil!

After treating some half-dozen or dozen domestic animals in the same
manner as I treat dogs, I intended to have a chapter of conclusions.
But Heaven knows when I shall finish: I get on very slowly. You would be
surprised how long it took me to pick out what seemed useful about dogs
out of multitudes of details.

I see the force of your remark about more isolated races of man in old
times, and therefore more in number. It seems to me difficult to weigh
probabilities. Perhaps so, if you refer to very slight differences in
the races: to make great differences much time would be required, and
then, even at the earliest period I should have expected one race to
have spread, conquered, and exterminated the others.

With respect to Falconer's series of Elephants (112/5. In 1837 Dr.
Falconer and Sir Proby Cautley collected a large number of fossil
remains from the Siwalik Hills. Falconer and Cautley, "Fauna Antiqua
Sivalensis," 1845-49.), I think the case could be answered better than
I have done in the "Origin," page 334. (112/6. "Origin of Species,"
Edition I., page 334. "It is no real objection to the truth of
the statement that the fauna of each period as a whole is nearly
intermediate in character between the preceding and succeeding faunas,
that certain genera offer exceptions to the rule. For instance,
mastodons and elephants, when arranged by Dr. Falconer in two series,
first according to their mutual affinities and then according to their
periods of existence, do not accord in arrangement. The species extreme
in character are not the oldest, or the most recent; nor are those which
are intermediate in character intermediate in age. But supposing for
an instant, in this and other such cases, that the record of the first
appearance and disappearance of the species was perfect, we have no
reason to believe that forms successively produced necessarily
endure for corresponding lengths of time. A very ancient form might
occasionally last much longer than a form elsewhere subsequently
produced, especially in the case of terrestrial productions inhabiting
separated districts" (pages 334-5). The same words occur in the
later edition of the "Origin" (Edition VI., page 306.) All these new
discoveries show how imperfect the discovered series is, which Falconer
thought years ago was nearly perfect.

I will send to-day or to-morrow two articles by Asa Gray. The longer
one (now not finally corrected) will come out in the October "Atlantic
Monthly," and they can be got at Trubner's. Hearty thanks for all your
kindness.

Do not hurry over Asa Gray. He strikes me as one of the best reasoners
and writers I ever read. He knows my book as well as I do myself.


LETTER 113. TO C. LYELL. 15, Marine Parade, Eastbourne, October 3rd
[1860].

Your last letter has interested me much in many ways.

I enclose a letter of Wyman's which touches on brains. Wyman is mistaken
in supposing that I did not know that the Cave-rat was an American form;
I made special enquiries. He does not know that the eye of the Tucotuco
was carefully dissected.

With respect to reviews by A. Gray. I thought of sending the Dialogue
to the "Saturday Review" in a week's time or so, as they have lately
discussed Design. (113/1. "Discussion between two Readers of Darwin's
Treatise on the Origin of Species, upon its Natural Theology" ("Amer.
Journ. Sci." Volume XXX, page 226, 1860). Reprinted in "Darwiniana,"
1876, page 62. The article begins with the following question: "First
Reader--Is Darwin's theory atheistic or pantheistic? Or does it tend to
atheism or pantheism?" The discussion is closed by the Second Reader,
who thus sums up his views: "Wherefore we may insist that, for all
that yet appears, the argument for design, as presented by the natural
theologians, is just as good now, if we accept Darwin's theory, as it
was before the theory was promulgated; and that the sceptical juryman,
who was about to join the other eleven in an unanimous verdict in favour
of design, finds no good excuse for keeping the Court longer waiting.")
I have sent the second, or August, "Atlantic" article to the "Annals and
Mag. of Nat. History." (113/2. "Annals and Mag. Nat. Hist." Volume VI.,
pages 373-86, 1860. (From the "Atlantic Monthly," August, 1860.)) The
copy which you have I want to send to Pictet, as I told A. Gray I
would, thinking from what he said he would like this to be done. I doubt
whether it would be possible to get the October number reprinted in this
country; so that I am in no hurry at all for this.

I had a letter a few weeks ago from Symonds on the imperfection of the
Geological Record, less clear and forcible than I expected. I answered
him at length and very civilly, though I could hardly make out what
he was driving at. He spoke about you in a way which it did me good to
read.

I am extremely glad that you like A. Gray's reviews. How generous and
unselfish he has been in all his labour! Are you not struck by his
metaphors and similes? I have told him he is a poet and not a lawyer.

I should altogether doubt on turtles being converted into land tortoises
on any one island. Remember how closely similar tortoises are on all
continents, as well as islands; they must have all descended from one
ancient progenitor, including the gigantic tortoise of the Himalaya.

I think you must be cautious in not running the convenient doctrine that
only one species out of very many ever varies. Reflect on such cases as
the fauna and flora of Europe, North America, and Japan, which are so
similar, and yet which have a great majority of their species either
specifically distinct, or forming well-marked races. We must in such
cases incline to the belief that a multitude of species were once
identically the same in all the three countries when under a warmer
climate and more in connection; and have varied in all the three
countries. I am inclined to believe that almost every species (as we
see with nearly all our domestic productions) varies sufficiently for
Natural Selection to pick out and accumulate new specific differences,
under new organic and inorganic conditions of life, whenever a place is
open in the polity of nature. But looking to a long lapse of time and to
the whole world, or to large parts of the world, I believe only one or
a few species of each large genus ultimately becomes victorious, and
leaves modified descendants. To give an imaginary instance: the jay has
become modified in the three countries into (I believe) three or four
species; but the jay genus is not, apparently, so dominant a group
as the crows; and in the long run probably all the jays will be
exterminated and be replaced perhaps by some modified crows.

I merely give this illustration to show what seems to me probable.

But oh! what work there is before we shall understand the genealogy of
organic beings!

With respect to the Apteryx, I know not enough of anatomy; but ask Dr.
F. whether the clavicle, etc., do not give attachment to some of the
muscles of respiration. If my views are at all correct, the wing of the
Apteryx (113/3. "Origin of Species," Edition VI., page 140.) cannot be
(page 452 of the "Origin") a nascent organ, as these wings are useless.
I dare not trust to memory, but I know I found the whole sternum always
reduced in size in all the fancy and confined pigeons relatively to the
same bones in the wild Rock-pigeon: the keel was generally still further
reduced relatively to the reduced length of the sternum; but in some
breeds it was in a most anomalous manner more prominent. I have got a
lot of facts on the reduction of the organs of flight in the pigeon,
which took me weeks to work out, and which Huxley thought curious.

I am utterly ashamed, and groan over my handwriting. It was "Natural
Preservation." Natural persecution is what the author ought to suffer.
It rejoices me that you do not object to the term. Hooker made the same
remark that it ought to have been "Variation and Natural Selection."
Yet with domestic productions, when selection is spoken of, variation is
always implied. But I entirely agree with your and Hooker's remark.

Have you begun regularly to write your book on the antiquity of man?
(113/4. Published in 1863.)

I do NOT agree with your remark that I make Natural Selection do too
much work. You will perhaps reply that every man rides his hobby-horse
to death; and that I am in the galloping state.


LETTER 114. TO C. LYELL. 15, Marine Parade, Eastbourne, Friday 5th
[October, 1860].

I have two notes to thank you for, and I return Wollaston. It has always
seemed to me rather strange that Forbes, Wollaston and Co. should argue,
from the presence of allied, and not identical species in islands, for
the former continuity of land.

They argue, I suppose, from the species being allied in different
regions of the same continent, though specifically distinct. But I think
one might on the creative doctrine argue with equal force in a directly
reverse manner, and say that, as species are so often markedly distinct,
yet allied, on islands, all our continents existed as islands first, and
their inhabitants were first created on these islands, and since became
mingled together, so as not to be so distinct as they now generally are
on islands.


LETTER 115. TO H.G. BRONN. Down, October 5th [1860].

I ought to apologise for troubling you, but I have at last carefully
read your excellent criticisms on my book. (115/1. Bronn added critical
remarks to his German translation of the "Origin": see "Life and
Letters," II., page 279.) I agree with much of them, and wholly with
your final sentence. The objections and difficulties which may be urged
against my view are indeed heavy enough almost to break my back, but it
is not yet broken! You put very well and very fairly that I can in
no one instance explain the course of modification in any particular
instance. I could make some sort of answer to your case of the two rats;
and might I not turn round and ask him who believes in the separate
creation of each species, why one rat has a longer tail or shorter ears
than another? I presume that most people would say that these characters
were of some use, or stood in some connection with other parts; and if
so, Natural Selection would act on them. But as you put the case,
it tells well against me. You argue most justly against my question,
whether the many species were created as eggs (115/2. See Letter 110.)
or as mature, etc. I certainly had no right to ask that question.
I fully agree that there might have been as well a hundred thousand
creations as eight or ten, or only one. But then, on the view of eight
or ten creations (i.e. as many as there are distinct types of structure)
we can on my view understand the homological and embryological
resemblance of all the organisms of each type, and on this ground almost
alone I disbelieve in the innumerable acts of creation. There are only
two points on which I think you have misunderstood me. I refer only to
one Glacial period as affecting the distribution of organic beings; I
did not wish even to allude to the doubtful evidence of glacial action
in the Permian and Carboniferous periods. Secondly, I do not believe
that the process of development has always been carried on at the same
rate in all different parts of the world. Australia is opposed to such
belief. The nearly contemporaneous equal development in past periods I
attribute to the slow migration of the higher and more dominant forms
over the whole world, and not to independent acts of development in
different parts. Lastly, permit me to add that I cannot see the force
of your objection, that nothing is effected until the origin of life is
explained: surely it is worth while to attempt to follow out the action
of electricity, though we know not what electricity is.

If you should at any time do me the favour of writing to me, I should
be very much obliged if you would inform me whether you have yourself
examined Brehm's subspecies of birds; for I have looked through some of
his writings, but have never met an ornithologist who believed in his
[illegible]. Are these subspecies really characteristic of certain
different regions of Germany?

Should you write, I should much like to know how the German edition
sells.


LETTER 116. TO J.S. HENSLOW. October 26th [1860].

Many thanks for your note and for all the trouble about the seeds, which
will be most useful to me next spring. On my return home I will send the
shillings. (116/1. Shillings for the little girls in Henslow's parish
who collected seeds for Darwin.) I concluded that Dr. Bree had blundered
about the Celts. I care not for his dull, unvarying abuse of me,
and singular misrepresentation. But at page 244 he in fact doubts my
deliberate word, and that is the act of a man who has not the soul of a
gentleman in him. Kingsley is "the celebrated author and divine"
(116/2. "Species not Transmutable," by C.R. Bree. After quoting from the
"Origin," Edition II., page 481, the words in which a celebrated author
and divine confesses that "he has gradually learnt to see that it is
just as noble a conception of the Deity to believe that He created a few
original forms, etc.," Dr. Bree goes on: "I think we ought to have had
the name of this divine given with this remarkable statement. I confess
that I have not yet fully made up my mind that any divine could have
ever penned lines so fatal to the truths he is called upon to
teach.") whose striking sentence I give in the second edition with his
permission. I did not choose to ask him to let me use his name, and as
he did not volunteer, I had of course no choice. (116/3. We are indebted
to Mr. G.W. Prothero for calling our attention to the following striking
passage from the works of a divine of this period:--"Just a similar
scepticism has been evinced by nearly all the first physiologists of the
day, who have joined in rejecting the development theories of Lamarck
and the 'Vestiges'...Yet it is now acknowledged under the high sanction
of the name of Owen that 'creation' is only another name for our
ignorance of the mode of production...while a work has now appeared by
a naturalist of the most acknowledged authority, Mr. Darwin's masterly
volume on the 'Origin of Species,' by the law of 'natural selection,'
which now substantiates on undeniable grounds the very principle so long
denounced by the first naturalists--the origination of new species by
natural causes: a work which must soon bring about an entire revolution
of opinion in favour of the grand principle of the self-evolving
powers of nature."--Prof. Baden Powell's "Study of the Evidences of
Christianity," "Essays and Reviews," 7th edition, 1861 (pages 138,
139).)

Dr. Freke has sent me his paper, which is far beyond my scope--something
like the capital quiz in the "Anti-Jacobin" on my grandfather, which was
quoted in the "Quarterly Review."


LETTER 117. TO D.T. ANSTED.

(117/1. The following letter was published in Professor Meldola's
presidential address to the Entomological Society, 1897, and to him we
are indebted for a copy.)

15, Marine Parade, Eastbourne, October 27th [1860].

As I am away from home on account of my daughter's health, I do not
know your address, and fly this at random, and it is of very little
consequence if it never reaches you.

I have just been reading the greater part of your "Geological Gossip,"
and have found part very interesting; but I want to express my
admiration at the clear and correct manner in which you have given a
sketch of Natural Selection. You will think this very slight praise;
but I declare that the majority of readers seem utterly incapable
of comprehending my long argument. Some of the reviewers, who have
servilely stuck to my illustrations and almost to my words, have been
correct, but extraordinarily few others have succeeded. I can see
plainly, by your new illustrations and manner and order of putting the
case, that you thoroughly comprehend the subject. I assure you this is
most gratifying to me, and it is the sole way in which the public can
be indoctrinated. I am often in despair in making the generality of
NATURALISTS even comprehend me. Intelligent men who are not naturalists
and have not a bigoted idea of the term species, show more clearness
of mind. I think that you have done the subject a real service, and I
sincerely thank you. No doubt there will be much error found in my book,
but I have great confidence that the main view will be, in time, found
correct; for I find, without exception, that those naturalists who went
at first one inch with me now go a foot or yard with me.

This note obviously requires no answer.


LETTER 118. TO H.W. BATES. Down, November 22nd [1860].

I thank you sincerely for writing to me and for your very interesting
letter. Your name has for very long been familiar to me, and I have
heard of your zealous exertions in the cause of Natural History. But
I did not know that you had worked with high philosophical questions
before your mind. I have an old belief that a good observer really means
a good theorist (118/1. For an opposite opinion, see Letter 13.), and I
fully expect to find your observations most valuable. I am very sorry to
hear that your health is shattered; but I trust under a healthy climate
it may be restored. I can sympathise with you fully on this score, for
I have had bad health for many years, and fear I shall ever remain a
confirmed invalid. I am delighted to hear that you, with all your large
practical knowledge of Natural History, anticipated me in many respects
and concur with me. As you say, I have been thoroughly well attacked and
reviled (especially by entomologists--Westwood, Wollaston, and A. Murray
have all reviewed and sneered at me to their hearts' content), but I
care nothing about their attacks; several really good judges go a long
way with me, and I observe that all those who go some little way tend
to go somewhat further. What a fine philosophical mind your friend Mr.
Wallace has, and he has acted, in relation to me, like a true man with
a noble spirit. I see by your letter that you have grappled with
several of the most difficult problems, as it seems to me, in Natural
History--such as the distinctions between the different kinds of
varieties, representative species, etc. Perhaps I shall find some facts
in your paper on intermediate varieties in intermediate regions, on
which subject I have found remarkably little information. I cannot tell
you how glad I am to hear that you have attended to the curious point
of equatorial refrigeration. I quite agree that it must have been small;
yet the more I go into that question the more convinced I feel that
there was during the Glacial period some migration from north to south.
The sketch in the "Origin" gives a very meagre account of my fuller MS.
essay on this subject.

I shall be particularly obliged for a copy of your paper when published
(118/2. Probably a paper by Bates entitled "Contributions to an Insect
Fauna of the Amazon Valley" ("Trans. Entomol. Soc." Volume V., page 335,
1858-61).); and if any suggestions occur to me (not that you require
any) or questions, I will write and ask.

I have at once to prepare a new edition of the "Origin," (118/3. Third
Edition, March, 1861.), and I will do myself the pleasure of sending you
a copy; but it will be only very slightly altered.

Cases of neuter ants, divided into castes, with intermediate gradations
(which I imagine are rare) interest me much. See "Origin" on the
driver-ant, page 241 (please look at the passage.)


LETTER 119. TO T.H. HUXLEY.

(119/1. This refers to the first number of the new series of the
"Natural History Review," 1861, a periodical which Huxley was largely
instrumental in founding, and of which he was an editor (see Letter
107). The first series was published in Dublin, and ran to seven volumes
between 1854 and 1860. The new series came to an end in 1865.)

Down, January, 3rd [1861].

I have just finished No. 1 of the "Natural History Review," and must
congratulate you, as chiefly concerned, on its excellence. The whole
seems to me admirable,--so admirable that it is impossible that other
numbers should be so good, but it would be foolish to expect it. I am
rather a croaker, and I do rather fear that the merit of the articles
will be above the run of common readers and subscribers. I have been
much interested by your brain article. (119/2. The "Brain article" of
Huxley bore the title "On the Zoological Relations of Man with the
Lower Animals," and appeared in No. 1, January 1861, page 67. It was Mr.
Huxley's vindication of the unqualified contradiction given by him
at the Oxford meeting of the British Association to Professor Owen's
assertions as to the difference between the brains of man and the higher
apes. The sentence omitted by Owen in his lecture before the University
of Cambridge was a footnote on the close structural resemblance between
Homo and Pithecus, which occurs in his paper on the characters of the
class Mammalia in the "Linn. Soc. Journal," Volume II., 1857, page 20.
According to Huxley the lecture, or "Essay on the Classification of the
Mammalia," was, with this omission, a reprint of the Linnean paper. In
"Man's Place in Nature," page 110, note, Huxley remarks: "Surely it is
a little singular that the 'anatomist,' who finds it 'difficult' to
'determine the difference' between Homo and Pithecus, should yet range
them, on anatomical grounds, in distinct sub-classes.") What a complete
and awful smasher (and done like a "buttered angel") it is for Owen!
What a humbug he is to have left out the sentence in the lecture before
the orthodox Cambridge dons! I like Lubbock's paper very much: how well
he writes. (119/3. Sir John Lubbock's paper was a review of Leydig on
the Daphniidae. M'Donnell's was "On the Homologies of the Electric Organ
of the Torpedo," afterwards used in the "Origin" (see Edition VI., page
150).) M'Donnell, of course, pleases me greatly. But I am very curious
to know who wrote the Protozoa article: I shall hear, if it be not a
secret, from Lubbock. It strikes me as very good, and, by Jove, how Owen
is shown up--"this great and sound reasoner"! By the way, this reminds
me of a passage which I have just observed in Owen's address at Leeds,
which a clever reviewer might turn into good fun. He defines (page xc)
and further on amplifies his definition that creation means "a process
he knows not what." And in a previous sentence he says facts shake his
confidence that the Apteryx in New Zealand and Red Grouse in England are
"distinct creations." So that he has no confidence that these birds
were produced by "processes he knows not what!" To what miserable
inconsistencies and rubbish this truckling to opposite opinions leads
the great generaliser! (119/4. In the "Historical Sketch," which forms
part of the later editions of the "Origin," Mr. Darwin made use of
Owen's Leeds Address in the manner sketched above. See "Origin," Edition
VI., page xvii.)

Farewell: I heartily rejoice in the clear merit of this number. I hope
Mrs. Huxley goes on well. Etty keeps much the same, but has not got up
to the same pitch as when you were here. Farewell.


LETTER 120. TO JAMES LAMONT. Down, February 25th [1861].

I am extremely much obliged for your very kind present of your beautiful
work, "Seasons with the Sea-Horses;" and I have no doubt that I shall
find much interesting from so careful and acute an observer as yourself.
(120/1. "Seasons with the Sea-Horses; or, Sporting Adventures in the
Northern Seas." London, 1861. Mr. Lamont (loc. cit., page 273) writes:
"The polar bear seems to me to be nothing more than a variety of the
bears inhabiting Northern Europe, Asia, and America; and it surely
requires no very great stretch of the imagination to suppose that
this variety was originally created, not as we see him now, but by
individuals of Ursus arctos in Siberia, who, finding their means of
subsistence running short, and pressed by hunger, ventured on the ice
and caught some seals. These individuals would find that they could
make a subsistence in this way, and would take up their residence on the
shore and gradually take to a life on the ice...Then it stands to reason
that those individuals who might happen to be palest in colour would
have the best chance of succeeding in surprising seals...The process
of Natural Selection would do the rest, and Ursus arctos would in the
course of a few thousands, or a few millions of years, be transformed
into the variety at present known as Ursus maritimus." The author adds
the following footnote (op. cit., page 275): "It will be obvious to
any one that I follow Mr. Darwin in these remarks; and, although the
substance of this chapter was written in Spitzbergen, before "The Origin
of Species" was published, I do not claim any originality for my views;
and I also cheerfully acknowledge that, but for the publication of that
work in connection with the name of so distinguished a naturalist, I
never would have ventured to give to the world my own humble opinions on
the subject.")

P.S. I have just been cutting the leaves of your book, and have been
very much pleased and surprised at your note about what you wrote in
Spitzbergen. As you thought it out independently, it is no wonder
that you so clearly understand Natural Selection, which so few of my
reviewers do or pretend not to do.

I never expected to see any one so heroically bold as to defend my
bear illustration. (120/2. "In North America the black bear was seen by
Hearne swimming for hours with widely open mouth, thus catching, almost
like a whale, insects in the water."--"Origin," Edition VI., page 141.
See Letter 110.) But a man who has done all that you have done must be
bold! It is laughable how often I have been attacked and misrepresented
about this bear. I am much pleased with your remarks, and thank you
cordially for coming to the rescue.


LETTER 121. TO W.B. TEGETMEIER.

(121/1. Mr. Darwin's letters to Mr. Tegetmeier, taken as a whole, give a
striking picture of the amount of assistance which Darwin received from
him during many years. Some citations from these letters given in "Life
and Letters," II., pages 52, 53, show how freely and generously Mr.
Tegetmeier gave his help, and how much his co-operation was valued.

The following letter is given as an example of the questions on which
Darwin sought Mr. Tegetmeier's opinion and guidance.)

Down, March 22 [1861].

I ought to have answered your last note sooner; but I have been very
busy. How wonderfully successful you have been in breeding Pouters! You
have a good right to be proud of your accuracy of eye and judgment. I
am in the thick of poultry, having just commenced, and shall be truly
grateful for the skulls, if you can send them by any conveyance to the
Nag's Head next Thursday.

You ask about vermilion wax: positively it was not in the state of comb,
but in solid bits and cakes, which were thrown with other rubbish not
far from my hives. You can make any use of the fact you like. Combs
could be concentrically and variously coloured and dates recorded by
giving for a few days wax darkly coloured with vermilion and indigo,
and I daresay other substances. You ask about my crossed fowls, and this
leads me to make a proposition to you, which I hope cannot be offensive
to you. I trust you know me too well to think that I would propose
anything objectionable to the best of my judgment. The case is this: for
my object of treating poultry I must give a sketch of several breeds,
with remarks on various points. I do not feel strong on the subject.
Now, when my MS. is fairly copied in an excellent handwriting, would
you read it over, which would take you at most an hour or two, and make
comments in pencil on it; and accept, like a barrister, a fee, we will
say, of a couple of guineas. This would be a great assistance to me,
specially if you would allow me to put a note, stating that you, a
distinguished judge and fancier, had read it over. I would state that
you doubted or concurred, as each case might be, of course striking out
what you were sure was incorrect. There would be little new in my MS. to
you; but if by chance you used any of my facts or conclusions before I
published, I should wish you to state that they were on my authority;
otherwise I shall be accused of stealing from you. There will be little
new, except that perhaps I have consulted some out-of-the-way books, and
have corresponded with some good authorities. Tell me frankly what you
think of this; but unless you will oblige me by accepting remuneration,
I cannot and will not give you such trouble. I have little doubt that
several points will arise which will require investigation, as I care
for many points disregarded by fanciers; and according to any time thus
spent, you will, I trust, allow me to make remuneration. I hope that
you will grant me this favour. There is one assistance which I will now
venture to beg of you--viz., to get me, if you can, another specimen
of an old white Angora rabbit. I want it dead for the skeleton; and not
knocked on the head. Secondly, I see in the "Cottage Gardener" (March
19th, page 375) there are impure half-lops with one ear quite upright
and shorter than the other lopped ear. I much want a dead one. Baker
cannot get one. Baily is looking out; but I want two specimens. Can you
assist me, if you meet any rabbit-fancier? I have had rabbits with
one ear more lopped than the other; but I want one with one ear quite
upright and shorter, and the other quite long and lopped.


LETTER 122. TO H.W. BATES. Down, March 26th [1861].

I have read your papers with extreme interest, and I have carefully read
every word of them. (122/1. "Contributions to an Insect Fauna of the
Amazon Valley." (Read March 5th and November 24th, 1860). "Entomological
Soc. Trans." V., pages 223 and 335).) They seem to me to be far richer
in facts of variation, and especially on the distribution of varieties
and subspecies, than anything which I have read. Hereafter I shall
re-read them, and hope in my future work to profit by them and make use
of them. The amount of variation has much surprised me. The analogous
variation of distinct species in the same regions strikes me as
particularly curious. The greater variability of the female sex is new
to me. Your Guiana case seems in some degree analogous, as far as plants
are concerned, with the modern plains of La Plata, which seem to
have been colonised from the north, but the species have been hardly
modified. (122/2. Mr. Bates (page 349) gives reason to believe that the
Guiana region should be considered "a perfectly independent province,"
and that it has formed a centre "whence radiated the species which now
people the low lands on its borders.")

Would you kindly answer me two or three questions if in your power? When
species A becomes modified in another region into a well-marked form C,
but is connected with it by one (or more) gradational forms B inhabiting
an intermediate region; does this form B generally exist in equal
numbers with A and C, OR INHABIT AN EQUALLY LARGE AREA? The probability
is that you cannot answer this question, though one of your cases seems
to bear on it...

You will, I think, be glad to hear that I now often hear of naturalists
accepting my views more or less fully; but some are curiously cautious
in running the risk of any small odium in expressing their belief.


LETTER 123. TO H.W. BATES. Down, April 4th [1861].

I have been unwell, so have delayed thanking you for your admirable
letter. I hope you will not think me presumptuous in saying how much
I have been struck with your varied knowledge, and with the decisive
manner in which you bring it to bear on each point,--a rare and most
high quality, as far as my experience goes. I earnestly hope you will
find time to publish largely: before the Linnean Society you might bring
boldly out your views on species. Have you ever thought of publishing
your travels, and working in them the less abstruse parts of your
Natural History? I believe it would sell, and be a very valuable
contribution to Natural History. You must also have seen a good deal of
the natives. I know well it would be quite unreasonable to ask for any
further information from you; but I will just mention that I am now, and
shall be for a long time, writing on domestic varieties of all animals.
Any facts would be useful, especially any showing that savages take any
care in breeding their animals, or in rejecting the bad and preserving
the good; or any fancies which they may have that one coloured or marked
dog, etc., is better than another. I have already collected much on this
head, but am greedy for facts. You will at once see their bearing on
variation under domestication.

Hardly anything in your letter has pleased me more than about sexual
selection. In my larger MS. (and indeed in the "Origin" with respect
to the tuft of hairs on the breast of the cock-turkey) I have guarded
myself against going too far; but I did not at all know that male and
female butterflies haunted rather different sites. If I had to cut up
myself in a review I would have [worried?] and quizzed sexual selection;
therefore, though I am fully convinced that it is largely true, you may
imagine how pleased I am at what you say on your belief. This part
of your letter to me is a quintessence of richness. The fact about
butterflies attracted by coloured sepals is another good fact, worth its
weight in gold. It would have delighted the heart of old Christian C.
Sprengel--now many years in his grave.

I am glad to hear that you have specially attended to "mimetic"
analogies--a most curious subject; I hope you publish on it. I have
for a long time wished to know whether what Dr. Collingwood asserts
is true--that the most striking cases generally occur between insects
inhabiting the same country.


LETTER 124. TO F.W. HUTTON. Down, April 20th [1861].

I hope that you will permit me to thank you for sending me a copy of
your paper in "The Geologist" (124/1. In a letter to Hooker (April
23rd?, 1861) Darwin refers to Hutton's review as "very original," and
adds that Hutton is "one of the very few who see that the change of
species cannot be directly proved..." ("Life and Letters," II., page
362). The review appeared in "The Geologist" (afterwards known as "The
Geological Magazine") for 1861, pages 132-6 and 183-8. A letter on
"Difficulties of Darwinism" is published in the same volume of "The
Geologist," page 286.), and at the same time to express my opinion
that you have done the subject a real service by the highly original,
striking, and condensed manner with which you have put the case. I am
actually weary of telling people that I do not pretend to adduce direct
evidence of one species changing into another, but that I believe that
this view in the main is correct, because so many phenomena can be thus
grouped together and explained. But it is generally of no use; I cannot
make persons see this. I generally throw in their teeth the universally
admitted theory of the undulation of light,--neither the undulation nor
the very existence of ether being proved, yet admitted because the view
explains so much. You are one of the very few who have seen this, and
have now put it most forcibly and clearly. I am much pleased to see
how carefully you have read my book, and, what is far more important,
reflected on so many points with an independent spirit. As I am deeply
interested in the subject (and I hope not exclusively under a personal
point of view) I could not resist venturing to thank you for the right
good service which you have done.

I need hardly say that this note requires no answer.


LETTER 125. TO J.D. HOOKER.

(125/1. Parts of this letter are published in "Life and Letters," II.,
page 362.)

Down, [April] 23rd, [1861].

I have been much interested by Bentham's paper in the "Natural History
Review," but it would not, of course, from familiarity, strike you as
it did me. (125/2. This refers to Bentham's paper "On the Species and
Genera of Plants, etc." "Nat. Hist. Review," April, 1861, page 133,
which is founded on, or extracted from, a paper read before the Linn.
Soc., November 15th, 1858. It had been originally set down to be read
on July 1st, 1858, but gave way to the papers of Darwin and Wallace.
Mr. Bentham has described ("Life and Letters," II., page 294) how he
reluctantly cancelled the parts urging "original fixity" of specific
type, and the remainder seems not to have been published except in the
above-quoted paper in the "Nat. Hist. Review.") I liked the whole--all
the facts on the nature of close and varying species. Good Heavens! to
think of the British botanists turning up their noses and saying that
he knows nothing of British plants! I was also pleased at his remarks on
classification, because it showed me that I wrote truly on this subject
in the "Origin." I saw Bentham at the Linnean Society, and had some talk
with him and Lubbock and Edgeworth, Wallich, and several others. I asked
Bentham to give us his ideas of species; whether partially with us or
dead against us, he would write excellent matter. He made no answer, but
his manner made me think he might do so if urged--so do you attack him.
Every one was speaking with affection and anxiety of Henslow. I dined
with Bell at the Linnean Club, and liked my dinner...dining-out is such
a novelty to me that I enjoyed it. Bell has a real good heart. I
liked Rolleston's paper, but I never read anything so obscure and not
self-evident as his "canons." (125/3. See "Nat. Hist. Review," 1861,
page 206. The paper is "On the Brain of the Orang Utang," and forms part
of the bitter controversy of this period to which reference occurs in
letters to Huxley and elsewhere in these volumes. Rolleston's work is
quoted by Huxley ("Man's Place in Nature," page 117) as part of the
crushing refutation of Owen's position. Mr. Huxley's letter referred to
above is no doubt that in the "Athenaeum," April 13th, 1861, page 498;
it is certainly severe, but to those who know Mr. Huxley's "Succinct
History of the Controversy," etc. ("Man's Place in Nature," page 113),
it will not seem too severe.) I had a dim perception of the truth of
your profound remark--that he wrote in fear and trembling "of God, man,
and monkeys," but I would alter it into "God, man, Owen, and monkeys."
Huxley's letter was truculent, and I see that every one thinks it
too truculent; but in simple truth I am become quite demoniacal about
Owen--worse than Huxley; and I told Huxley that I should put myself
under his care to be rendered milder. But I mean to try and get more
angelic in my feelings; yet I never shall forget his cordial shake of
the hand, when he was writing as spitefully as he possibly could against
me. But I have always thought that you have more cause than I to be
demoniacally inclined towards him. Bell told me that Owen says that the
editor mutilated his article in the "Edinburgh Review" (125/4. This is
the only instance, with which we are acquainted, of Owen's acknowledging
the authorship of the "Edinburgh Review" article.), and Bell seemed to
think it was rendered more spiteful by the Editor; perhaps the opposite
view is as probable. Oh, dear! this does not look like becoming more
angelic in my temper!

I had a splendid long talk with Lyell (you may guess how splendid, for
he was many times on his knees, with elbows on the sofa) (125/5. Mr.
Darwin often spoke of Sir Charles Lyell's tendency to take curious
attitudes when excited.) on his work in France: he seems to have done
capital work in making out the age of the celt-bearing beds, but the
case gets more and more complicated. All, however, tends to greater and
greater antiquity of man. The shingle beds seem to be estuary deposits.
I called on R. Chambers at his very nice house in St. John's Wood, and
had a very pleasant half-hour's talk--he is really a capital fellow. He
made one good remark and chuckled over it: that the laymen universally
had treated the controversy on the "Essays and Reviews" as a merely
professional subject, and had not joined in it but had left it to the
clergy. I shall be anxious for your next letter about Henslow. Farewell,
with sincere sympathy, my old friend.

P.S.--We are very much obliged for "London Review." We like reading much
of it, and the science is incomparably better than in the "Athenaeum."
You shall not go on very long sending it, as you will be ruined by
pennies and trouble; but I am under a horrid spell to the "Athenaeum"
and "Gardeners' Chronicle," both of which are intolerably dull, but I
have taken them in for so many years that I cannot give them up.
The "Cottage Gardener," for my purpose, is now far better than the
"Gardeners' Chronicle."


LETTER 126. TO J.L.A. DE QUATREFAGES. Down, April 25 [1861].

I received this morning your "Unite de l'Espece Humaine" [published
in 1861], and most sincerely do I thank you for this your very kind
present. I had heard of and been recommended to read your articles, but,
not knowing that they were separately published, did not know how to get
them. So your present is most acceptable, and I am very anxious to
see your views on the whole subject of species and variation; and I am
certain to derive much benefit from your work. In cutting the pages I
observe that you have most kindly mentioned my work several times. My
views spread slowly in England and America; and I am much surprised to
find them most commonly accepted by geologists, next by botanists, and
least by zoologists. I am much pleased that the younger and middle-aged
geologists are coming round, for the arguments from Geology have always
seemed strongest against me. Not one of the older geologists (except
Lyell) has been even shaken in his views of the eternal immutability of
species. But so many of the younger men are turning round with zeal
that I look to the future with some confidence. I am now at work on
"Variation under Domestication," but make slow progress--it is such
tedious work comparing skeletons.

With very sincere thanks for the kind sympathy which you have always
shown me, and with much respect,...

P.S.--I have lately read M. Naudin's paper (126/1. Naudin's paper
("Revue Horticole," 1852) is mentioned in the "Historical Sketch"
prefixed to the later editions of the "Origin" (Edition VI., page xix).
Naudin insisted that species are formed in a manner analogous to the
production of varieties by cultivators, i.e., by selection, "but he does
not show how selection acts under nature." In the "Life and Letters,"
II., page 246, Darwin, speaking of Naudin's work, says: "Decaisne seems
to think he gives my whole theory."), but it does not seem to me to
anticipate me, as he does not show how selection could be applied under
nature; but an obscure writer (126/2. The obscure writer is Patrick
Matthew (see the "Historical Sketch" in the "Origin.") on forest
trees, in 1830, in Scotland, most expressly and clearly anticipated
my views--though he put the case so briefly that no single person ever
noticed the scattered passages in his book.


LETTER 127. TO L. HINDMARSH.

(127/1. The following letter was in reply to one from Mr. Hindmarsh, to
whom Mr. Darwin had written asking for information on the average number
of animals killed each year in the Chillingham herd. The object of the
request was to obtain information which might throw light on the rate
of increase of the cattle relatively to those on the pampas of South
America. Mr. Hindmarsh had contributed a paper "On the Wild Cattle of
Chillingham Park" to the "Annals and Mag. Nat. Hist." Volume II., page
274, 1839.)

Down, May 12th [1861].

I thank you sincerely for your prompt and great kindness, and return
the letter, which I have been very glad to see and have had copied.
The increase is more rapid than I anticipated, but it seems rather
conjectural; I had hoped that in so interesting a case some exact record
had been kept. The number of births, or of calves reared till they
followed their mothers, would perhaps have been the best datum. From
Mr. Hardy's letter I infer that ten must be annually born to make up the
deaths from various causes. In Paraguay, Azara states that in a herd of
4,000, from 1,000 to 1,300 are reared; but then, though they do not kill
calves, but castrate the young bulls, no doubt the oxen would be killed
earlier than the cows, so that the herd would contain probably more of
the female sex than the herd at Chillingham. There is not apparently
any record whether more young bulls are killed than cows. I am surprised
that Lord Tankerville does not have an exact record kept of deaths
and sexes and births: after a dozen years it would be an interesting
statistical record to the naturalist and agriculturist.


(PLATE: PROFESSOR HENSLOW.)


LETTER 128. TO J.D. HOOKER.

(128/1. The death of Professor Henslow (who was Sir J.D. Hooker's
father-in-law) occurred on May 16th, 1861.)

Down, May 24th [1861].

Thanks for your two notes. I am glad that the burial is over, and
sincerely sympathise and can most fully understand your feelings at your
loss.

I grieve to think how little I saw of Henslow for many years. With
respect to a biography of Henslow, I cannot help feeling rather
doubtful, on the principle that a biography could not do him justice.
His letters were generally written in a hurry, and I fear he did not
keep any journal or diary. If there were any vivid materials to describe
his life as parish priest, and manner of managing the poor, it would be
very good.

I am never very sanguine on literary projects. I cannot help fearing
his Life might turn out flat. There can hardly be marked incidents to
describe. I sincerely hope that I take a wrong and gloomy view, but
I cannot help fearing--I would rather see no Life than one that would
interest very few. It will be a pleasure and duty in me to consider what
I can recollect; but at present I can think of scarcely anything. The
equability and perfection of Henslow's whole character, I should think,
would make it very difficult for any one to pourtray him. I have been
thinking about Henslow all day a good deal, but the more I think the
less I can think of to write down. It is quite a new style for me to
set about, but I will continue to think what I could say to give any,
however imperfect, notion of him in the old Cambridge days.

Pray give my kindest remembrances to L. Jenyns (128/2. The Rev. Leonard
Jenyns (afterwards Blomefield) undertook the "Life" of Henslow, to which
Darwin contributed a characteristic and delightful sketch. See Letter
17.), who is often associated with my recollection of those old happy
days.


LETTER 129. HENRY FAWCETT TO CHARLES DARWIN.

(129/1. It was in reply to the following letter that Darwin wrote to
Fawcett: "You could not possibly have told me anything which would have
given me more satisfaction than what you say about Mr. Mill's opinion.
Until your review appeared I began to think that perhaps I did not
understand at all how to reason scientifically." ("Life of Henry
Fawcett," by Leslie Stephen, 1885, page 100.)

Bodenham, Salisbury, July 16th [1861].

I feel that I ought not to have so long delayed writing to thank you
for your very kind letter to me about my article on your book in
"Macmillan's Magazine."

I was particularly anxious to point out that the method of investigation
pursued was in every respect philosophically correct. I was spending an
evening last week with my friend Mr. John Stuart Mill, and I am sure you
will be pleased to hear from such an authority that he considers that
your reasoning throughout is in the most exact accordance with the
strict principles of logic. He also says the method of investigation you
have followed is the only one proper to such a subject.

It is easy for an antagonistic reviewer, when he finds it difficult
to answer your arguments, to attempt to dispose of the whole matter by
uttering some such commonplace as "This is not a Baconian induction."

I expect shortly to be spending a few days in your neighbourhood, and if
I should not be intruding upon you, I should esteem it a great favour if
you will allow me to call on you, and have half an hour's conversation
with you.

As far as I am personally concerned, I am sure I ought to be grateful to
you, for since my accident nothing has given me so much pleasure as the
perusal of your book. Such studies are now a great resource to me.


LETTER 130. TO C. LYELL. 2, Hesketh Terrace, Torquay [August 2nd, 1861].

I declare that you read the reviews on the "Origin" more carefully than
I do. I agree with all your remarks. The point of correlation struck me
as well put, and on varieties growing together; but I have already begun
to put things in train for information on this latter head, on which
Bronn also enlarges. With respect to sexuality, I have often speculated
on it, and have always concluded that we are too ignorant to speculate:
no physiologist can conjecture why the two elements go to form a new
being, and, more than that, why nature strives at uniting the two
elements from two individuals. What I am now working at in my orchids is
an admirable illustration of the law. I should certainly conclude that
all sexuality had descended from one prototype. Do you not underrate the
degree of lowness of organisation in which sexuality occurs--viz., in
Hydra, and still lower in some of the one-celled free confervae which
"conjugate," which good judges (Thwaites) believe is the simplest form
of true sexual generation? (130/1. See Letter 97.) But the whole case is
a mystery.

There is another point on which I have occasionally wished to say a few
words. I believe you think with Asa Gray that I have not allowed enough
for the stream of variation having been guided by a higher power. I have
had lately a good deal of correspondence on this head. Herschel, in his
"Physical Geography" (130/2. "Physical Geography of the Globe," by Sir
John F.W. Herschel, Edinburgh, 1861. On page 12 Herschel writes of
the revelations of Geology pointing to successive submersions and
reconstructions of the continents and fresh races of animals and plants.
He refers to a "great law of change" which has not operated either by
a gradually progressing variation of species, nor by a sudden and
total abolition of one race...The following footnote on page 12 of
the "Physical Geography" was added in January, 1861: "This was written
previous to the publication of Mr. Darwin's work on the "Origin of
Species," a work which, whatever its merit or ingenuity, we cannot,
however, consider as having disproved the view taken in the text. We
can no more accept the principle of arbitrary and casual variation
and natural selection as a sufficient account, per se, of the past
and present organic world, than we can receive the Laputan method of
composing books (pushed a outrance) as a sufficient one of Shakespeare
and the "Principia." Equally in either case an intelligence, guided by
a purpose, must be continually in action to bias the directions of the
steps of change--to regulate their amount, to limit their divergence,
and to continue them in a definite course. We do not believe that Mr.
Darwin means to deny the necessity of such intelligent direction. But it
does not, so far as we can see, enter into the formula of this law, and
without it we are unable to conceive how far the law can have led to
the results. On the other hand, we do not mean to deny that such
intelligence may act according to a law (that is to say, on a
preconceived and definite plan). Such law, stated in words, would be
no other than the actual observed law of organic succession; a one more
general, taking that form when applied to our own planet, and including
all the links of the chain which have disappeared. BUT THE ONE LAW IS A
NECESSARY SUPPLEMENT TO THE OTHER, AND OUGHT, IN ALL LOGICAL PROPRIETY,
TO FORM A PART OF ITS ENUNCIATION. Granting this, and with some demur
as to the genesis of man, we are far from disposed to repudiate the view
taken of this mysterious subject in Mr. Darwin's book." The sentence
in italics is no doubt the one referred to in the letter to Lyell. See
Letter 243.), has a sentence with respect to the "Origin," something to
the effect that the higher law of Providential Arrangement should always
be stated. But astronomers do not state that God directs the course
of each comet and planet. The view that each variation has been
providentially arranged seems to me to make Natural Selection entirely
superfluous, and indeed takes the whole case of the appearance of new
species out of the range of science. But what makes me most object to
Asa Gray's view is the study of the extreme variability of domestic
animals. He who does not suppose that each variation in the pigeon was
providentially caused, by accumulating which variations, man made
a Fantail, cannot, I think, logically argue that the tail of the
woodpecker was formed by variations providentially ordained. It seems
to me that variations in the domestic and wild conditions are due to
unknown causes, and are without purpose, and in so far accidental; and
that they become purposeful only when they are selected by man for his
pleasure, or by what we call Natural Selection in the struggle for life,
and under changing conditions. I do not wish to say that God did not
foresee everything which would ensue; but here comes very nearly the
same sort of wretched imbroglio as between freewill and preordained
necessity. I doubt whether I have made what I think clear; but certainly
A. Gray's notion of the courses of variation having been led like a
stream of water by gravity, seems to me to smash the whole affair. It
reminds me of a Spaniard whom I told I was trying to make out how the
Cordillera was formed; and he answered me that it was useless, for "God
made them." It may be said that God foresaw how they would be made.
I wonder whether Herschel would say that you ought always to give the
higher providential law, and declare that God had ordered all certain
changes of level, that certain mountains should arise. I must think
that such views of Asa Gray and Herschel merely show that the subject in
their minds is in Comte's theological stage of science...

Of course I do not want any answer to my quasi-theological discussion,
but only for you to think of my notions, if you understand them.

I hope to Heaven your long and great labours on your new edition are
drawing to a close.


LETTER 131. TO C. LYELL. Torquay, [August 13th, 1861].

Very many thanks for the orchids, which have proved extremely useful to
me in two ways I did not anticipate, but were too monstrous (yet of some
use) for my special purpose.

When you come to "Deification" (131/1. See Letter 105, note.), ask
yourself honestly whether what you are thinking applies to the endless
variations of domestic productions, which man accumulates for his mere
fancy or use. No doubt these are all caused by some unknown law, but
I cannot believe they were ordained for any purpose, and if not so
ordained under domesticity, I can see no reason to believe that they
were ordained in a state of nature. Of course it may be said, when you
kick a stone, or a leaf falls from a tree, that it was ordained, before
the foundations of the world were laid, exactly where that stone or leaf
should lie. In this sense the subject has no interest for me.

Once again, many thanks for the orchids; you must let me repay you what
you paid the collector.


LETTER 132. TO C. LYELL.

(132/1. The first paragraph probably refers to the proof-sheets of
Lyell's "Antiquity of Man," but the passage referred to seems not to
occur in the book.)

Torquay, August 21st [1861].

...I have really no criticism, except a trifling one in pencil near the
end, which I have inserted on account of dominant and important species
generally varying most. You speak of "their views" rather as if you were
a thousand miles away from such wretches, but your concluding paragraph
shows that you are one of the wretches.

I am pleased that you approve of Hutton's review. (132/2. "Some Remarks
on Mr. Darwin's Theory," by F.W. Hutton. "Geologist," Volume IV.,
page 132 (1861). See Letter 124.) It seemed to me to take a more
philosophical view of the manner of judging the question than any other
review. The sentence you quote from it seems very true, but I do not
agree with the theological conclusion. I think he quotes from Asa Gray,
certainly not from me; but I have neither A. Gray nor "Origin" with me.
Indeed, I have over and over again said in the "Origin" that Natural
Selection does nothing without variability; I have given a whole chapter
on laws, and used the strongest language how ignorant we are on these
laws. But I agree that I have somehow (Hooker says it is owing to
my title) not made the great and manifest importance of previous
variability plain enough. Breeders constantly speak of Selection as
the one great means of improvement; but of course they imply individual
differences, and this I should have thought would have been obvious to
all in Natural Selection; but it has not been so.

I have just said that I cannot agree with "which variations are the
effects of an unknown law, ordained and guided without doubt by an
intelligent cause on a preconceived and definite plan." Will you
honestly tell me (and I should be really much obliged) whether you
believe that the shape of my nose (eheu!) was ordained and "guided by
an intelligent cause?" (132/3. It should be remembered that the shape
of his nose nearly determined Fitz-Roy to reject Darwin as naturalist to
H.M.S. "Beagle" ("Life and Letters," I., page 60).) By the selection of
analogous and less differences fanciers make almost generic differences
in their pigeons; and can you see any good reason why the Natural
Selection of analogous individual differences should not make new
species? If you say that God ordained that at some time and place a
dozen slight variations should arise, and that one of them alone should
be preserved in the struggle for life and the other eleven should perish
in the first or few first generations, then the saying seems to me
mere verbiage. It comes to merely saying that everything that is, is
ordained.

Let me add another sentence. Why should you or I speak of variation
as having been ordained and guided, more than does an astronomer, in
discussing the fall of a meteoric stone? He would simply say that it was
drawn to our earth by the attraction of gravity, having been displaced
in its course by the action of some quite unknown laws. Would you have
him say that its fall at some particular place and time was "ordained
and guided without doubt by an intelligent cause on a preconceived and
definite plan"? Would you not call this theological pedantry or display?
I believe it is not pedantry in the case of species, simply because
their formation has hitherto been viewed as beyond law; in fact, this
branch of science is still with most people under its theological phase
of development. The conclusion which I always come to after thinking of
such questions is that they are beyond the human intellect; and the less
one thinks on them the better. You may say, Then why trouble me? But I
should very much like to know clearly what you think.


LETTER 133. TO HENRY FAWCETT.

(133/1. The following letter was published in the "Life" of Mr. Fawcett
(1885); we are indebted to Mrs. Fawcett and Messrs. Smith & Elder for
permission to reprint it. See Letter 129.)

September 18th [1861].

I wondered who had so kindly sent me the newspaper (133/2. The newspaper
sent was the "Manchester Examiner" for September 9th, 1861, containing
a report of Mr. Fawcett's address given before Section D of the British
Association, "On the method of Mr. Darwin in his treatise on the
origin of species," in which the speaker showed that the "method of
investigation pursued by Mr. Darwin in his treatise on the origin of
species is in strict accordance with the principles of logic." The "A"
of the letter (as published in Fawcett's Life) is the late Professor
Williamson, who is reported to have said that "while he would not say
that Mr. Darwin's book had caused him a loss of reputation, he was sure
that it had not caused a gain." The reference to "B" is explained by the
report of the late Dr. Lankester's speech in which he said, "The facts
brought forward in support of the hypothesis had a very different value
indeed from that of the hypothesis...A great naturalist, who was still a
friend of Mr. Darwin, once said to him (Dr. Lankester), 'The mistake is,
that Darwin has dealt with origin. Why did he not put his facts before
us, and let them rest?'" Another speaker, the Rt. Hon. J.R. Napier,
remarked: "I am going to speak closely to the question. If the
hypothesis is put forward to contradict facts, and the averments are
contrary to the Word of God, I say that it is not a logical argument."
At this point the chairman, Professor Babington, wisely interfered, on
the ground that the meeting was a scientific one.), which I was very
glad to see; and now I have to thank you sincerely for allowing me to
see your MS. It seems to me very good and sound; though I am certainly
not an impartial judge. You will have done good service in calling the
attention of scientific men to means and laws of philosophising. As far
as I could judge by the papers, your opponents were unworthy of you. How
miserably A. talked of my reputation, as if that had anything to do with
it!...How profoundly ignorant B must be of the very soul of observation!
About thirty years ago there was much talk that geologists ought only
to observe and not theorise; and I well remember some one saying that at
this rate a man might as well go into a gravel-pit and count the pebbles
and describe the colours. How odd it is that anyone should not see that
all observation must be for or against some view if it is to be of any
service!

I have returned only lately from a two months' visit to Torquay,
which did my health at the time good; but I am one of those miserable
creatures who are never comfortable for twenty-four hours; and it is
clear to me that I ought to be exterminated. I have been rather idle of
late, or, speaking more strictly, working at some miscellaneous papers,
which, however, have some direct bearing on the subject of species; yet
I feel guilty at having neglected my larger book. But, to me, observing
is much better sport than writing. I fear that I shall have wearied you
with this long note.

Pray believe that I feel sincerely grateful that you have taken up the
cudgels in defence of the line of argument in the "Origin;" you will
have benefited the subject.

Many are so fearful of speaking out. A German naturalist came here the
other day; and he tells me that there are many in Germany on our side,
but that all seem fearful of speaking out, and waiting for some one to
speak, and then many will follow. The naturalists seem as timid as
young ladies should be, about their scientific reputation. There is much
discussion on the subject on the Continent, even in quiet Holland; and I
had a pamphlet from Moscow the other day by a man who sticks up famously
for the imperfection of the "Geological Record," but complains that I
have sadly understated the variability of the old fossilised animals!
But I must not run on.


LETTER 134. TO H.W. BATES. Down, September 25th [1861].

Now for a few words on science. Many thanks for facts on neuters. You
cannot tell how I rejoice that you do not think what I have said on the
subject absurd. Only two persons have even noticed it to me--viz.,
the bitter sneer of Owen in the "Edinburgh Review" (134/1. "Edinburgh
Review," April, 1860, page 525.), and my good friend and supporter,
Sir C. Lyell, who could only screw up courage to say, "Well, you have
manfully faced the difficulty."

What a wonderful case of Volucella of which I had never heard. (134/2.
Volucella is a fly--one of the Syrphidae--supposed to supply a case of
mimicry; this was doubtless the point of interest with Bates. Dr. Sharp
says ["Insects," Part II. (in the Camb. Nat. Hist. series), 1899, page
500]: "It was formerly assumed that the Volucella larvae lived on
the larvae of the bees, and that the parent flies were providentially
endowed with a bee-like appearance that they might obtain entrance into
the bees' nests without being detected." Dr. Sharp goes on to say
that what little is known on the subject supports the belief that the
"presence of the Volucella in the nests is advantageous to both fly and
bee.") I had no idea such a case occurred in nature; I must get and see
specimens in British Museum. I hope and suppose you will give a
good deal of Natural History in your Travels; every one cares about
ants--more notice has been taken about slave-ants in the "Origin" than
of any other passage.

I fully expect to delight in your Travels. Keep to simple style, as in
your excellent letters,--but I beg pardon, I am again advising.

What a capital paper yours will be on mimetic resemblances! You will
make quite a new subject of it. I had thought of such cases as a
difficulty; and once, when corresponding with Dr. Collingwood, I thought
of your explanation; but I drove it from my mind, for I felt that I had
not knowledge to judge one way or the other. Dr C., I think, states that
the mimetic forms inhabit the same country, but I did not know whether
to believe him. What wonderful cases yours seem to be! Could you not
give a few woodcuts in your Travels to illustrate this? I am tired with
a hard day's work, so no more, except to give my sincere thanks and
hearty wishes for the success of your Travels.


LETTER 135. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, March 18th [1862].

Your letter discusses lots of interesting subjects, and I am very glad
you have sent for your letter to Bates. (135/1. Published in Mr. Clodd's
memoir of Bates in the "Naturalist on the Amazons," 1892, page l.) What
do you mean by "individual plants"? (135/2. In a letter to Mr. Darwin
dated March 17th, 1862, Sir J.D. Hooker had discussed a supposed
difference between animals and plants, "inasmuch as the individual
animal is certainly changed materially by external conditions, the
latter (I think) never, except in such a coarse way as stunting or
enlarging--e.g. no increase of cold on the spot, or change of individual
plant from hot to cold, will induce said individual plant to get more
woolly covering; but I suppose a series of cold seasons would bring
about such a change in an individual quadruped, just as rowing will
harden hands, etc.") I fancied a bud lived only a year, and you could
hardly expect any change in that time; but if you call a tree or plant
an individual, you have sporting buds. Perhaps you mean that the
whole tree does not change. Tulips, in "breaking," change. Fruit seems
certainly affected by the stock. I think I have (135/3. See note, Letter
16.) got cases of slight change in alpine plants transplanted. All these
subjects have rather gone out of my head owing to orchids, but I shall
soon have to enter on them in earnest when I come again to my volume on
variation under domestication.

...In the lifetime of an animal you would, I think, find it very
difficult to show effects of external condition on animals more than
shade and light, good and bad soil, produce on a plant.

You speak of "an inherent tendency to vary wholly independent of
physical conditions"! This is a very simple way of putting the case (as
Dr. Prosper Lucas also puts it) (135/4. Prosper Lucas, the author of
"Traite philosophique et physiologique de l'heredite naturelle dans
les etats de sante et de maladie du systeme nerveux": 2 volumes,
Paris, 1847-50.): but two great classes of facts make me think that all
variability is due to change in the conditions of life: firstly, that
there is more variability and more monstrosities (and these graduate
into each other) under unnatural domestic conditions than under nature;
and, secondly, that changed conditions affect in an especial manner the
reproductive organs--those organs which are to produce a new being. But
why one seedling out of thousands presents some new character transcends
the wildest powers of conjecture. It was in this sense that I spoke of
"climate," etc., possibly producing without selection a hooked seed,
or any not great variation. (135/5. This statement probably occurs in a
letter, and not in Darwin's published works.)

I have for years and years been fighting with myself not to attribute
too much to Natural Selection--to attribute something to direct action
of conditions; and perhaps I have too much conquered my tendency to lay
hardly any stress on conditions of life.

I am not shaken about "saltus" (135/6. Sir Joseph had written, March
17th, 1862: "Huxley is rather disposed to think you have overlooked
saltus, but I am not sure that he is right--saltus quoad individuals is
not saltus quoad species--as I pointed out in the Begonia case, though
perhaps that was rather special pleading in the present state of
science." For the Begonia case, see "Life and Letters," II., page
275, also letter 110, page 166.), I did not write without going pretty
carefully into all the cases of normal structure in animals resembling
monstrosities which appear per saltus.


LETTER 136. TO J.D. HOOKER. 26th [March, 1862].

Thanks also for your own (136/1. See note in Letter 135.) and Bates'
letter now returned. They are both excellent; you have, I think, said
all that can be said against direct effects of conditions, and capitally
put. But I still stick to my own and Bates' side. Nevertheless I am
pleased to attribute little to conditions, and I wish I had done what
you suggest--started on the fundamental principle of variation being
an innate principle, and afterwards made a few remarks showing that
hereafter, perhaps, this principle would be explicable. Whenever my
book on poultry, pigeons, ducks, and rabbits is published, with all the
measurements and weighings of bones, I think you will see that "use
and disuse" at least have some effect. I do not believe in perfect
reversion. I rather demur to your doctrine of "centrifugal variation."
(136/2. The "doctrine of centrifugal variation" is given in Sir J.D.
Hooker's "Introductory Essay to the Flora of Tasmania" (Part III. of the
Botany of the Antarctic Expedition), 1859, page viii. In paragraph 10
the author writes: "The tendency of varieties, both in nature and under
cultivation...is rather to depart more and more widely from the original
type than to revert to it." In Sir Joseph's letter to Bates (loc. cit.,
page lii) he wrote: "Darwin also believes in some reversion to type
which is opposed to my view of variation." It may be noted in this
connection that Mr. Galton has shown reason to believe in a centripetal
tendency in variation (to use Hooker's phraseology) which is not
identical with the reversion of cultivated plants to their ancestors,
the case to which Hooker apparently refers. See "Natural Inheritance,"
by F. Galton, 1889.) I suppose you do not agree with or do not remember
my doctrine of the good of diversification (136/3. Darwin usually used
the word "divergence" in this connection.); this seems to me amply to
account for variation being centrifugal--if you forget it, look at
this discussion (page 117 of 3rd edition), it was the best point which,
according to my notions, I made out, and it has always pleased me. It is
really curiously satisfactory to me to see so able a man as Bates (and
yourself) believing more fully in Natural Selection than I think I even
do myself. (136/4. This refers to a very interesting passage in Hooker's
letter to Bates (loc. cit., page liii): "I am sure that with you, as
with me, the more you think the less occasion you will see for anything
but time and natural selection to effect change; and that this view
is the simplest and clearest in the present state of science is one
advantage, at any rate. Indeed, I think that it is, in the present state
of the inquiry, the legitimate position to take up; it is time enough to
bother our heads with the secondary cause when there is some evidence of
it or some demand for it--at present I do not see one or the other, and
so feel inclined to renounce any other for the present.") By the way, I
always boast to you, and so I think Owen will be wrong that my book will
be forgotten in ten years, for a French edition is now going through the
press and a second German edition wanted. Your long letter to Bates has
set my head working, and makes me repent of the nine months spent on
orchids; though I know not why I should not have amused myself on them
as well as slaving on bones of ducks and pigeons, etc. The orchids have
been splendid sport, though at present I am fearfully sick of them.

I enclose a waste copy of woodcut of Mormodes ignea; I wish you had a
plant at Kew, for I am sure its wonderful mechanism and structure would
amuse you. Is it not curious the way the labellum sits on the top of the
column?--here insects alight and are beautifully shot, when they touch a
certain sensitive point, by the pollinia.

How kindly you have helped me in my work! Farewell, my dear old fellow.


LETTER 137. TO H.W. BATES. Down, May 4th [1862].

Hearty thanks for your most interesting letter and three very valuable
extracts. I am very glad that you have been looking at the South
Temperate insects. I wish that the materials in the British Museum had
been richer; but I should think the case of the South American Carabi,
supported by some other case, would be worth a paper. To us who theorise
I am sure the case is very important. Do the South American Carabi
differ more from the other species than do, for instance, the Siberian
and European and North American and Himalayan (if the genus exists
there)? If they do, I entirely agree with you that the difference would
be too great to account for by the recent Glacial period. I agree, also,
with you in utterly rejecting an independent origin for these Carabi.
There is a difficulty, as far as I know, in our ignorance whether
insects change quickly in time; you could judge of this by knowing how
far closely allied coleoptera generally have much restricted ranges,
for this almost implies rapid change. What a curious case is offered by
land-shells, which become modified in every sub-district, and have yet
retained the same general structure from very remote geological periods!
When working at the Glacial period, I remember feeling much surprised
how few birds, no mammals, and very few sea-mollusca seemed to have
crossed, or deeply entered, the inter-tropical regions during the cold
period. Insects, from all you say, seem to come under the same category.
Plants seem to migrate more readily than animals. Do not underrate the
length of Glacial period: Forbes used to argue that it was equivalent to
the whole of the Pleistocene period in the warmer latitudes. I believe,
with you, that we shall be driven to an older Glacial period.

I am very sorry to hear about the British Museum; it would be hopeless
to contend against any one supported by Owen. Perhaps another chance
might occur before very long. How would it be to speak to Owen as soon
as your own mind is made up? From what I have heard, since talking to
you, I fear the strongest personal interest with a Minister is requisite
for a pension.

Farewell, and may success attend the acerrimo pro-pugnatori.

P.S. I deeply wish you could find some situation in which you could
give your time to science; it would be a great thing for science and for
yourself.


LETTER 138. TO J.L.A. DE QUATREFAGES. Down, July 11th [1862].

I thank you cordially for so kindly and promptly answering my questions.
I will quote some of your remarks. The case seems to me of some
importance with reference to my heretical notions, for it shows how
larvae might be modified. I shall not publish, I daresay, for a year,
for much time is expended in experiments. If within this time you should
acquire any fresh information on the similarity of the moths of distinct
races, and would allow me to quote any facts on your authority, I should
feel very grateful.

I thank you for your great kindness with respect to the translation of
the "Origin;" it is very liberal in you, as we differ to a considerable
degree. I have been atrociously abused by my religious countrymen; but
as I live an independent life in the country, it does not in the least
hurt me in any way, except indeed when the abuse comes from an old
friend like Professor Owen, who abuses me and then advances the doctrine
that all birds are probably descended from one parent.

I wish the translator (138/1. Mdlle. Royer, who translated the first
French edition of the "Origin.') had known more of Natural History; she
must be a clever but singular lady, but I never heard of her till she
proposed to translate my book.


LETTER 139. TO ASA GRAY. Down, July 23rd [1862].

I received several days ago two large packets, but have as yet read only
your letter; for we have been in fearful distress, and I could attend
to nothing. Our poor boy had the rare case of second rash and sore
throat...; and, as if this was not enough, a most serious attack of
erysipelas, with typhoid symptoms. I despaired of his life; but this
evening he has eaten one mouthful, and I think has passed the crisis. He
has lived on port wine every three-quarters of an hour, day and night.
This evening, to our astonishment, he asked whether his stamps were
safe, and I told him of one sent by you, and that he should see it
to-morrow. He answered, "I should awfully like to see it now"; so with
difficulty he opened his eyelids and glanced at it, and, with a sigh of
satisfaction, said, "All right." Children are one's greatest happiness,
but often and often a still greater misery. A man of science ought to
have none--perhaps not a wife; for then there would be nothing in
this wide world worth caring for, and a man might (whether he could is
another question) work away like a Trojan. I hope in a few days to get
my brains in order, and then I will pick out all your orchid letters,
and return them in hopes of your making use of them...

Of all the carpenters for knocking the right nail on the head, you are
the very best; no one else has perceived that my chief interest in my
orchid book has been that it was a "flank movement" on the enemy. I
live in such solitude that I hear nothing, and have no idea to what you
allude about Bentham and the orchids and species. But I must enquire.

By the way, one of my chief enemies (the sole one who has annoyed me),
namely Owen, I hear has been lecturing on birds; and admits that all
have descended from one, and advances as his own idea that the oceanic
wingless birds have lost their wings by gradual disuse. He never alludes
to me, or only with bitter sneers, and coupled with Buffon and the
"Vestiges."

Well, it has been an amusement to me this first evening, scribbling as
egotistically as usual about myself and my doings; so you must forgive
me, as I know well your kind heart will do. I have managed to skim the
newspaper, but had not heart to read all the bloody details. Good God!
What will the end be? Perhaps we are too despondent here; but I must
think you are too hopeful on your side of the water. I never believed
the "canards" of the army of the Potomac having capitulated. My good
dear wife and self are come to wish for peace at any price. Good night,
my good friend. I will scribble on no more.

One more word. I should like to hear what you think about what I say
in the last chapter of the orchid book on the meaning and cause of the
endless diversity of means for the same general purpose. It bears on
design, that endless question. Good night, good night!


LETTER 140. TO C. LYELL. 1, Carlton Terrace, Southampton, August 22nd
[1862].

You say that the Bishop and Owen will be down on you (140/1. This refers
to the "Antiquity of Man," which was published in 1863.): the latter
hardly can, for I was assured that Owen, in his lectures this spring,
advanced as a new idea that wingless birds had lost their wings by
disuse. (140/2. The first paragraph of this letter was published in
"Life and Letters," II., pages 387, 388.) Also that magpies stole
spoons, etc., from a remnant of some instinct like that of the
bower-bird, which ornaments its playing passage with pretty feathers.
Indeed, I am told that he hinted plainly that all birds are descended
from one. What an unblushing man he must be to lecture thus after
abusing me so, and never to have openly retracted, or alluded to my
book!


LETTER 141. TO JOHN LUBBOCK (LORD AVEBURY). Cliff Cottage, Bournemouth,
September 5th [1862].

Many thanks for your pleasant note in return for all my stupid trouble.
I did not fully appreciate your insect-diving case (141/1. "On two
Aquatic Hymenoptera, one of which uses its Wings in Swimming." By John
Lubbock. "Trans. Linn. Soc." Volume XXIV., 1864, pages 135-42.) [Read
May 7th, 1863.] In this paper Lubbock describes a new species of
Polynema--P. natans--which swims by means of its wings, and is capable
of living under water for several hours; the other species, referred to
a new genus Prestwichia, lives under water, holds its wings motionless
and uses its legs as oars.) before your last note, nor had I any idea
that the fact was new, though new to me. It is really very interesting.
Of course you will publish an account of it. You will then say whether
the insect can fly well through the air. (141/2. In describing the
habits of Polynema, Lubbock writes, "I was unfortunately unable to
ascertain whether they could fly" (loc. cit., page 137).) My wife
asked, "How did he find that it stayed four hours under water without
breathing?" I answered at once: "Mrs. Lubbock sat four hours watching."
I wonder whether I am right.

I long to be at home and at steady work, and I hope we may be in another
month. I fear it is hopeless my coming to you, for I am squashier than
ever, but hope two shower-baths a day will give me a little strength, so
that you will, I hope, come to us. It is an age since I have seen you or
any scientific friend.

I heard from Lyell the other day in the Isle of Wight, and from
Hooker in Scotland. About Huxley I know nothing, but I hope his book
progresses, for I shall be very curious to see it. (141/3. "Man's Place
in Nature." London, 1863.)

I do nothing here except occasionally look at a few flowers, and there
are very few here, for the country is wonderfully barren.

See what it is to be well trained. Horace said to me yesterday, "If
every one would kill adders they would come to sting less." I
answered: "Of course they would, for there would be fewer." He replied
indignantly: "I did not mean that; but the timid adders which run away
would be saved, and in time would never sting at all." Natural selection
of cowards!


LETTER 142. H. FALCONER TO CHARLES DARWIN.

(142/1. This refers to the MS. of Falconer's paper "On the American
Fossil Elephant of the Regions bordering the Gulf of Mexico (E. Columbi,
Falc.)," published in the "Natural History Review," January, 1863, page
43. The section dealing with the bearing of his facts on Darwin's views
is at page 77. He insists strongly (page 78) on the "persistence and
uniformity of the characters of the molar teeth in the earliest known
mammoth, and his most modern successor." Nevertheless, he adds that
the "inferences I draw from these facts are not opposed to one of the
leading propositions of Darwin's theory." These admissions were the
more satisfactory since, as Falconer points out (page 77), "I have been
included by him in the category of those who have vehemently maintained
the persistence of specific characters.")

21, Park Crescent, Portland Place, N.W., September 24th [1862].

Do not be frightened at the enclosure. I wish to set myself right by you
before I go to press. I am bringing out a heavy memoir on elephants--an
omnium gatherum affair, with observations on the fossil and recent
species. One section is devoted to the persistence in time of the
specific characters of the mammoth. I trace him from before the Glacial
period, through it and after it, unchangeable and unchanged as far as
the organs of digestion (teeth) and locomotion are concerned. Now, the
Glacial period was no joke: it would have made ducks and drakes of your
dear pigeons and doves.

With all my shortcomings, I have such a sincere and affectionate regard
for you and such admiration of your work, that I should be pained to
find that I had expressed my honest convictions in a way that would be
open to any objection by you. The reasoning may be very stupid, but I
believe that the observation is sound. Will you, therefore, look over
the few pages which I have sent, and tell me whether you find any flaw,
or whether you think I should change the form of expression? You have
been so unhandsomely and uncandidly dealt with by a friend of yours
and mine that I should be sorry to find myself in the position of an
opponent to you, and more particularly with the chance of making a fool
of myself.

I met your brother yesterday, who tells me you are coming to town. I
hope you will give me a hail. I long for a jaw with you, and have much
to speak to you about.

You will have seen the eclaircissement about the Eocene monkeys
of England. By a touch of the conjuring wand they have been
metamorphosed--a la Darwin--into Hyracotherian pigs. (142/2. "On the
Hyracotherian Character of the Lower Molars of the supposed Macacus from
the Eocene Sand of Kyson, Suffolk." "Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist." Volume X.,
1862, page 240. In this note Owen stated that the teeth which he had
named Macacus ("Ann. Mag." 1840, page 191) most probably belonged to
Hyracotherium cuniculus. See "A Catalogue of British Fossil Vertebrata,"
A.S. Woodward and C.D. Sherborn, 1890, under Hyracotherium, page 356;
also Zittel's "Handbuch der Palaeontologie" Abth. I., Bd. IV., Leipzig,
1891-93, page 703.) Would you believe it? This even is a gross blunder.
They are not pigs.


LETTER 143. TO HUGH FALCONER. Down, October 1st [1862].

On my return home yesterday I found your letter and MS., which I have
read with extreme interest. Your note and every word in your paper are
expressed with the same kind feeling which I have experienced from you
ever since I have had the happiness of knowing you. I value scientific
praise, but I value incomparably higher such kind feeling as yours.
There is not a single word in your paper to which I could possibly
object: I should be mad to do so; its only fault is perhaps its too
great kindness. Your case seems the most striking one which I have met
with of the persistence of specific characters. It is very much the more
striking as it relates to the molar teeth, which differ so much in the
species of the genus, and in which consequently I should have expected
variation. As I read on I felt not a little dumbfounded, and thought to
myself that whenever I came to this subject I should have to be savage
against myself; and I wondered how savage you would be. I trembled a
little. My only hope was that something could be made out of the bog
N. American forms, which you rank as a geographical race; and possibly
hereafter out of the Sicilian species. Guess, then, my satisfaction when
I found that you yourself made a loophole (143/1. This perhaps refers
to a passage ("N.H. Review," 1863, page 79) in which Falconer allows the
existence of intermediate forms along certain possible lines of descent.
Falconer's reference to the Sicilian elephants is in a note on page 78;
the bog-elephant is mentioned on page 79.), which I never, of course,
could have guessed at; and imagine my still greater satisfaction at
your expressing yourself as an unbeliever in the eternal immutability of
species. Your final remarks on my work are too generous, but have given
me not a little pleasure. As for criticisms, I have only small ones.
When you speak of "moderate range of variation" I cannot but think that
you ought to remind your readers (though I daresay previously done) what
the amount is, including the case of the American bog-mammoth. You speak
of these animals as having been exposed to a vast range of climatal
changes from before to after the Glacial period. I should have thought,
from analogy of sea-shells, that by migration (or local extinction when
migration not possible) these animals might and would have kept under
nearly the same climate.

A rather more important consideration, as it seems to me, is that the
whole proboscidean group may, I presume, be looked at as verging towards
extinction: anyhow, the extinction has been complete as far as Europe
and America are concerned. Numerous considerations and facts have led
me in the "Origin" to conclude that it is the flourishing or dominant
members of each order which generally give rise to new races,
sub-species, and species; and under this point of view I am not at all
surprised at the constancy of your species. This leads me to remark that
the sentence at the bottom of page [80] is not applicable to my
views (143/2. See Falconer at the bottom of page 80: it is the old
difficulty--how can variability co-exist with persistence of type? In
our copy of the letter the passage is given as occurring on page 60,
a slip of the pen for page 80.), though quite applicable to those who
attribute modification to the direct action of the conditions of life.
An elephant might be more individually variable than any known quadruped
(from the effects of the conditions of life or other innate unknown
causes), but if these variations did not aid the animal in better
resisting all hostile influences, and therefore making it increase in
numbers, there would be no tendency to the preservation and accumulation
of such variations--i.e. to the formation of a new race. As the
proboscidean group seems to be from utterly unknown causes a failing
group in many parts of the world, I should not have anticipated the
formation of new races.

You make important remarks versus Natural Selection, and you will
perhaps be surprised that I do to a large extent agree with you. I could
show you many passages, written as strongly as I could in the "Origin,"
declaring that Natural Selection can do nothing without previous
variability; and I have tried to put equally strongly that variability
is governed by many laws, mostly quite unknown. My title deceives
people, and I wish I had made it rather different. Your phyllotaxis
(143/3. Falconer, page 80: "The law of Phyllotaxis...is nearly as
constant in its manifestation as any of the physical laws connected with
the material world.") will serve as example, for I quite agree that the
spiral arrangement of a certain number of whorls of leaves (however that
may have primordially arisen, and whether quite as invariable as you
state), governs the limits of variability, and therefore governs what
Natural Selection can do. Let me explain how it arose that I laid so
much stress on Natural Selection, and I still think justly. I came to
think from geographical distribution, etc., etc., that species probably
change; but for years I was stopped dead by my utter incapability of
seeing how every part of each creature (a woodpecker or swallow, for
instance) had become adapted to its conditions of life. This seemed
to me, and does still seem, the problem to solve; and I think Natural
Selection solves it, as artificial selection solves the adaptation of
domestic races for man's use. But I suspect that you mean something
further,--that there is some unknown law of evolution by which species
necessarily change; and if this be so, I cannot agree. This, however,
is too large a question even for so unreasonably long a letter as
this. Nevertheless, just to explain by mere valueless conjectures how I
imagine the teeth of your elephants change, I should look at the change
as indirectly resulting from changes in the form of the jaws, or from
the development of tusks, or in the case of the primigenius even from
correlation with the woolly covering; in all cases Natural Selection
checking the variation. If, indeed, an elephant would succeed better by
feeding on some new kinds of food, then any variation of any kind in the
teeth which favoured their grinding power would be preserved. Now, I can
fancy you holding up your hands and crying out what bosh! To return
to your concluding sentence: far from being surprised, I look at it
as absolutely certain that very much in the "Origin" will be proved
rubbish; but I expect and hope that the framework will stand. (143/4.
Falconer, page 80: "He [Darwin] has laid the foundations of a great
edifice: but he need not be surprised if, in the progress of erection,
the superstructure is altered by his successors...")

I had hoped to have called on you on Monday evening, but was quite
knocked up. I saw Lyell yesterday morning. He was very curious about
your views, and as I had to write to him this morning I could not help
telling him a few words on your views. I suppose you are tired of the
"Origin," and will never read it again; otherwise I should like you to
have the third edition, and would gladly send it rather than you should
look at the first or second edition. With cordial thanks for your
generous kindness.


LETTER 144. J.D. HOOKER TO CHARLES DARWIN. Royal Gardens, Kew, November
7th, 1862.

I am greatly relieved by your letter this morning about my Arctic essay,
for I had been conjuring up some egregious blunder (like the granitic
plains of Patagonia).. Certes, after what you have told me of Dawson,
he will not like the letter I wrote to him days ago, in which I told
him that it was impossible to entertain a strong opinion against the
Darwinian hypothesis without its giving rise to a mental twist when
viewing matters in which that hypothesis was or might be involved. I
told him I felt that this was so with me when I opposed you, and that
all minds are subject to such obliquities!--the Lord help me, and this
to an LL.D. and Principal of a College! I proceeded to discuss his
Geology with the effrontery of a novice; and, thank God, I urged the
very argument of your letter about evidence of subsidence--viz., not all
submerged at once, and glacial action being subaerial and not oceanic.
Your letter hence was a relief, for I felt I was hardly strong enough to
have launched out as I did to a professed geologist.

(144/1. [On the subject of the above letter, see one of earlier date by
Sir J.D. Hooker (November 2nd, 1862) given in the present work (Letter
354) with Darwin's reply (Letter 355).])


LETTER 145. TO HUGH FALCONER. Down, November 14th [1862].

I have read your paper (145/1. "On the disputed Affinity of the
Mammalian Genus Plagiaulax, from the Purbeck beds."--"Quart. Journ.
Geol. Soc." Volume XVIII., page 348, 1862.) with extreme interest, and I
thank you for sending it, though I should certainly have carefully
read it, or anything with your name, in the Journal. It seems to me a
masterpiece of close reasoning: although, of course, not a judge of
such subjects, I cannot feel any doubt that it is conclusive. Will Owen
answer you? I expect that from his arrogant view of his own position he
will not answer. Your paper is dreadfully severe on him, but perfectly
courteous, and polished as the finest dagger. How kind you are towards
me: your first sentence (145/2. "One of the most accurate observers and
original thinkers of our time has discoursed with emphatic eloquence on
the Imperfection of the Geological Record.") has pleased me more than
perhaps it ought to do, if I had any modesty in my composition. By the
way, after reading the first whole paragraph, I re-read it, not for
matter, but for style; and then it suddenly occurred to me that a
certain man once said to me, when I urged him to publish some of his
miscellaneous wealth of knowledge, "Oh, he could not write,--he hated
it," etc. You false man, never say that to me again. Your incidental
remark on the remarkable specialisation of Plagiaulax (145/3. "If
Plagiaulax be regarded through the medium of the view advocated with
such power by Darwin, through what a number of intermediate forms must
not the genus have passed before it attained the specialised condition
in which the fossils come before us!") (which has stuck in my gizzard
ever since I read your first paper) as bearing on the number of
preceding forms, is quite new to me, and, of course, is in accordance to
my notions a most impressive argument. I was also glad to be reminded of
teeth of camel and tarsal bones. (145/4. Op. cit. page 353. A reference
to Cuvier's instance "of the secret relation between the upper
canine-shaped incisors of the camel and the bones of the tarsus.")
Descent from an intermediate form, Ahem!

Well, all I can say is that I have not been for a long time more
interested with a paper than with yours. It gives me a demoniacal
chuckle to think of Owen's pleasant countenance when he reads it.

I have not been in London since the end of September; when I do come I
will beat up your quarters if I possibly can; but I do not know what
has come over me. I am worse than ever in bearing any excitement. Even
talking of an evening for less than two hours has twice recently brought
on such violent vomiting and trembling that I dread coming up to London.
I hear that you came out strong at Cambridge (145/5. Prof. Owen, in a
communication to the British Association at Cambridge (1862) "On a tooth
of Mastodon from the Tertiary marls, near Shanghai," brought forward
the case of the Australian Mastodon as a proof of the remarkable
geographical distribution of the Proboscidia. In a subsequent discussion
he frankly abandoned it, in consequence of the doubts then urged
regarding its authenticity. (See footnote, page 101, in Falconer's paper
"On the American Fossil Elephant," "Nat. Hist. Review," 1863.)), and am
heartily glad you attacked the Australian Mastodon. I never did or could
believe in him. I wish you would read my little Primula paper in the
"Linnean Journal," Volume VI. Botany (No. 22), page 77 (I have no copy
which I can spare), as I think there is a good chance that you may have
observed similar cases. This is my real hobby-horse at present. I have
re-tested this summer the functional difference of the two forms in
Primula, and find all strictly accurate. If you should know of any cases
analogous, pray inform me. Farewell, my good and kind friend.


LETTER 146. TO J.D. HOOKER.

(146/1. The following letter is interesting in connection with a letter
addressed to Sir J.D. Hooker, March 26th, 1862, No. 136, where the
value of Natural Selection is stated more strongly by Sir Joseph than by
Darwin. It is unfortunate that Sir Joseph's letter, to which this is a
reply, has not been found.)

Down, November 20th [1862].

Your last letter has interested me to an extraordinary degree, and your
truly parsonic advice, "some other wise and discreet person," etc.,
etc., amused us not a little. I will put a concrete case to show what
I think A. Gray believes about crossing and what I believe. If 1,000
pigeons were bred together in a cage for 10,000 years their number
not being allowed to increase by chance killing, then from mutual
intercrossing no varieties would arise; but, if each pigeon were a
self-fertilising hermaphrodite, a multitude of varieties would
arise. This, I believe, is the common effect of crossing, viz., the
obliteration of incipient varieties. I do not deny that when two marked
varieties have been produced, their crossing will produce a third
or more intermediate varieties. Possibly, or probably, with domestic
varieties, with a strong tendency to vary, the act of crossing tends
to give rise to new characters; and thus a third or more races, not
strictly intermediate, may be produced. But there is heavy evidence
against new characters arising from crossing wild forms; only
intermediate races are then produced. Now, do you agree thus far? if
not, it is no use arguing; we must come to swearing, and I am convinced
I can swear harder than you, therefore I am right. Q.E.D.

If the number of 1,000 pigeons were prevented increasing not by chance
killing, but by, say, all the shorter-beaked birds being killed, then
the WHOLE body would come to have longer beaks. Do you agree?

Thirdly, if 1,000 pigeons were kept in a hot country, and another
1,000 in a cold country, and fed on different food, and confined in
different-size aviary, and kept constant in number by chance killing,
then I should expect as rather probable that after 10,000 years the two
bodies would differ slightly in size, colour, and perhaps other trifling
characters; this I should call the direct action of physical conditions.
By this action I wish to imply that the innate vital forces are somehow
led to act rather differently in the two cases, just as heat will
allow or cause two elements to combine, which otherwise would not have
combined. I should be especially obliged if you would tell me what you
think on this head.

But the part of your letter which fairly pitched me head over heels with
astonishment, is that where you state that every single difference which
we see might have occurred without any selection. I do and have always
fully agreed; but you have got right round the subject, and viewed it
from an entirely opposite and new side, and when you took me there I was
astounded. When I say I agree, I must make the proviso, that under
your view, as now, each form long remains adapted to certain fixed
conditions, and that the conditions of life are in the long run
changeable; and second, which is more important, that each individual
form is a self-fertilising hermaphrodite, so that each hair-breadth
variation is not lost by intercrossing. Your manner of putting the case
would be even more striking than it is if the mind could grapple with
such numbers--it is grappling with eternity--think of each of a thousand
seeds bringing forth its plant, and then each a thousand. A globe
stretching to the furthest fixed star would very soon be covered. I
cannot even grapple with the idea, even with races of dogs, cattle,
pigeons, or fowls; and here all admit and see the accurate strictness of
your illustration.

Such men as you and Lyell thinking that I make too much of a Deus of
Natural Selection is a conclusive argument against me. Yet I hardly know
how I could have put in, in all parts of my book, stronger sentences.
The title, as you once pointed out, might have been better. No one ever
objects to agriculturalists using the strongest language about their
selection, yet every breeder knows that he does not produce the
modification which he selects. My enormous difficulty for years was to
understand adaptation, and this made me, I cannot but think, rightly,
insist so much on Natural Selection. God forgive me for writing at such
length; but you cannot tell how much your letter has interested me, and
how important it is for me with my present book in hand to try and get
clear ideas. Do think a bit about what is meant by direct action of
physical conditions. I do not mean whether they act; my facts will throw
some light on this. I am collecting all cases of bud-variations, in
contradistinction to seed-variations (do you like this term, for what
some gardeners call "sports"?); these eliminate all effects of crossing.
Pray remember how much I value your opinion as the clearest and most
original I ever get.

I see plainly that Welwitschia (146/2. Sir Joseph's great paper on
Welwitschia mirabilis was published in the "Linn. Soc. Trans." 1863.)
will be a case of Barnacles.

I have another plant to beg, but I write on separate paper as more
convenient for you to keep. I meant to have said before, as an excuse
for asking for so much from Kew, that I have now lost TWO seasons, by
accursed nurserymen not having right plants, and sending me the wrong
instead of saying that they did not possess.


LETTER 147. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, 24th [November, 1862].

I have just received enclosed for you, and I have thought that you
would like to read the latter half of A. Gray's letter to me, as it is
political and nearly as mad as ever in our English eyes. You will see
how the loss of the power of bullying is in fact the sore loss to the
men of the North from disunion.

I return with thanks Bates' letter, which I was glad to see. It was
very good of you writing to him, for he is evidently a man who wants
encouragement. I have now finished his paper (but have read nothing
else in the volume); it seems to me admirable. To my mind the act of
segregation of varieties into species was never so plainly brought
forward, and there are heaps of capital miscellaneous observations.

I hardly know why I am a little sorry, but my present work is leading
me to believe rather more in the direct action of physical conditions. I
presume I regret it, because it lessens the glory of Natural Selection,
and is so confoundedly doubtful. Perhaps I shall change again when I get
all my facts under one point of view, and a pretty hard job this will
be. (147/1. This paragraph was published in "Life and Letters," II.,
page 390. It is not clear why a belief in "direct action" should
diminish the glory of Natural Selection, since the changes so produced
must, like any other variations, pass through the ordeal of the survival
of the fittest. On the whole question of direct action see Mr. Adam
Sedgwick's "Presidential Address to the Zoological Section of the
British Association," 1899.)


LETTER 148. TO H.W. BATES. Down, November 25th [1862?].

I should think it was not necessary to get a written agreement. (148/1.
Mr. Bates' book, "A Naturalist on the Amazons," was published in 1863.)
I have never had one from Murray. I suppose you have a letter with
terms; if not, I should think you had better ask for one to prevent
misunderstandings. I think Sir C. Lyell told me he had not any formal
agreements. I am heartily glad to hear that your book is progressing.
Could you find me some place, even a footnote (though these are in nine
cases out of ten objectionable), where you could state, as fully as your
materials permit, all the facts about similar varieties pairing,--at a
guess how many you caught, and how many now in your collection? I look
at this fact as very important; if not in your book, put it somewhere
else, or let me have cases.

I entirely agree with you on the enormous advantage of thoroughly
studying one group.

I really have no criticism to make. (148/2. Mr. Bates' paper on mimetic
butterflies was read before the Linnean Society, November 21st, 1861,
and published in the "Linn. Soc. Trans." XXIII., 1862, page 495, under
the title of "Contributions to an Insect Fauna of the Amazon Valley.")
Style seems to me very good and clear; but I much regret that in the
title or opening passage you did not blow a loud trumpet about what
you were going to show. Perhaps the paper would have been better more
divided into sections with headings. Perhaps you might have given
somewhere rather more of a summary on the progress of segregation
of varieties, and not referred your readers to the descriptive part,
excepting such readers as wanted minute detail. But these are trifles:
I consider your paper as a most admirable production in every way.
Whenever I come to variation under natural conditions (my head for
months has been exclusively occupied with domestic varieties), I shall
have to study and re-study your paper, and no doubt shall then have to
plague you with questions. I am heartily glad to hear that you are well.
I have been compelled to write in a hurry; so excuse me.


LETTER 149. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, December 7th [1862].

I was on the point of adding to an order to Williams & Norgate for your
Lectures (149/1. "A Course of Six Lectures to Working Men," published in
six pamphlets by Hardwicke, and later as a book. See Letter 156.) when
they arrived, and much obliged I am. I have read them with interest, and
they seem to me very good for this purpose and capitally written, as is
everything which you write. I suppose every book nowadays requires some
pushing, so that if you do not wish these lectures to be extensively
circulated, I suppose they will not; otherwise I should think they would
do good and spread a taste for the natural sciences. Anyhow, I have
liked them; but I get more and more, I am sorry to say, to care for
nothing but Natural History; and chiefly, as you once said, for the mere
species question. I think I liked No. III. the best of all. I have often
said and thought that the process of scientific discovery was identical
with everyday thought, only with more care; but I never succeeded in
putting the case to myself with one-tenth of the clearness with which
you have done. I think your second geological section will puzzle your
non-scientific readers; anyhow, it has puzzled me, and with the strong
middle line, which must represent either a line of stratification or
some great mineralogical change, I cannot conceive how your statement
can hold good.

I am very glad to hear of your "three-year-old" vigour [?]; but I fear,
with all your multifarious work, that your book on Man will necessarily
be delayed. You bad man; you say not a word about Mrs. Huxley, of whom
my wife and self are always truly anxious to hear.

P.S. I see in the "Cornhill Magazine" a notice of a work by Cohn, which
apparently is important, on the contractile tissue of plants. (149/2.
"Ueber contractile Gewebe im Pflanzenreiche." "Abhand. der Schlesischen
Gesellschaft fur vaterlandische Cultur," Heft I., 1861.) You ought to
have it reviewed. I have ordered it, and must try and make out, if
I can, some of the accursed german, for I am much interested in the
subject, and experimented a little on it this summer, and came to
the conclusion that plants must contain some substance most closely
analogous to the supposed diffused nervous matter in the lower animals;
or as, I presume, it would be more accurate to say with Cohn, that they
have contractile tissue.

Lecture VI., page 151, line 7 from top--wetting FEET or bodies? (Miss
Henrietta Darwin's criticism.) (149/3. Lecture VI., page 151: Lamarck
"said, for example, that the short-legged birds, which live on fish, had
been converted into the long-legged waders by desiring to get the fish
without wetting their feet."

Their criticisms on Lectures IV. and VI. are on a separate piece of
undated paper, and must belong to a letter of later date; only three
lectures were published by December 7th, 1862.)

Lecture IV., page 89--Atavism.

You here and there use atavism = inheritance. Duchesne, who, I believe,
invented the word, in his Strawberry book confined it, as every one has
since done, to resemblance to grandfather or more remote ancestor, in
contradistinction to resemblance to parents.


LETTER 150. TO JOHN SCOTT.

(150/1. The following is the first of a series of letters addressed to
the late John Scott, of which the major part is given in our Botanical
chapters. We have been tempted to give this correspondence fully not
only because of its intrinsic scientific interest, but also because they
are almost the only letters which show Darwin in personal relation with
a younger man engaged in research under his supervision.)

[1862?]

To the best of my judgment, no subject is so important in relation to
theoretical natural science, in several respects, and likewise in
itself deserving investigation, as the effects of changed or unnatural
conditions, or of changed structure on the reproductive system. Under
this point of view the relation of well-marked but undoubted varieties
in fertilising each other requires far more experiments than have been
tried. See in the "Origin" the brief abstract of Gartner on Verbascum
and Zea. Mr. W. Crocker, lately foreman at Kew and a very good observer,
is going at my suggestion to work varieties of hollyhock. (150/2.
Altheae species. These experiments seem not to have been carried out.)
The climate would be too cold, I suppose, for varieties of tobacco. I
began on cabbages, but immediately stopped from early shedding of their
pollen causing too much trouble. Your knowledge would suggest some
[plants]. On the same principle it would be well to test peloric flowers
with their own pollen, and with pollen of regular flowers, and try
pollen of peloric on regular flowers--seeds being counted in each case.
I have now got one seedling from many crosses of a peloric Pelargonium
by peloric pollen; I have two or three seedlings from a peloric flower
by pollen of regular flower. I have ordered a peloric Antirrhinum
(150/3. See "Variation of Animals and Plants," Edition I., Volume II.,
page 70.) and the peloric Gloxinia, but I much fear I shall never have
time to try them. The Passiflora cases are truly wonderful, like the
Crinum cases (see "Origin"). (150/4. "Origin," Edition VI., page 238.)
I have read in a German paper that some varieties of potatoes (name not
given) cannot be fertilised by [their] own pollen, but can by pollen
of other varieties: well worth trying. Again, fertility of any monster
flower, which is pretty regularly produced; I have got the wonderful
Begonia frigida (150/5. The species on which Sir J.D. Hooker wrote in
the "Gardeners' Chronicle," February 25th, 1860. See "Life and Letters,"
II., page 275.) from Kew, but doubt whether I have heat to set its
seeds. If an unmodified Celosia could be got, it would be well to
test with the modified cockscomb. There is a variation of columbine
[Aquilegia] with simple petals without nectaries, etc., etc. I never
could think what to try; but if one could get hold of a long-cultivated
plant which crossed with a distinct species and yielded a very small
number of seeds, then it would be highly good to test comparatively the
wild parent-form and its varying offspring with this third species: for
instance, if a polyanthus would cross with some species of Primula, then
to try a wild cowslip with it. I believe hardly any primulas have ever
been crossed. If we knew and could get the parent of the carnation
(150/6. Dianthus caryophyllus, garden variety.), it would be very good
for this end. Any member of the Lythraceae raised from seed ought to be
well looked after for dimorphism. I have wonderful facts, the result of
experiment, on Lythrum salicaria.


LETTER 151. TO JOHN SCOTT. Down, December 11th [1862].

I have read your paper with much interest. (151/1. "On the Nature and
Peculiarities of the Fern-spore." "Bot. Soc. Edin." Read June 12th,
1862.) You ask for remarks on the matter, which is alone really
important. Shall you think me impertinent (I am sure I do not mean to be
so) if I hazard a remark on the style, which is of more importance than
some think? In my opinion (whether or no worth much) your paper would
have been much better if written more simply and less elaborated--more
like your letters. It is a golden rule always to use, if possible, a
short old Saxon word. Such a sentence as "so purely dependent is the
incipient plant on the specific morphological tendency" does not sound
to my ears like good mother-English--it wants translating. Here and
there you might, I think, have condensed some sentences. I go on the
plan of thinking every single word which can be omitted without actual
loss of sense as a decided gain. Now perhaps you will think me a
meddling intruder: anyhow, it is the advice of an old hackneyed
writer who sincerely wishes you well. Your remark on the two sexes
counteracting variability in product of the one is new to me. (151/2.
Scott (op. cit., page 214): "The reproductive organs of phoenogams,
as is well-known, are always products of two morphologically distinct
organs, the stamens producing the pollen, the carpels producing the
ovules...The embryo being in this case the modified resultant of two
originally distinct organs, there will necessarily be a greater tendency
to efface any individual peculiarities of these than would have been
the case had the embryo been the product of a single organ." A different
idea seems to have occurred to Mr. Darwin, for in an undated letter
to Scott he wrote: "I hardly know what to say on your view of male and
female organs and variability. I must think more over it. But I was
amused by finding the other day in my portfolio devoted to bud-variation
a slip of paper dated June, 1860, with some such words as these, 'May
not permanence of grafted buds be due to the two sexual elements
derived from different parts not having come into play?' I had utterly
forgotten, when I read your paper that any analogous notion had ever
passed through my mind--nor can I now remember, but the slip shows me
that it had." It is interesting that Huxley also came to a conclusion
differing from Scott's; and, curiously enough, Darwin confused the two
views, for he wrote to Scott (December 19th): "By an odd chance, reading
last night some short lectures just published by Prof. Huxley, I find
your observation, independently arrived at by him, on the confluence of
the two sexes causing variability." Professor Huxley's remarks are in
his "Lectures to Working Men on our Knowledge, etc." No. 4, page 90:
"And, indeed, I think that a certain amount of variation from the
primitive stock is the necessary result of the method of sexual
propagation itself; for inasmuch as the thing propagated proceeds from
two organisms of different sexes and different makes and temperaments,
and, as the offspring is to be either of one sex or the other, it is
quite clear that it cannot be an exact diagonal of the two, or it would
be of no sex at all; it cannot be an exact intermediate form between
that of each of its parents--it must deviate to one side or the other.")
But I cannot avoid thinking that there is something unknown and deeper
in seminal generation. Reflect on the long succession of embryological
changes in every animal. Does a bud ever produce cotyledons or embryonic
leaves? I have been much interested by your remark on inheritance at
corresponding ages; I hope you will, as you say, continue to attend to
this. Is it true that female Primula plants always produce females
by parthenogenesis? (151/3. It seems probable that Darwin here means
vegetative reproduction.) If you can answer this I should be glad;
it bears on my Primula work. I thought on the subject, but gave
up investigating what had been observed, because the female bee by
parthenogenesis produces males alone. Your paper has told me much that
in my ignorance was quite new to me. Thanks about P. scotica. If any
important criticisms are made on the Primula to the Botanical Society,
I should be glad to hear them. If you think fit, you may state that I
repeated the crossing experiments on P. sinensis and cowslip with the
same result this spring as last year--indeed, with rather more marked
difference in fertility of the two crosses. In fact, had I then proved
the Linum case, I would not have wasted time in repetition. I am
determined I will at once publish on Linum...

I was right to be cautious in supposing you in error about Siphocampylus
(no flowers were enclosed). I hope that you will make out whether the
pistil presents two definite lengths; I shall be astounded if it does. I
do not fully understand your objections to Natural Selection; if I do,
I presume they would apply with full force to, for instance, birds.
Reflect on modification of Arab-Turk horse into our English racehorse. I
have had the satisfaction to tell my publisher to send my "Journal" and
"Origin" to your address. I suspect, with your fertile mind, you
will find it far better to experiment on your own choice; but if, on
reflection, you would like to try some which interest me, I should be
truly delighted, and in this case would write in some detail. If
you have the means to repeat Gartner's experiments on variations of
Verbascum or on maize (see the "Origin"), such experiments would be
pre-eminently important. I could never get variations of Verbascum.
I could suggest an experiment on potatoes analogous with the case of
Passiflora; even the case of Passiflora, often as it has been repeated,
might be with advantage repeated. I have worked like a slave (having
counted about nine thousand seeds) on Melastoma, on the meaning of the
two sets of very different stamens, and as yet have been shamefully
beaten, and I now cry for aid. I could suggest what I believe a
very good scheme (at least, Dr. Hooker thought so) for systematic
degeneration of culinary plants, and so find out their origin; but this
would be laborious and the work of years.


LETTER 152. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, 12th [December, 1862].

My good old Friend--

How kind you have been to give me so much of your time! Your letter
is of real use, and has been and shall be well considered. I am much
pleased to find that we do not differ as much as I feared. I begin my
book with saying that my chief object is to show the inordinate scale
of variation; I have especially studied all sorts of variations of the
individual. On crossing I cannot change; the more I think, the more
reason I have to believe that my conclusion would be agreed to by
all practised breeders. I also greatly doubt about variability and
domestication being at all necessarily correlative, but I have touched
on this in "Origin." Plants being identical under very different
conditions has always seemed to me a very heavy argument against what
I call direct action. I think perhaps I will take the case of 1,000
pigeons (152/1. See Letter 146.) to sum up my volume; I will not discuss
other points, but, as I have said, I shall recur to your letter. But
I must just say that if sterility be allowed to come into play, if
long-beaked be in the least degree sterile with short-beaked, my whole
case is altered. By the way, my notions on hybridity are becoming
considerably altered by my dimorphic work. I am now strongly inclined to
believe that sterility is at first a selected quality to keep incipient
species distinct. If you have looked at Lythrum you will see how pollen
can be modified merely to favour crossing; with equal readiness it could
be modified to prevent crossing.

It is this which makes me so much interested with dimorphism, etc.
(152/2. This gives a narrow impression of Darwin's interest in
dimorphism. The importance of his work was (briefly put) the proof that
sterility has no necessary connection with specific difference, but
depends on sexual differentiation independent of racial differences. See
"Life and Letters," III., page 296. His point of view that sterility
is a selected quality is again given in a letter to Huxley ("Life and
Letters," II., page 384), but was not upheld in his later writings (see
"Origin of Species," Edition VI., page 245). The idea of sterility being
a selected quality is interesting in connection with Romanes' theory of
physiological selection. (See Letters 209-214.))

One word more. When you pitched me head over heels by your new way of
looking at the back side of variation, I received assurance and strength
by considering monsters--due to law: horribly strange as they are, the
monsters were alive till at least when born. They differ at least as
much from the parent as any one mammal from another.

I have just finished a long, weary chapter on simple facts of variation
of cultivated plants, and am now refreshing myself with a paper on Linum
for the Linnean Society.


LETTER 153. TO W.B. TEGETMEIER.

(153/1. The following letter also bears on the question of the
artificial production of sterility.)

Down, 27th [December, 1862].

The present plan is to try whether any existing breeds happen to
have acquired accidentally any degree of sterility; but to this point
hereafter. The enclosed MS. will show what I have done and know on the
subject. Please at some future time carefully return the MS. to me. If I
were going to try again, I would prefer Turbit with Carrier or Dragon.

I will suggest an analogous experiment, which I have had for two years
in my experimental book with "be sure and try," but which, as my health
gets yearly weaker and weaker and my other work increases, I suppose
I shall never try. Permit me to add that if 5 pounds would cover the
expenses of the experiment, I should be delighted to give it, and you
could publish the result if there be any result. I crossed the Spanish
cock (your bird) and white Silk hen and got plenty of eggs and chickens;
but two of them seemed to be quite sterile. I was then sadly overdone
with work, but have ever since much reproached myself that I did not
preserve and carefully test the procreative power of these hens. Now, if
you are inclined to get a Spanish cock and a couple of white Silk hens,
I shall be most grateful to hear whether the offspring breed well: they
will prove, I think, not hardy; if they should prove sterile, which I
can hardly believe, they will anyhow do for the pot. If you do try this,
how would it do to put a Silk cock to your curious silky Cochin hen, so
as to get a big silk breed; it would be curious if you could get silky
fowl with bright colours. I believe a Silk hen crossed by any other
breed never gives silky feathers. A cross from Silk cock and Cochin Silk
hen ought to give silky feathers and probably bright colours.

I have been led lately from experiments (not published) on dimorphism
to reflect much on sterility from hybridism, and partially to change
the opinion given in "Origin." I have now letters out enquiring on the
following point, implied in the experiment, which seems to me well worth
trying, but too laborious ever to be attempted. I would ask every pigeon
and fowl fancier whether they have ever observed, in the same breed, a
cock A paired to a hen B which did not produce young. Then I would get
cock A and match it to a hen of its nearest blood; and hen B to its
nearest blood. I would then match the offspring of A (viz., a, b, c, d,
e) to the offspring of B (viz., f, g, h, i, j), and all those children
which were fertile together should be destroyed until I found one--say
a, which was not quite fertile with--say, i. Then a and i should be
preserved and paired with their parents A and B, so as to try and get
two families which would not unite together; but the members WITHIN each
family being fertile together. This would probably be quite hopeless;
but he who could effect this would, I believe, solve the problem of
sterility from hybridism. If you should ever hear of individual fowls or
pigeons which are sterile together, I should be very grateful to hear of
the case. It is a parallel case to those recorded of a man not impotent
long living with a woman who remained childless; the husband died, and
the woman married again and had plenty of children. Apparently (by
no means certainly) this first man and woman were dissimilar in their
sexual organisation. I conceive it possible that their offspring
(if both had married again and both had children) would be sexually
dissimilar, like their parents, or sterile together. Pray forgive my
dreadful writing; I have been very unwell all day, and have no strength
to re-write this scrawl. I am working slowly on, and I suppose in three
or four months shall be ready.

I am sure I do not know whether any human being could understand or read
this shameful scrawl.


LETTER 154. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, December, 28th [1862].

I return enclosed: if you write, thank Mr. Kingsley for thinking
of letting me see the sound sense of an Eastern potentate. (154/1.
Kingsley's letter to Huxley, dated December 20th, 1862, contains a story
or parable of a heathen Khan in Tartary who was visited by a pair of
proselytising Moollahs. The first Moollah said: "Oh! Khan, worship my
God. He is so wise that he made all things." But Moollah No. 2 won the
day by pointing out that his God is "so wise that he makes all things
make themselves.") All that I said about the little book (154/2. The six
"Lectures to Working Men," published in six pamphlets and in book-form
in 1863. Mr. Huxley considered that Mr. Darwin's argument required
the production by man's selection of breeds which should be mutually
infertile, and thus resemble distinct species physiologically as well as
morphologically.) is strictly my opinion; it is in every way excellent,
and cannot fail to do good the wider it is circulated. Whether it is
worth your while to give up time to it is another question for you alone
to decide; that it will do good for the subject is beyond all question.
I do not think a dunce exists who could not understand it, and that is
a bold saying after the extent to which I have been misunderstood. I did
not understand what you required about sterility: assuredly the facts
given do not go nearly so far. We differ so much that it is no use
arguing. To get the degree of sterility you expect in recently formed
varieties seems to me simply hopeless. It seems to me almost like those
naturalists who declare they will never believe that one species turns
into another till they see every stage in process.

I have heard from Tegetmeier, and have given him the result of my
crosses of the birds which he proposes to try, and have told him how
alone I think the experiment could be tried with the faintest hope of
success--namely, to get, if possible, a case of two birds which when
paired were unproductive, yet neither impotent. For instance, I had this
morning a letter with a case of a Hereford heifer, which seemed to be,
after repeated trials, sterile with one particular and far from impotent
bull, but not with another bull. But it is too long a story--it is to
attempt to make two strains, both fertile, and yet sterile when one
of one strain is crossed with one of the other strain. But the
difficulty...would be beyond calculation. As far as I see, Tegetmeier's
plan would simply test whether two existing breeds are now in any
slight degree sterile; which has already been largely tested: not that I
dispute the good of re-testing.


LETTER 155. TO HUGH FALCONER.

(155/1. The original letter is dated "December 10th," but this must, we
think, be a slip of the pen for January 10th. It contains a reference to
No. VI. of the "Lectures to Working Men" which, as Mr. Leonard Huxley
is good enough to inform us, was not delivered until December 15th, and
therefore could not have been seen by Mr. Darwin on December 10th. The
change of date makes comprehensible the reference to Falconer's paper
"On the American Fossil Elephant of the Regions bordering the Gulf of
Mexico (E. Columbi, Falc.)," which appeared in the January number of the
"Natural History Review." It is true that he had seen advanced sheets of
Falconer's paper ("Life and Letters," II., page 389), but the reference
here is to the complete paper.

In the present volume we have thought it right to give some expression
to the attitude of Darwin towards Owen. Professor Owen's biographer has
clearly felt the difficulty of making a statement on Owen's attitude
towards Darwinism, and has ("Life of Sir Richard Owen," Volume II., page
92) been driven to adopt the severe indictment contained in the "Origin
of Species," Edition VI., page xviii. Darwin was by no means alone in
his distrust of Owen; and to omit altogether a reference to the conduct
which led up to the isolation of Owen among his former friends and
colleagues would be to omit a part of the history of science of the
day. And since we cannot omit to notice Darwin's point of view, it seems
right to give the facts of a typical case illustrating the feeling
with which he regarded Owen. This is all the more necessary since the
recently published biography of Sir R. Owen gives no hint, as far as we
are aware, of even a difference of opinion with other scientific men.

The account which Falconer gives in the above-mentioned paper in the
"Nat. Hist. Review" (January, 1863) would be amusing if the matter were
less serious. In 1857 Falconer described ("Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc."
XIII.) a new species of fossil elephant from America, to which he gave
the name Elephas Columbi, a designation which was recognised and adopted
by Continental writers. In 1858 (Brit. Assoc. Leeds) Owen made use of
the name "Elephas texianus," Blake" for the species which Falconer
had previously named E. Columbi, but without referring to Falconer's
determination; he gave no authority, "thus by the established usage in
zoology producing it as his own." In 1861 Owen in his Palaeontology,
2nd edition, 1861, describes the elephant as E. texianus, Blake. To
Mr. Blake's name is appended an asterisk which refers to a footnote
to Bollaert's "Antiquities of S. America," 2nd edition. According to
Falconer (page 46) no second edition of Bollaert had appeared at the
time of writing (August, 1862), and in the first edition (1860) he
was "unable to detect the occurrence of the name even, of E. texianus,
anywhere throughout the volume"; though Bollaert mentions the fact that
he had deposited, in the British Museum, the tooth of a fossil elephant
from Texas.

In November, 1861, Blake wrote a paper in the "Geologist" in which the
new elephant no longer bears his own name as authority, but is described
as "Elephas texianus, Owen, E. Columbi, Falconer." Finally, in another
paper the name of Owen is dropped and the elephant is once more his own.
As Falconer remarks, "the usage of science does not countenance such
accommodating arrangements, when the result is to prejudice a prior
right."

It may be said, no doubt, that the question who first described a given
species is a petty one; but this view has a double edge, and
applies most strongly to those who neglect the just claims of their
predecessors.

Down, January 5th [1863].

I finished your Elephant paper last night, and you must let me express
my admiration at it. (155/2. "On the American Fossil Elephant of the
Regions bordering the Gulf of Mexico (E. Columbi, Falc.), etc." "Nat.
Hist. Rev." 1863, page 81. (Cf. Letter to Lyell. "Life and Letters,"
II., page 389; also "Origin," Edition VI., page 306.) See Letter 143.)
All the points strike me as admirably worked out, and very many
most interesting. I was particularly struck with your remarks on the
character of the ancient Mammalian Fauna of N. America (155/3. Falconer,
page 62. This passage is marked in Darwin's copy.); it agrees with all I
fancied was the case, namely a temporary irruption of S. American forms
into N. America, and conversely, I chuckled a little over the specimen
of M. Andium "hesitating" between the two groups. (155/4. In speaking of
the characters of Mastodon Andium, Falconer refers to a former paper
by himself ("Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc." Volume XIII. 1857, page 313),
in which he called attention "to the exceptional character of
certain specimens of M. Andium, as if hesitating between [the groups]
Tetralophodon and Trilophodon" (ibid., page 100).) I have been assured
by Mr. Wallace that abundant Mastodon remains have been found at Timor,
and that is rather close to Australia. I rejoice that you have smashed
that case. (155/5. In the paper in the "Nat. Hist. Review" (loc. cit.)
Falconer writes: "It seems more probable that some unintentional error
has got mixed up with the history of this remarkable fossil; and until
further confirmatory evidence is adduced, of an unimpeachable character,
faith cannot be reposed in the reality of the asserted Australian
Mastodon" (page 101).) It is indeed a grand paper. I will say nothing
more about your allusions to me, except that they have pleased me quite
as much in print as in MS. You must have worked very hard; the labour
must have been extreme, but I do hope that you will have health and
strength to go on. You would laugh if you could see how indignant all
Owen's mean conduct about E. Columbi made me. (155/6. See Letter 157.) I
did not get to sleep till past 3 o'clock. How well you lash him, firmly
and severely, with unruffled temper, as if you were performing a simple
duty. The case is come to such a pass, that I think every man of science
is bound to show his feelings by some overt act, and I shall watch for a
fitting opportunity.

P.S.--I have kept back for a day the enclosed owing to the arrival of
your most interesting letter. I knew it was a mere chance whether you
could inform me on the points required; but no one other person has so
often responded to my miscellaneous queries. I believe I have now in my
greenhouse L. trigynum (155/7. Linum trigynum.), which came up from seed
purchased as L. flavum, from which it is wholly different in foliage. I
have just sent in a paper on Dimorphism of Linum to the Linnean Society
(155/8. "On the Existence of the Forms, and on their reciprocal Sexual
Relation, in several species of the genus Linum.--"Journ. Linn. Soc."
Volume VII., page 69, 1864.), and so I do not doubt your memory is right
about L. trigynum: the functional difference in the two forms of Linum
is really wonderful. I assure you I quite long to see you and a few
others in London; it is not so much the eczema which has taken the
epidermis a dozen times clean off; but I have been knocked up of late
with extraordinary facility, and when I shall be able to come up I know
not. I particularly wish to hear about the wondrous bird: the case has
delighted me, because no group is so isolated as Birds. I much wish to
hear when we meet which digits are developed; when examining birds two
or three years ago, I distinctly remember writing to Lyell that some
day a fossil bird would be found with the end of wing cloven, i.e.
the bastard-wing and other part, both well developed. Thanks for Von
Martius, returned by this post, which I was glad to see. Poor old
Wagner (Probably Johann Andreas Wagner, author of "Zur Feststellung des
Artbegriffes, mit besonderer Bezugnahme auf die Ansichten von Nathusius,
Darwin, Is. Geoffroy and Agassiz," "Munchen Sitzungsb." (1861),
page 301, and of numerous papers on zoological and palaeozoological
subjects.) always attacked me in a proper spirit, and sent me two or
three little brochures, and I thanked him cordially. The Germans seem
much stirred up on the subject. I received by the same post almost a
little volume on the "Origin."

I cannot work above a couple of hours daily, and this plays the deuce
with me.

P.S. 2nd.--I have worked like a slave and been baffled like a slave in
trying to make out the meaning of two very different sets of stamens in
some Melastomaceae. (155/9. Several letters on the Melastomaceae occur
in our Botanical section.) I must tell you one fact. I counted 9,000
seeds, one by one, from my artificially fertilised pods. There is
something very odd, but I am as yet beaten. Plants from two pollens grow
at different rates! Now, what I want to know is, whether in individuals
of the same species, growing together, you have ever noticed any
difference in the position of the pistil or in the size and colour of
the stamens?


LETTER 156. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, December 18th [1862].

I have read Nos. IV, and V. (156/1. "On our Knowledge of the Causes
of the Phenomena of Organic Nature," being six Lectures to Working Men
delivered at the Museum of Practical Geology by Prof. Huxley, 1863.
These lectures, which were given once a week from November 10th, 1862,
onwards, were printed from the notes of Mr. J.A. Mays, a shorthand
writer, who asked permission to publish them on his own account; Mr.
Huxley stating in a prefatory "Notice" that he had no leisure to
revise the lectures.) They are simply perfect. They ought to be largely
advertised; but it is very good in me to say so, for I threw down No.
IV. with this reflection, "What is the good of writing a thundering big
book, when everything is in this green little book, so despicable for
its size?" In the name of all that is good and bad, I may as well shut
up shop altogether. You put capitally and most simply and clearly the
relation of animals and plants to each other at page 122.

Be careful about Fantails: their tail-feathers are fixed in a radiating
position, but they can depress and elevate them. I remember in a
pigeon-book seeing withering contempt expressed at some naturalist for
not knowing this important point! Page 111 (156/2. The reference is
to the original little green paper books in which the lectures first
appeared; the paging in the bound volume dated 1863 is slightly
different. The passage here is, "...If you couple a male and female
hybrid...the result is that in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred you
will get no offspring at all." Darwin maintains elsewhere that Huxley,
from not knowing the botanical evidence, made too much of this point.
See "Life and Letters," II., page 384.) seems a little too strong--viz.,
ninety-nine out of a hundred, unless you except plants.

Page 118: You say the answer to varieties when crossed being at all
sterile is "absolutely a negative." (156/3. Huxley, page 112: "Can we
find any approximation to this [sterility of hybrids] in the different
races known to be produced by selective breeding from a common stock? Up
to the present time the answer to that question is absolutely a negative
one.") Do you mean to say that Gartner lied, after experiments by the
hundred (and he a hostile witness), when he showed that this was the
case with Verbascum and with maize (and here you have selected races):
does Kolreuter lie when he speaks about the varieties of tobacco? My
God, is not the case difficult enough, without its being, as I must
think, falsely made more difficult? I believe it is my own fault--my
d--d candour: I ought to have made ten times more fuss about these most
careful experiments. I did put it stronger in the third edition of the
"Origin." If you have a new edition, do consider your second geological
section: I do not dispute the truth of your statement; but I maintain
that in almost every case the gravel would graduate into the mud; that
there would not be a hard, straight line between the mass of gravel and
mud; that the gravel, in crawling inland, would be separated from the
underlying beds by oblique lines of stratification. A nice idea of the
difficulty of Geology your section would give to a working man! Do show
your section to Ramsay, and tell him what I say; and if he thinks it
a fair section for a beginner I am shut up, and "will for ever hold my
tongue." Good-night.


LETTER 157. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, [January] 10th [1863].

You will be weary of notes from me about the little book of yours. It is
lucky for me that I expressed, before reading No. VI. (157/1. "Lectures
to Working Men," No. VI., is a critical examination of the position
of the "Origin of Species" in relation to the complete theory of
the "causes of the phenomena of organic nature."), my opinion of its
absolute excellence, and of its being well worth wide distribution
and worth correction (not that I see where you could improve), if you
thought it worth your valuable time. Had I read No. VI., even a rudiment
of modesty would, or ought to, have stopped me saying so much. Though I
have been well abused, yet I have had so much praise, that I have become
a gourmand, both as to capacity and taste; and I really did not think
that mortal man could have tickled my palate in the exquisite manner
with which you have done the job. So I am an old ass, and nothing more
need be said about this. I agree entirely with all your reservations
about accepting the doctrine, and you might have gone further with
further safety and truth. Of course I do not wholly agree about
sterility. I hate beyond all things finding myself in disagreement with
any capable judge, when the premises are the same; and yet this will
occasionally happen. Thinking over my former letter to you, I fancied
(but I now doubt) that I had partly found out the cause of our
disagreement, and I attributed it to your naturally thinking most
about animals, with which the sterility of the hybrids is much more
conspicuous than the lessened fertility of the first cross. Indeed,
this could hardly be ascertained with mammals, except by comparing the
products of [their] whole life; and, as far as I know, this has only
been ascertained in the case of the horse and ass, which do produce
fewer offspring in [their] lifetime than in pure breeding. In plants the
test of first cross seems as fair as test of sterility of hybrids. And
this latter test applies, I will maintain to the death, to the crossing
of varieties of Verbascum, and varieties, selected varieties, of Zea.
(157/2. See Letter 156.) You will say Go to the Devil and hold your
tongue. No, I will not hold my tongue; for I must add that after going,
for my present book, all through domestic animals, I have come to the
conclusion that there are almost certainly several cases of two or three
or more species blended together and now perfectly fertile together.
Hence I conclude that there must be something in domestication,--perhaps
the less stable conditions, the very cause which induces so much
variability,--which eliminates the natural sterility of species when
crossed. If so, we can see how unlikely that sterility should arise
between domestic races. Now I will hold my tongue. Page 143: ought
not "Sanscrit" to be "Aryan"? What a capital number the last "Natural
History Review" is! That is a grand paper by Falconer. I cannot say how
indignant Owen's conduct about E. Columbi has made me. I believe I hate
him more than you do, even perhaps more than good old Falconer does. But
I have bubbled over to one or two correspondents on this head, and will
say no more. I have sent Lubbock a little review of Bates' paper in
"Linn. Transact." (157/3. The unsigned review of Mr. Bates' work on
mimetic butterflies appeared in the "Nat. Hist. Review" (1863), page
219.) which L. seems to think will do for your "Review." Do inaugurate a
great improvement, and have pages cut, like the Yankees do; I will heap
blessings on your head. Do not waste your time in answering this.


LETTER 158. TO JOHN LUBBOCK [LORD AVEBURY]. Down, January 23rd [1863].

I have no criticism, except one sentence not perfectly smooth. I think
your introductory remarks very striking, interesting, and novel. (158/1.
"On the Development of Chloeon (Ephemera) dimidiatum, Part I. By John
Lubbock. "Trans. Linn. Soc." Volume XXIV., pages 61-78, 1864 [Read
January 15th, 1863].) They interested me the more, because the vaguest
thoughts of the same kind had passed through my head; but I had no idea
that they could be so well developed, nor did I know of exceptions.
Sitaris and Meloe (158/2. Sitaris and Meloe, two genera of coleopterous
insects, are referred to by Lubbock (op. cit., pages 63-64) as
"perhaps...the most remarkable cases...among the Coleoptera" of curious
and complicated metamorphoses.) seem very good. You have put the whole
case of metamorphosis in a new light; I dare say what you remark about
poverty of fresh-water is very true. (158/3. "We cannot but be struck
by the poverty of the fresh-water fauna when compared with that of
the ocean" (op. cit., page 64).) I think you might write a memoir
on fresh-water productions. I suggest that the key-note is that
land-productions are higher and have advantage in general over marine;
and consequently land-productions have generally been modified into
fresh-water productions, instead of marine productions being directly
changed into fresh-water productions, as at first seems more probable,
as the chance of immigration is always open from sea to rivers and
ponds.

My talk with you did me a deal of good, and I enjoyed it much.


LETTER 159. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, January 13th [1863].

I send a very imperfect answer to [your] question, which I have written
on foreign paper to save you copying, and you can send when you write
to Thomson in Calcutta. Hereafter I shall be able to answer better your
question about qualities induced in individuals being inherited; gout
in man--loss of wool in sheep (which begins in the first generation and
takes two or three to complete); probably obesity (for it is rare with
poor); probably obesity and early maturity in short-horn cattle, etc.,
etc.


LETTER 160. TO A. DE CANDOLLE. Down, January 14th [1863].

I thank you most sincerely for sending me your Memoir. (160/1. Etude
sur l'Espece a l'occasion d'une revision de la Famille des Cupuliferes.
"Biblioth. Univ. (Arch. des Sc. Phys. et Nat.)," Novembre 1862.) I have
read it with the liveliest interest, as is natural for me; but you have
the art of making subjects, which might be dry, run easily. I have been
fairly astonished at the amount of individual variability in the oaks.
I never saw before the subject in any department of nature worked out so
carefully. What labour it must have cost you! You spoke in one letter
of advancing years; but I am very sure that no one would have suspected
that you felt this. I have been interested with every part; though I am
so unfortunate as to differ from most of my contemporaries in thinking
that the vast continental extensions (160/2. See Letters 47, 48.)
of Forbes, Heer, and others are not only advanced without sufficient
evidence, but are opposed to much weighty evidence. You refer to my work
in the kindest and most generous spirit. I am fully satisfied at the
length in belief to which you go, and not at all surprised at the
prudent reservations which you make. I remember well how many years it
cost me to go round from old beliefs. It is encouraging to me to observe
that everyone who has gone an inch with me, after a period goes a few
more inches or even feet. But the great point, as it seems to me, is to
give up the immutability of specific forms; as long as they are thought
immutable, there can be no real progress in "Epiontology." (160/3. See
De Candolle, loc. cit., page 67: he defines "Epiontologie" as the study
of the distribution and succession of organised beings from their origin
up to the present time. At present Epiontology is divided into geography
and palaeontology, "mais cette division trop inegale et a limites bien
vagues disparaitra probablement.") It matters very little to any one
except myself, whether I am a little more or less wrong on this or that
point; in fact, I am sure to be proved wrong in many points. But the
subject will have, I am convinced, a grand future. Considering that
birds are the most isolated group in the animal kingdom, what a splendid
case is this Solenhofen bird-creature with its long tail and fingers to
its wings! I have lately been daily and hourly using and quoting your
"Geographical Botany" in my book on "Variation under Domestication."


LETTER 161. TO HORACE DOBELL. Down, February 16th [1863].

Absence from home and consequent idleness are the causes that I have not
sooner thanked you for your very kind present of your Lectures. (161/1.
"On the Germs and Vestiges of Disease," (London) 1861.) Your reasoning
seems quite satisfactory (though the subject is rather beyond my limit
of thought and knowledge) on the V.M.F. not being "a given quantity."
(161/2. "It has been too common to consider the force exhibited in
the operations of life (the V.M.F.) as a given quantity, to which no
accessions can be made, but which is apportioned to each living being in
quantity sufficient for its necessities, according to some hidden law"
(op. cit., page 41.) And I can see that the conditions of life must play
a most important part in allowing this quantity to increase, as in the
budding of a tree, etc. How far these conditions act on "the forms of
organic life" (page 46) I do not see clearly. In fact, no part of my
subject has so completely puzzled me as to determine what effect to
attribute to (what I vaguely call) the direct action of the conditions
of life. I shall before long come to this subject, and must endeavour to
come to some conclusion when I have got the mass of collected facts
in some sort of order in my mind. My present impression is that I
have underrated this action in the "Origin." I have no doubt when I go
through your volume I shall find other points of interest and value to
me. I have already stumbled on one case (about which I want to consult
Mr. Paget)--namely, on the re-growth of supernumerary digits. (161/3.
See Letters 178, 270.) You refer to "White on Regeneration, etc., 1785."
I have been to the libraries of the Royal and the Linnean Societies, and
to the British Museum, where the librarians got out your volume and made
a special hunt, and could discover no trace of such a book. Will you
grant me the favour of giving me any clue, where I could see the book?
Have you it? if so, and the case is given briefly, would you have the
great kindness to copy it? I much want to know all particulars. One
case has been given me, but with hardly minute enough details, of a
supernumerary little finger which has already been twice cut off, and
now the operation will soon have to be done for the third time. I am
extremely much obliged for the genealogical table; the fact of the two
cousins not, as far as yet appears, transmitting the peculiarity is
extraordinary, and must be given by me.


LETTER 162. TO C. LYELL. [February 17th, 1863.]

The same post that brought the enclosed brought Dana's pamphlet on
the same subject. (162/1. The pamphlet referred to was published in
"Silliman's Journal," Volume XXV., 1863, pages 65 and 71, also in the
"Annals and Magazine of Natural History," Volume XI., pages 207-14,
1863: "On the Higher Subdivisions in the Classification of Mammals." In
this paper Dana maintains the view that "Man's title to a position by
himself, separate from the other mammals in classification, appears
to be fixed on structural as well as physical grounds" (page 210). His
description is as follows:--

     I.  ARCHONTIA (vel DIPODA) Man (alone).

     II.  MEGASTHENA.       III.  MICROSTHENA.
     Quadrumana.            Cheiroptera.
     Carnivora.             Insectivora.
     Herbivora.             Rodentia.
     Mutilata.              Bruta (Edentata).

     IV.  OOTICOIDEA.
     Marsupialia.
     Monotremata.)

The whole seems to me utterly wild. If there had not been the foregone
wish to separate men, I can never believe that Dana or any one would
have relied on so small a distinction as grown man not using fore-limbs
for locomotion, seeing that monkeys use their limbs in all other
respects for the same purpose as man. To carry on analogous principles
(for they are not identical, in crustacea the cephalic limbs are brought
close to mouth) from crustacea to the classification of mammals seems
to me madness. Who would dream of making a fundamental distinction in
birds, from fore-limbs not being used at all in [some] birds, or used as
fins in the penguin, and for flight in other birds?

I get on slowly with your grand work, for I am overwhelmed with odds and
ends and letters.


LETTER 163. TO J.D. HOOKER.

(163/1. The following extract refers to Owen's paper in the "Linn. Soc.
Journal," June, 1857, in which the classification of the Mammalia by
cerebral characters was proposed. In spite of the fact that men and apes
are placed in distinct Sub-Classes, Owen speaks (in the foot-note of
which Huxley made such telling effect) of the determination of the
difference between Homo and Pithecus as the anatomist's difficulty. (See
Letter 119.))

July 5th, 1857.

What a capital number of the "Linnean Journal!" Owen's is a grand paper;
but I cannot swallow Man making a division as distinct from a chimpanzee
as an Ornithorhynchus from a horse; I wonder what a chimpanzee would say
to this? (163/2. According to Owen the sub-class Archencephala contains
only the genus Homo: the Gyrencephala contains both chimpanzee and
horse, the Lyencephala contains Ornithorhynchus.)


LETTER 164. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down [February?] 26th, 1863.

I have just finished with very great interest "Man's Place." (164/1.
"Evidence as to Man's Place in Nature," 1863 (preface dated January
1863).) I never fail to admire the clearness and condensed vigour of
your style, as one calls it, but really of your thought. I have no
criticisms; nor is it likely that I could have. But I think you could
have added some interesting matter on the character or disposition of
the young ourangs which have been kept in France and England. I should
have thought you might have enlarged a little on the later embryological
changes in man and on his rudimentary structure, tail as compared with
tail of higher monkeys, intermaxillary bone, false ribs, and I daresay
other points, such as muscles of ears, etc., etc. I was very much
struck with admiration at the opening pages of Part II. (and oh! what a
delicious sneer, as good as a dessert, at page 106) (164/2. Huxley, op.
cit., page 106. After saying that "there is but one hypothesis regarding
the origin of species of animals in general which has any scientific
existence--that propounded by Mr. Darwin," and after a few words on
Lamarck, he goes on: "And though I have heard of the announcement of a
formula touching 'the ordained continuous becoming of organic forms,' it
is obvious that it is the first duty of a hypothesis to be intelligible,
and that a qua-qua-versal proposition of this kind, which may be read
backwards or forwards, or sideways, with exactly the same amount of
significance, does not really exist, though it may seem to do so." The
"formula" in question is Owen's.): but my admiration is unbounded at
pages 109 to 112. I declare I never in my life read anything grander.
Bacon himself could not have charged a few paragraphs with more
condensed and cutting sense than you have done. It is truly grand. I
regret extremely that you could not, or did not, end your book (not that
I mean to say a word against the Geological History) with these pages.
With a book, as with a fine day, one likes it to end with a glorious
sunset. I congratulate you on its publication; but do not be
disappointed if it does not sell largely: parts are highly scientific,
and I have often remarked that the best books frequently do not get soon
appreciated: certainly large sale is no proof of the highest merit. But
I hope it may be widely distributed; and I am rejoiced to see in your
note to Miss Rhadamanthus (164/3. This refers to Mr. Darwin's daughter
(now Mrs. Litchfield), whom Mr. Huxley used to laugh at for the severity
of her criticisms.) that a second thousand is called for of the little
book. What a letter that is of Owen's in the "Athenaeum" (164/4. A
letter by Owen in the "Athenaeum," February 21st, 1863, replying to
strictures on his treatment of the brain question, which had appeared
in Lyell's "Antiquity of Man."); how cleverly he will utterly muddle and
confound the public. Indeed he quite muddled me, till I read again your
"concise statement" (164/5. This refers to a section (pages 113-18) in
"Man's Place in Nature," headed "A succinct History of the Controversy
respecting the Cerebral Structure of Man and the Apes." Huxley follows
the question from Owen's attempt to classify the mammalia by cerebral
characters, published by the "Linn. Soc." in 1857, up to his revival of
the subject at the Cambridge meeting of the British Association in 1862.
It is a tremendous indictment of Owen, and seems to us to conclude
not unfittingly with a citation from Huxley's article in the "Medical
Times," October 11th, 1862. Huxley here points out that special
investigations have been made into the question at issue "during the
last two years" by Allen Thomson, Rolleston, Marshall, Flower, Schroeder
van der Kolk and Vrolik, and that "all these able and conscientious
observers" have testified to the accuracy of his statements, "while not
a single anatomist, great or small, has supported Professor Owen." He
sums up the case once more, and concludes: "The question has thus become
one of personal veracity. For myself I will accept no other issue than
this, grave as it is, to the present controversy.") (which is capitally
clear), and then I saw that my suspicion was true that he has entirely
changed his ground to size of Brain. How candid he shows himself to have
taken the slipped Brain! (164/6. Owen in the "Athenaeum," February 21st,
1863, admits that in the brain which he used in illustration of his
statements "the cerebral hemispheres had glided forward and apart behind
so as to expose a portion of the cerebellum.") I am intensely curious
to see whether Lyell will answer. (164/7. Lyell's answer was in the
"Athenaeum" March 7th, 1863.) Lyell has been, I fear, rather rash to
enter on a subject on which he of course knows nothing by himself. By
heavens, Owen will shake himself, when he sees what an antagonist he has
made for himself in you. With hearty admiration, Farewell.

I am fearfully disappointed at Lyell's excessive caution (164/8. In the
"Antiquity of Man": see "Life and Letters," III., page 8.) in expressing
any judgment on Species or [on the] origin of Man.


LETTER 165. TO JOHN SCOTT. Down, March 6th, 1863.

I thank you for your criticisms on the "Origin," and which I have not
time to discuss; but I cannot help doubting, from your expression of
an "INNATE...selective principle," whether you fully comprehend what
is meant by Natural Selection. Certainly when you speak of weaker (i.e.
less well adapted) forms crossing with the stronger, you take a widely
different view from what I do on the struggle for existence; for such
weaker forms could not exist except by the rarest chance. With respect
to utility, reflect that 99/100ths part of the structure of each being
is due to inheritance of formerly useful structures. Pray read what I
have said on "correlation." Orchids ought to show us how ignorant we are
of what is useful. No doubt hundreds of cases could be advanced of
which no explanation could be offered; but I must stop. Your letter has
interested me much. I am very far from strong, and have great fear that
I must stop all work for a couple of months for entire rest, and leave
home. It will be ruin to all my work.


LETTER 166. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, April 23rd [1863].

The more I think of Falconer's letter (166/1. Published in the
"Athenaeum" April 4th, 1863, page 459. The writer asserts that Lyell did
not make it clear that certain material made use of in the "Antiquity
of Man" was supplied by the original work of Mr. Prestwich and himself.
(See "Life and Letters," III., page 19.)) the more grieved I am; he and
Prestwich (the latter at least must owe much to the "Principles") assume
an absurdly unwarrantable position with respect to Lyell. It is too
bad to treat an old hero in science thus. I can see from a note from
Falconer (about a wonderful fossil Brazilian Mammal, well called Meso-
or Typo-therium) that he expects no sympathy from me. He will end, I
hope, by being sorry. Lyell lays himself open to a slap by saying that
he would come to show his original observations, and then not distinctly
doing so; he had better only have laid claim, on this one point of man,
to verification and compilation.

Altogether, I much like Lyell's letter. But all this squabbling will
greatly sink scientific men. I have seen a sneer already in the "Times."


LETTER 167. TO H.W. BATES. At Rev. C. Langton, Hartfield, Tunbridge
Wells, April 30th [1863].

You will have received before this the note which I addressed to
Leicester, after finishing Volume I., and you will have received copies
of my little review (167/1. "Nat. Hist. Review," 1863, page 219. A
review of Bates' paper on Mimetic Butterflies.) of your paper...I have
now finished Volume II., and my opinion remains the same--that you have
written a truly admirable work (167/2. "The Naturalist on the Amazons,"
1863.), with capital original remarks, first-rate descriptions, and the
whole in a style which could not be improved. My family are now reading
the book, and admire it extremely; and, as my wife remarks, it has so
strong an air of truthfulness. I had a letter from a person the other
day, unknown to you, full of praise of the book. I do hope it may get
extensively heard of and circulated; but to a certain extent this, I
think, always depends on chance.

I suppose the clicking noise of surprise made by the Indian is that
which the end of the tongue, applied to the palate of the mouth and
suddenly withdrawn, makes?

I have not written since receiving your note of April 20th, in which
you confided in me and told me your prospects. I heartily wish they were
better, and especially more certain; but with your abilities and powers
of writing it will be strange if you cannot add what little you require
for your income. I am glad that you have got a retired and semi-rural
situation. What a grand ending you give to your book, contrasting
civilisation and wild life! I quite regret that I have finished it:
every evening it was a real treat to me to have my half-hour in the
grand Amazonian forest, and picture to myself your vivid descriptions.
There are heaps of facts of value to me in a natural history point
of view. It was a great misfortune that you were prevented giving the
discussion on species. But you will, I hope, be able to give your views
and facts somewhere else.


LETTER 168. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, May 15th [1863].

Your letter received this morning interested me more than even most of
your letters, and that is saying a good deal. I must scribble a little
on several points. About Lyell and species--you put the whole case, I
do believe, when you say that he is "half-hearted and whole-headed."
(168/1. Darwin's disappointment with the cautious point of view taken
up by Lyell in the "Antiquity of Man" is illustrated in the "Life and
Letters," III., pages 11, 13. See also Letter 164, page 239.) I wrote
to A. Gray that, when I saw such men as Lyell and he refuse to judge,
it put me in despair, and that I sometimes thought I should prefer that
Lyell had judged against modification of species rather than profess
inability to decide; and I left him to apply this to himself. I am
heartily rejoiced to hear that you intend to try to bring L. and F.
(168/2. Falconer claimed that Lyell had not "done justice to the part he
took in resuscitating the cave question." See "Life and Letters," III.,
page 14.) together again; but had you not better wait till they are a
little cooled? You will do Science a real good service. Falconer never
forgave Lyell for taking the Purbeck bones from him and handing them
over to Owen.

With respect to island floras, if I understand rightly, we differ almost
solely how plants first got there. I suppose that at long intervals,
from as far back as later Tertiary periods to the present time, plants
occasionally arrived (in some cases, perhaps, aided by different
currents from existing currents and by former islands), and that these
old arrivals have survived little modified on the islands, but have
become greatly modified or become extinct on the continent. If I
understand, you believe that all islands were formerly united to
continents, and then received all their plants and none since; and that
on the islands they have undergone less extinction and modification than
on the continent. The number of animal forms on islands, very closely
allied to those on continents, with a few extremely distinct and
anomalous, does not seem to me well to harmonise with your supposed view
of all having formerly arrived or rather having been left together on
the island.


LETTER 169. TO ASA GRAY. Down, May 31st [1863?].

I was very glad to receive your review (169/1. The review on De
Candolle's work on the Oaks (A. Gray's "Scientific Papers," I., page
130).) of De Candolle a week ago. It seems to me excellent, and you
speak out, I think, more plainly in favour of derivation of species than
hitherto, though doubtfully about Natural Selection. Grant the first,
I am easy about the second. Do you not consider such cases as all the
orchids next thing to a demonstration against Heer's view of species
arising suddenly by monstrosities?--it is impossible to imagine so many
co-adaptations being formed all by a chance blow. Of course creationists
would cut the enigma.


LETTER 170. TO T.H. HUXLEY. June 27th [1863?]

What are you doing now? I have never yet got hold of the "Edinburgh
Review," in which I hear you are well abused. By the way, I heard
lately from Asa Gray that Wyman was delighted at "Man's Place." (170/1.
"Evidence as to Man's Place in Nature," by T.H. Huxley, 1863.) I
wonder who it is who pitches weakly, but virulently into you, in the
"Anthropological Review." How quiet Owen seems! I do at last begin to
believe that he will ultimately fall in public estimation. What nonsense
he wrote in the "Athenaeum" (170/2. "Athenaeum," March 28th, 1863. See
"Life and Letters," III., page 17.) on Heterogeny! I saw in his Aye-Aye
(170/3. See Owen in the "Trans. Zool. Soc." Volume V. The sentence
referred to seems to be the following (page 95): "We know of no changes
in progress in the Island of Madagascar, necessitating a special quest
of wood-boring larvae by small quadrupeds of the Lemurine or Sciurine
types of organisation.') paper (I think) that he sneers at the manner in
which he supposes that we should account for the structure of its
limbs; and asks how we know that certain insects had increased in the
Madagascar forests. Would it not be a good rebuff to ask him how he
knows there were trees at all on the leafless plains of La Plata for his
Mylodons to tear down? But I must stop, for if I once begin about [him]
there will be no end. I was disappointed in the part about species in
Lyell. (170/4. Lyell's "Antiquity of Man." See "Life and Letters," III.,
page 11.) You and Hooker are the only two bold men. I have had a bad
spring and summer, almost constantly very unwell; but I am crawling on
in my book on "Variation under Domestication.")


LETTER 171. TO C. LYELL. Down, August 14th [1863].

Have you seen Bentham's remarks on species in his address to the Linnean
Society? (171/1. Presidential address before the Linnean Society by G.
Bentham ("Journ. Proc. Linn. Soc." Volume VII., page xi., 1864).) they
have pleased me more than anything I have read for some time. I have no
news, for I have not seen a soul for months, and have had a bad
spring and summer, but have managed to do a good deal of work. Emma is
threatening me to take me to Malvern, and perhaps I shall be compelled,
but it is a horrid waste of time; you must have enjoyed North Wales, I
should think, it is to me a most glorious country...

If you have not read Bates' book (171/2. Henry Walter Bates, "The
Naturalist on the River Amazons," 2 volumes, London, 1863. In a letter
to Bates, April 18th, 1863, Darwin writes, "It is the best work of
natural history travels ever published in England" ("Life and Letters,"
II., page 381.), I think it would interest you. He is second only to
Humboldt in describing a tropical forest. (171/3. Quoted in "Life and
Letters," II., page 381.). Talking of reading, I have never got the
"Edinburgh" (171/4. The "Geological Evidence of the Antiquity of
Man," by Sir Charles Lyell, and works by other authors reviewed in the
"Edinburgh Review." Volume CXVIII., July 1863. The writer sums up his
criticism as follows: "Glancing at the work of Sir Charles Lyell as a
whole, it leaves the impression on our minds that we have been reading
an ingenious academical thesis, rather than a work of demonstration by
an original writer...There is no argument in it, and only a few facts
which have not been stated elsewhere by Sir C. Lyell himself or by
others" (loc. cit., page 294).), in which, I suppose, you are cut up.


LETTER 172. TO H. FALCONER. December 26th [1863].

Thank you for telling me about the Pliocene mammal, which is very
remarkable; but has not Owen stated that the Pliocene badger is
identical with the recent? Such a case does indeed well show the
stupendous duration of the same form. I have not heard of Suess'
pamphlet (172/1. Probably Suess's paper "Ueber die Verschiedenheit und
die Aufeinanderfolge der tertiaren Land-faunen in der Niederung von
Wien." "Sitz.-Ber. Wien Akad." XLVII., page 306, 1863.), and should much
like to learn the title, if it can be procured; but I am on different
subjects just at present. I should rather like to see it rendered
highly probable that the process of formation of a new species was short
compared to its duration--that is, if the process was allowed to be
slow and long; the idea is new to me. Heer's view that new species are
suddenly formed like monsters, I feel a conviction from many reasons is
false.



CHAPTER 1.IV.--EVOLUTION, 1864-1869.


LETTER 173. TO A.R. WALLACE. Down, January 1st, 1864.

I am still unable to write otherwise than by dictation. In a letter
received two or three weeks ago from Asa Gray he writes: "I read lately
with gusto Wallace's expose of the Dublin man on Bees' cells, etc."
(173/1. "Remarks on the Rev. S. Haughton's paper on the Bee's Cell and
on the Origin of Species" ("Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist." XII., 1863, page
303). Prof. Haughton's paper was read before the Natural History Society
of Dublin, November 21st, 1862, and reprinted in the "Ann. and Mag.
Nat. Hist." XI., 1863, page 415. See Letters 73, 74, 75.) Now, though
I cannot read at present, I much want to know where this is published,
that I may procure a copy. Further on, Asa Gray says (after speaking of
Agassiz's paper on Glaciers in the "Atlantic Magazine" and his
recent book entitled "Method of Study"): "Pray set Wallace upon these
articles." So Asa Gray seems to think much of your powers of reviewing,
and I mention this as it assuredly is laudari a laudato. I hope you are
hard at work, and if you are inclined to tell me, I should much like to
know what you are doing. It will be many months, I fear, before I shall
do anything.


LETTER 174. TO J.L.A. DE QUATREFAGES. Down, March 27th [1864?].

I had heard that your work was to be translated, and I heard it with
pleasure; but I can take no share of credit, for I am not an active,
only an honorary member of the Society. Since writing I have finished
with extreme interest to the end your admirable work on metamorphosis.
(174/1. Probably "Metamorphoses of Man and the Lower Animals."
Translated by H. Lawson, 1864.) How well you are acquainted with the
works of English naturalists, and how generously you bestow honour on
them! Mr. Lubbock is my neighbour, and I have known him since he was a
little boy; he is in every way a thoroughly good man; as is my friend
Huxley. It gave me real pleasure to see you notice their works as you
have done.


LETTER 175. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, April 11th [1864].

I am very much obliged for your present of your "Comp. Anatomy." (175/1.
"Lectures on the Elements of Comparative Anatomy," 1864.) When strong
enough I am sure I shall read it with greatest interest. I could not
resist the last chapter, of which I have read a part, and have been much
interested about the "inspired idiot." (175/2. In reference to Oken
(op. cit., page 282) Huxley says: "I must confess I never read his works
without thinking of the epithet of 'inspired idiot' applied to our own
Goldsmith.") If Owen wrote the article "Oken" (175/3. The article on
Oken in the eighth edition of the "Encyclopaedia Britannica" is signed
"R.O.": Huxley wrote to Darwin (April 18th, 1864), "There is not the
smallest question that Owen wrote both the article 'Oken' and the
'Archetype' Book" (Huxley's "Life," I., page 250). Mr. Huxley's
statements amount to this: (1) Prof. Owen accuses Goethe of having in
1820 appropriated Oken's theory of the skull, and of having given an
apocryphal account of how the idea occurred to himself in 1790. (2) in
the same article, page 502, Owen stated it to be questionable whether
the discoverer of the true theory of the segmental constitution of
the skull (i.e. himself) was excited to his labours, or "in any way
influenced by the a priori guesses of Oken." On this Huxley writes, page
288: "But if he himself had not been in any way influenced by Oken, and
if the 'Programm' [of Oken] is a mere mass of 'a priori guesses,' how
comes it that only three years before Mr. Owen could write thus? 'Oken,
ce genie profond et penetrant, fut le premier qui entrevit la verite,
guide par l'heureuse idee de l'arrangement des os craniens en segments,
comme ceux du rachis, appeles vertebres...'" Later on Owen wrote:
"Cela servira pour exemple d'une examen scrupuleux des faits, d'une
appreciation philosophique de leurs relations et analogies, etc." (From
"Principes d'Osteologie comparee, ou Recherches sur l'Archetype," etc.,
pages 155, 1855). (3) Finally Huxley says, page 289, plainly: "The fact
is that, so far from not having been 'in any way influenced' by Oken,
Prof. Owen's own contributions to this question are the merest Okenism,
remanie.") and the French work on the Archetype (points you do not put
quite clearly), he never did a baser act...You are so good a Christian
that you will hardly understand how I chuckle over this bit of baseness.
I hope you keep well and hearty; I honour your wisdom at giving up at
present Society for Science. But, on the other hand, I feel it in myself
possible to get to care too much for Natural Science and too little for
other things. I am getting better, I almost dare to hope permanently;
for my sickness is decidedly less--for twenty-seven days consecutively I
was sick many times daily, and lately I was five days free. I long to do
a little work again. The magnificent (by far the most magnificent, and
too magnificent) compliment which you paid me at the end of your "Origin
of Species" (175/4. A title applied to the "Lectures to Working Men,"
that "green little book" referred to in Letter 156. Speaking of Mr.
Darwin's work he says (page 156): "I believe that if you strip it of its
theoretical part, it still remains one of the greatest encyclopaedias of
biological doctrine that any one man ever brought forth; and I believe
that, if you take it as the embodiment of an hypothesis, it is destined
to be the guide of biological and psychological speculation for the next
three or four generations.') I have met with reprinted from you two or
three times lately.


LETTER 175A. TO ERASMUS DARWIN. Down, June 30th, 1864.

(175A.1. The preceding letter contains a reference to the prolonged
period of ill-health which Darwin suffered in 1863 and 1864, and in this
connection the present letter is of interest.

The Copley Medal was given to him in 1864.)

I had not heard a word about the Copley Medal. Please give Falconer
my cordial thanks for his interest about me. I enclose the list of
everything published by me except a few unimportant papers. Ask Falconer
not to mention that I sent the list, as some one might say I had been
canvassing, which is an odious imputation. The origin of the Voyage in
the "Beagle" was that Fitz-Roy generously offered to give up half his
cabin to any one who would volunteer to go as naturalist. Beaufort wrote
to Cambridge, and I volunteered. Fitz-Roy never persuaded me to give
up the voyage on account of sickness, nor did I ever think of doing so,
though I suffered considerably; but I do not believe it was the cause of
my subsequent ill-health, which has lost me so many years, and therefore
I should not think the sea-sickness was worth notice. It would save you
trouble to forward this with my kindest remembrances to Falconer.


(176/1. The following letter was the beginning of a correspondence with
Mr. B.D. Walsh, whom C.V. Riley describes as "one of the ablest and most
thorough entomologists of our time.")

LETTER 176. B.D. WALSH TO CHARLES DARWIN. Rock Island, Illinois, U.S.,
April 29th, 1864.

(176/2. The words in square brackets are restorations of parts torn off
the original letter.)

More than thirty years ago I was introduced to you at your rooms in
Christ's College by A.W. Grisebach, and had the pleasure of seeing your
noble collection of British Coleoptera. Some years afterwards I became a
Fellow of Trinity, and finally gave up my Fellowship rather than go into
Orders, and came to this country. For the last five or six years I have
been paying considerable attention to the insect fauna of the U.S., some
of the fruits of which you will see in the enclosed pamphlets. Allow
me to take this opportunity of thanking you for the publication of your
"Origin of Species," which I read three years ago by the advice of
a botanical friend, though I had a strong prejudice against what I
supposed then to be your views. The first perusal staggered me, the
second convinced me, and the oftener I read it the more convinced I am
of the general soundness of your theory.

As you have called upon naturalists that believe in your views to give
public testimony of their convictions, I have directed your attention on
the outside of one or two of my pamphlets to the particular passages in
which [I] have done so. You will please accept these papers from me in
token of my respect and admiration.

As you may see from the latest of these papers, I [have] recently made
the remarkable discover that there [are the] so-called "three sexes" not
only in social insects but [also in the] strictly solitary genus Cynips.

When is your great work to make its appearance? [I should be] much
pleased to receive a few lines from you.


LETTER 177. TO B.D. WALSH. Down, October 21st [1864].

Ill-health has prevented me from sooner thanking you for your very kind
letter and several memoirs.

I have been very much pleased to see how boldly and clearly you speak
out on the modification of species. I thank you for giving me the pages
of reference; but they were superfluous, for I found so many original
and profound remarks that I have carefully looked through all the
papers. I hope that your discovery about the Cynips (177/1. "On
Dimorphism in the hymenopterous genus Cynips," "Proc. Entom. Soc.
Philadelphia," March, 1864. Mr. Walsh's view is that Cynips quercus
aciculata is a dimorphous form of Cynips q. spongifica, and occurs only
as a female. Cynips q. spongifica also produces spongifica females and
males from other galls at a different time of year.) will hold good, for
it is a remarkable one, and I for one have often marvelled what could
be the meaning of the case. I will lend your paper to my neighbour Mr.
Lubbock, who I know is much interested in the subject. Incidentally I
shall profit by your remarks on galls. If you have time I think a rather
hopeless experiment would be worth trying; anyhow, I should have tried
it had my health permitted. It is to insert a minute grain of some
organic substance, together with the poison from bees, sand-wasps,
ichneumons, adders, and even alkaloid poisons into the tissues of
fitting plants for the chance of monstrous growths being produced.
(177/2. See "Life and Letters," III., page 346, for an account of
experiments attempted in this direction by Mr. Darwin in 1880. On the
effects of injuring plant-tissues, see Massart, "La Cicatrisation, etc."
in Tome LVII. of the "Memoires Couronnes" of the Brussels Academy.)

My health has long been poor, and I have lately suffered from a long
illness which has interrupted all work, but I am now recommencing a
volume in connection with the "Origin."

P.S.--If you write again I should very much like to hear what your life
in your new country is.

What can be the meaning or use of the great diversity of the external
generative organs in your cases, in Bombus, and the phytophagous
coleoptera?

What can there be in the act of copulation necessitating such complex
and diversified apparatus?


LETTER 178. TO W.H. FLOWER. Down, July 11th, 1864.

I am truly obliged for all the trouble which you have taken for me, and
for your very interesting note. I had only vaguely heard it said that
frogs had a rudiment of a sixth toe; had I known that such great men
had looked to the point I should not have dreamed of looking myself. The
rudiment sent to you was from a full-grown frog; so that if these bones
are the two cuneiforms they must, I should think, be considered to be
in a rudimentary condition. This afternoon my gardener brought in
some tadpoles with the hind-legs alone developed, and I looked at the
rudiment. At this age it certainly looks extremely like a digit, for
the extremity is enlarged like that of the adjoining real toe, and
the transverse articulation seems similar. I am sorry that the case is
doubtful, for if these batrachians had six toes, I certainly think
it would have thrown light on the truly extraordinary strength of
inheritance in polydactylism in so many animals, and especially on the
power of regeneration in amputated supernumerary digits. (178/1. In the
first edition of "Variation under Domestication" the view here given is
upheld, but in the second edition (Volume I., page 459) Darwin withdrew
his belief that the development of supernumerary digits in man is "a
case of reversion to a lowly-organised progenitor provided with more
than five digits." See Letters 161, 270.)


LETTER 179. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down [October 22nd, 1864].

The Lyells have been here, and were extremely pleasant, but I saw them
only occasionally for ten minutes, and when they went I had an awful day
[of illness]; but I am now slowly getting up to my former standard. I
shall soon be confined to a living grave, and a fearful evil it is.

I suppose you have read Tyndall. (179/1. Probably Tyndall "On the
Conformation of the Alps" ("Phil. Mag." 1864, page 255).) I have now
come round again to Ramsay's view, (179/2. "Phil. Mag." 1864, page 293.)
for the third or fourth time; but Lyell says when I read his discussion
in the "Elements," I shall recant for the fifth time. (179/3. This
refers to a discussion on the "Connection of the predominance of Lakes
with Glacial Action" ("Elements," Edition VI., pages 168-74). Lyell
adheres to the views expressed in the "Antiquity of Man" (1863) against
Ramsay's theory of the origin of lake basins by ice action.) What a
capital writer Tyndall is!

In your last note you ask what the Bardfield oxlip is. It is P. elatior
of Jacq., which certainly looks, when growing, to common eyes different
from the common oxlip. I will fight you to the death that as primrose
and cowslip are different in appearance (not to mention odour,
habitat and range), and as I can now show that, when they cross, the
intermediate offspring are sterile like ordinary hybrids, they must be
called as good species as a man and a gorilla.

I agree that if Scott's red cowslip grew wild or spread itself and
did not vary [into] common cowslip (and we have absolutely no proof of
primrose or cowslip varying into each other), and as it will not cross
with the cowslip, it would be a perfectly good species. The power of
remaining for a good long period constant I look at as the essence of a
species, combined with an appreciable amount of difference; and no one
can say there is not this amount of difference between primrose and
oxlip.


(PLATE: HUGH FALCONER, 1844. From a photograph by Hill & Adamson.)


LETTER 180. HUGH FALCONER TO W. SHARPEY.

(180/1. Falconer had proposed Darwin for the Copley Medal of the Royal
Society (which was awarded to him in 1864), but being detained abroad,
he gave his reasons for supporting Darwin for this honour in a letter to
Sharpey, the Secretary of the Royal Society. A copy of the letter here
printed seems to have been given to Erasmus Darwin, and by him shown to
his brother Charles.)

Montauban, October 25th, 1864.

Busk and myself have made every effort to be back in London by the 27th
inst., but we have been persecuted by mishaps--through the breakdown
of trains, diligences, etc., so that we have been sadly put out in our
reckoning--and have lost some of the main objects that brought us round
by this part of France--none of which were idle or unimportant.

Busk started yesterday for Paris from Bruniquel, to make sure of being
present at the meeting of the Royal Council on Thursday. He will tell
you that there were strong reasons for me remaining behind him. But as I
seconded the proposal of Mr. Darwin for the Copley Medal, in default of
my presence at the first meeting, I beg that you will express my great
regrets to the President and Council at not being there, and that I am
very reluctantly detained. I shall certainly be in London (D.V.) by the
second meeting on the 3rd proximo. Meanwhile I solicit the favour of
being heard, through you, respecting the grounds upon which I seconded
Mr. Darwin's nomination for the Copley Medal.

Referring to the classified list which I drew up of Mr. Darwin's
scientific labours, ranging through the wide field of (1) Geology, (2)
Physical Geography, (3) Zoology, (4) physiological Botany, (5) genetic
Biology, and to the power with which he has investigated whatever
subject he has taken up,--Nullum quod tetigit non ornavit,--I am of
opinion that Mr. Darwin is not only one of the most eminent naturalists
of his day, but that hereafter he will be regarded as one of the great
naturalists of all countries and of all time. His early work on the
structure and distribution of coral reefs constitutes an era in the
investigation of the subject. As a monographic labour, it may be
compared with Dr. Wells' "Essay upon Dew," as original, exhaustive, and
complete--containing the closest observation with large and important
generalisations.

Among the zoologists his monographs upon the Balanidae and Lepadidae,
Fossil and Recent, in the Palaeontographical and Ray Societies'
publications, are held to be models of their kind.

In physiological Botany, his recent researches upon the dimorphism of
the genital organs in certain plants, embodied in his papers in the
"Linnean Journal," on Primula, Linum, and Lythrum, are of the highest
order of importance. They open a new mine of observation upon a field
which had been barely struck upon before. The same remark applies to his
researches on the structure and various adaptations of the orchideous
flower to a definite object connected with impregnation of the plants
through the agency of insects with foreign pollen. There has not yet
been time for their due influence being felt in the advancement of the
science. But in either subject they constitute an advance per saltum.
I need not dwell upon the value of his geological researches, which
won for him one of the earlier awards of the Wollaston Medal from the
Geological Society, the best of judges on the point.

And lastly, Mr. Darwin's great essay on the "Origin of Species" by
Natural Selection. This solemn and mysterious subject had been either so
lightly or so grotesquely treated before, that it was hardly regarded as
being within the bounds of legitimate philosophical investigation. Mr.
Darwin, after twenty years of the closest study and research, published
his views, and it is sufficient to say that they instantly fixed the
attention of mankind throughout the civilised world. That the efforts of
a single mind should have arrived at success on a subject of such vast
scope, and encompassed with such difficulties, was more than could have
been reasonably expected, and I am far from thinking that Charles Darwin
has made out all his case. But he has treated it with such power and in
such a philosophical and truth-seeking spirit, and illustrated it with
such an amount of original and collated observation as fairly to have
brought the subject within the bounds of rational scientific research.
I consider this great essay on genetic Biology to constitute a strong
additional claim on behalf of Mr. Darwin for the Copley Medal. (180/2.
The following letter (December 3rd, 1864), from Mr. Huxley to Sir J.D.
Hooker, is reprinted, by the kind permission of Mr. L. Huxley, from his
father's "Life," I., page 255. Sabine's address (from the "Reader") is
given in the "Life and Letters," III., page 28. In the "Proceedings of
the Royal Society" the offending sentence is slightly modified. It is
said, in Huxley's "Life" (loc. cit., note), that the sentence which
follows it was introduced to mitigate the effect:--

"I wish you had been at the anniversary meeting and dinner, because the
latter was very pleasant, and the former, to me, very disagreeable. My
distrust of Sabine is, as you know, chronic; and I went determined to
keep careful watch on his address, lest some crafty phrase injurious to
Darwin should be introduced. My suspicions were justified, the only part
of the address [relating] to Darwin written by Sabine himself containing
the following passage:

"'Speaking generally and collectively, we have expressly omitted it
[Darwin's theory] from the grounds of our award.'

"Of course this would be interpreted by everybody as meaning that after
due discussion, the council had formally resolved not only to exclude
Darwin's theory from the grounds of the award, but to give public notice
through the president that they had done so, and, furthermore, that
Darwin's friends had been base enough to accept an honour for him on the
understanding that in receiving it he should be publicly insulted!

"I felt that this would never do, and therefore, when the resolution for
printing the address was moved, I made a speech, which I took care
to keep perfectly cool and temperate, disavowing all intention of
interfering with the liberty of the president to say what he pleased,
but exercising my constitutional right of requiring the minutes of
council making the award to be read, in order that the Society might be
informed whether the conditions implied by Sabine had been imposed or
not.

"The resolution was read, and of course nothing of the kind appeared.
Sabine didn't exactly like it, I believe. Both Busk and Falconer
remonstrated against the passage to him, and I hope it will be withdrawn
when the address is printed. If not, there will be an awful row, and I
for one will show no mercy.")

In forming an estimate of the value and extent of Mr. Darwin's
researches, due regard ought to be had to the circumstances under which
they have been carried out--a pressure of unremitting disease, which
has latterly left him not more than one or two hours of the day which he
could call his own.


LETTER 181. TO HUGH FALCONER. Down, November 4th [1864].

What a good kind friend you are! I know well that this medal must have
cost you a deal of trouble. It is a very great honour to me, but I
declare the knowledge that you and a few other friends have interested
themselves on the subject is the real cream of the enjoyment to me;
indeed, it is to me worth far more than many medals. So accept my true
and cordial thanks. I hope that I may yet have strength to do a little
more work in Natural Science, shaky and old though I be. I have chuckled
and triumphed over your postscript about poor M. Brulle and his young
pupils (181/1. The following is the postscript in a letter from Falconer
to Darwin November 3rd [1864]: "I returned last night from Spain via
France. On Monday I was at Dijon, where, while in the Museum, M. Brulle,
Professor of Zoology, asked me what was my frank opinion of Charles
Darwin's doctrine? He told me in despair that he could not get his
pupils to listen to anything from him except a la Darwin! He, poor man,
could not comprehend it, and was still unconvinced, but that all young
Frenchmen would hear or believe nothing else.") About a week ago I had
a nearly similar account from Germany, and at the same time I heard of
some splendid converts in such men as Leuckart, Gegenbauer, etc. You may
say what you like about yourself, but I look at a man who treats natural
history in the same spirit with which you do, exactly as good, for what
I believe to be the truth, as a convert.


LETTER 182. TO HUGH FALCONER. Down, November 8th [1864].

Your remark on the relation of the award of the medal and the present
outburst of bigotry had not occurred to me. It seems very true, and
makes me the more gratified to receive it. General Sabine (182/1. See
"Life and Letters," III., page 28.) wrote to me and asked me to attend
at the anniversary, but I told him it was really impossible. I have
never been able to conjecture the cause; but I find that on my good
days, when I can write for a couple of hours, that anything which stirs
me up like talking for half or even a quarter of an hour, generally
quite prostrates me, sometimes even for a long time afterwards. I
believe attending the anniversary would possibly make me seriously ill.
I should enjoy attending and shaking you and a few of my other friends
by the hand, but it would be folly even if I did not break down at the
time. I told Sabine that I did not know who had proposed and seconded
me for the medal, but that I presumed it was you, or Hooker or Busk, and
that I felt sure, if you attended, you would receive the medal for me;
and that if none of you attended, that Lyell or Huxley would receive it
for me. Will you receive it, and it could be left at my brother's?

Again accept my cordial and enduring thanks for all your kindness and
sympathy.


LETTER 183. TO B.D. WALSH. Down, December 4th [1864].

I have been greatly interested by your account of your American life.
What an extraordinary and self-contained life you have led! and what
vigour of mind you must possess to follow science with so much ardour
after all that you have undergone! I am very much obliged to you for
your pamphlet on Geographical Distribution, on Agassiz, etc. (183/1. Mr.
Walsh's paper "On certain Entomological Speculations of the New England
School of Entomologists" was published in the "Proc. Entomolog. Soc. of
Philadelphia," September 1864, page 207.) I am delighted at the manner
in which you have bearded this lion in his den. I agree most entirely
with all that you have written. What I meant when I wrote to Agassiz
to thank him for a bundle of his publications, was exactly what you
suppose. (183/2. Namely, that Mr. Darwin, having been abused as an
atheist, etc., by other writers, probably felt grateful to a writer who
was willing to allow him "a spirit as reverential as his own." ("Methods
of Study," Preface, page iv.) I confess, however, I did not fully
perceive how he had misstated my views; but I only skimmed through
his "Methods of Study," and thought it a very poor book. I am so much
accustomed to be utterly misrepresented that it hardly excites my
attention. But you really have hit the nail on the head capitally. All
the younger good naturalists whom I know think of Agassiz as you do; but
he did grand service about glaciers and fish. About the succession of
forms, Pictet has given up his whole views, and no geologist now agrees
with Agassiz. I am glad that you have attacked Dana's wild notions;
[though] I have a great respect for Dana...If you have an opportunity,
read in "Trans. Linn. Soc." Bates on "Mimetic Lepidoptera of Amazons." I
was delighted with his paper.

I have got a notice of your views about the female Cynips inserted in
the "Natural History Review" (183/3. "Nat. Hist. Review," January 1865,
page 139. A notice by "J.L." (probably Lord Avebury) on Walsh's paper
"On Dimorphism in the Hymenopterous Genus Cynips," in the "Proc.
Entomolog. Soc. of Philadelphia," March, 1864.): whether the notice will
be favourable, I do not know, but anyhow it will call attention to your
views...

As you allude in your paper to the believers in change of species, you
will be glad to hear that very many of the very best men are coming
round in Germany. I have lately heard of Hackel, Gegenbauer, F. Muller,
Leuckart, Claparede, Alex. Braun, Schleiden, etc. So it is, I hear, with
the younger Frenchmen.


LETTER 184. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, January 19th [1865].

It is working hours, but I am trying to take a day's holiday, for I
finished and despatched yesterday my Climbing paper. For the last ten
days I have done nothing but correct refractory sentences, and I loathe
the whole subject like tartar emetic. By the way, I am convinced that
you want a holiday, and I think so because you took the devil's name in
vain so often in your last note. Can you come here for Sunday? You know
how I should like it, and you will be quiet and dull enough here to get
plenty of rest. I have been thinking with regret about what you said
in one of your later notes, about having neglected to make notes on the
gradation of character in your genera; but would it be too late? Surely
if you looked over names in series the facts would come back, and
you might surely write a fine paper "On the gradation of important
characters in the genera of plants." As for unimportant characters, I
have made their perfect gradation a very prominent point with respect
to the means of climbing, in my paper. I begin to think that one of the
commonest means of transition is the same individual plant having the
same part in different states: thus Corydalis claviculata, if you look
to one leaf, may be called a tendril-bearer; if you look to another leaf
it may be called a leaf-climber. Now I am sure I remember some cases
with plants in which important parts such as the position of the ovule
differ: differences in the spire of leaves on lateral and terminal
branches, etc.

There was not much in last "Natural History Review" which interested
me except colonial floras (184/1. "Nat. Hist. Review," 1865, page 46.
A review of Grisebach's "Flora of the British West Indian Islands" and
Thwaites' "Enumeratio Plantarum Zeylaniae." The point referred to is
given at page 57: "More than half the Flowering Plants belong to eleven
Orders in the case of the West Indies, and to ten in that of Ceylon,
whilst with but one exception the Ceylon Orders are the same as the West
Indian." The reviewer speculates on the meaning of the fact "in relation
to the hypothesis of an intertropical cold epoch, such as Mr. Darwin
demands for the migration of the Northern Flora to the Southern
hemisphere.") and the report on the sexuality of cryptogams. I
suppose the former was by Oliver; how extremely curious is the fact
of similarity of Orders in the Tropics! I feel a conviction that it
is somehow connected with Glacial destruction, but I cannot "wriggle"
comfortably at all on the subject. I am nearly sure that Dana makes out
that the greatest number of crustacean forms inhabit warmer temperate
regions.

I have had an enormous letter from Leo Lesquereux (after doubts, I did
not think it worth sending you) on Coal Flora: he wrote some excellent
articles in "Silliman" again [my] "Origin" views; but he says now after
repeated reading of the book he is a convert! But how funny men's minds
are! he says he is chiefly converted because my books make the Birth of
Christ, Redemption by Grace, etc., plain to him!


LETTER 185. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, February 9th [1865].

I quite agree how humiliating the slow progress of man is, but every
one has his own pet horror, and this slow progress or even personal
annihilation sinks in my mind into insignificance compared with the idea
or rather I presume certainty of the sun some day cooling and we all
freezing. To think of the progress of millions of years, with every
continent swarming with good and enlightened men, all ending in this,
and with probably no fresh start until this our planetary system has
been again converted into red-hot gas. Sic transit gloria mundi, with a
vengeance...


LETTER 186. TO B.D. WALSH. Down, March 27th [1865].

I have been much interested by your letter. I received your former
paper on Phytophagic variety (186/1. For "Phytophagic Varieties and
Phytophagic Species" see "Proc. Entomolog. Soc. Philadelphia," November
1864, page 403, also December 1865. The part on gradation is summarised
at pages 427, 428. Walsh shows that a complete gradation exists between
species which are absolutely unaffected by change of food and cases
where "difference of food is accompanied by marked and constant
differences, either colorational, or structural, or both, in the larva,
pupa and imago states."), most of which was new to me. I have since
received your paper on willow-galls; this has been very opportune, as I
wanted to learn a little about galls. There was much in this paper which
has interested me extremely, on gradations, etc., and on your "unity
of coloration." (186/2. "Unity of coloration": this expression does not
seem to occur in the paper of November 1864, but is discussed at length
in that of December 1865, page 209.) This latter subject is nearly new
to me, though I collected many years ago some such cases with birds; but
what struck me most was when a bird genus inhabits two continents, the
two sections sometimes display a somewhat different type of colouring.
I should like to hear whether this does not occur with widely ranging
insect-genera? You may like to hear that Wichura (186/3. Max Wichura's
"Die Bastarde befruchtung im Pflanzenreich, etc:" Breslau 1865. A
translation appeared in the "Bibliotheque Universelle," xxiii., page
129: Geneva 1865.) has lately published a book which has quite convinced
me that in Europe there is a multitude of spontaneous hybrid willows.
Would it not be very interesting to know how the gall-makers behaved
with respect to these hybrids? Do you think it likely that the ancestor
of Cecidomyia acquired its poison like gnats (which suck men) for no
especial purpose (at least not for gall-making)? Such notions make me
wish that some one would try the experiments suggested in my former
letter. Is it not probable that guest-flies were aboriginally
gall-makers, and bear the same relation to them which Apathus probably
does to Bombus? (186/4. Apathus (= Psithyrus) lives in the nests of
Bombus. These insects are said to be so like humble bees that "they were
not distinguished from them by the early entomologists:" Dr. Sharp in
"Cambridge Nat. Hist. (Insects," Part II.), page 59.) With respect
to dimorphism, you may like to hear that Dr. Hooker tells me that
a dioecious parasitic plant allied to Rafflesia has its two sexes
parasitic on two distinct species of the same genus of plants; so look
out for some such case in the two forms of Cynips. I have posted to you
copies of my papers on dimorphism. Leersia (186/5. Leersia oryzoides
was for a long time thought to produce only cleistogamic and therefore
autogamous flowers. See "Variation of Animals and Plants," Edition II.,
Volume II., page 69.) does behave in a state of nature in the provoking
manner described by me. With respect to Wagner's curious discovery my
opinion is worth nothing; no doubt it is a great anomaly, but it does
not appear to me nearly so incredible as to you. Remember how allied
forms in the Hydrozoa differ in their so-called alternate generations;
I follow those naturalists who look at all such cases as forms of
gemmation; and a multitude of organisms have this power or traces
of this power at all ages from the germ to maturity. With respect to
Agassiz's views, there were many, and there are still not a few, who
believe that the same species is created on many spots. I wrote to
Bates, and he will send you his mimetic paper; and I dare say others: he
is a first-rate man.

Your case of the wingless insects near the Rocky Mountains is extremely
curious. I am sure I have heard of some such case in the Old World:
I think on the Caucasus. Would not my argument about wingless insular
insects perhaps apply to truly Alpine insects? for would it not be
destruction to them to be blown from their proper home? I should like to
write on many points at greater length to you, but I have no strength to
spare.


LETTER 187. TO A.R. WALLACE. Down, September 22nd [1865].

I am much obliged for your extract (187/1. Mr. Wallace had sent Darwin
a note about a tufted cock-blackbird, which transmitted the character
to some of its offspring.); I never heard of such a case, though such
a variation is perhaps the most likely of any to occur in a state of
nature, and to be inherited, inasmuch as all domesticated birds present
races with a tuft or with reversed feathers on their heads. I have
sometimes thought that the progenitor of the whole class must have been
a crested animal.

Do you make any progress with your journal of travels? I am the more
anxious that you should do so as I have lately read with much interest
some papers by you on the ourang-outan, etc., in the "Annals," of which
I have lately been reading the later volumes. I have always thought that
journals of this nature do considerable good by advancing the taste for
Natural History: I know in my own case that nothing ever stimulated my
zeal so much as reading Humboldt's "Personal Narrative." I have not yet
received the last part of the "Linnean Transactions," but your paper
(187/2. Probably on the variability and distribution of the butterflies
of the Malayan region: "Linn. Soc. Trans." XXV., 1866.) at present will
be rather beyond my strength, for though somewhat better, I can as yet
do hardly anything but lie on the sofa and be read aloud to. By the
way, have you read Tylor and Lecky? (187/3. Tylor, "Early History of
Mankind;" Lecky's "Rationalism.") Both these books have interested me
much. I suppose you have read Lubbock. (187/4. Lubbock, "Prehistoric
Times," page 479: "...the theory of Natural Selection, which with
characteristic unselfishness he ascribes unreservedly to Mr. Darwin.")
In the last chapter there is a note about you in which I most cordially
concur. I see you were at the British Association but I have heard
nothing of it except what I have picked up in the "Reader." I have heard
a rumour that the "Reader" is sold to the Anthropological Society. If
you do not begrudge the trouble of another note (for my sole channel of
news through Hooker is closed by his illness) I should much like to hear
whether the "Reader" is thus sold. I should be very sorry for it, as the
paper would thus become sectional in its tendency. If you write, tell
me what you are doing yourself. The only news which I have about the
"Origin" is that Fritz Muller published a few months ago a remarkable
book (187/5. "Fur Darwin.") in its favour, and secondly that a second
French edition is just coming out.


LETTER 188. TO F. MULLER. Down, January 11th [1866].

I received your interesting letter of November 5th some little time ago,
and despatched immediately a copy of my "Journal of Researches." I
fear you will think me troublesome in my offer; but have you the second
German edition of the "Origin?" which is a translation, with additions,
of the third English edition, and is, I think, considerably improved
compared with the first edition. I have some spare copies which are of
no use to me, and it would be a pleasure to me to send you one, if it
would be of any use to you. You would never require to re-read the book,
but you might wish to refer to some passage. I am particularly obliged
for your photograph, for one likes to have a picture in one's mind of
any one about whom one is interested. I have received and read with
interest your paper on the sponge with horny spicula. (188/1. "Ueber
Darwinella aurea, einen Schwamm mit sternformigen Hornnadeln."--"Archiv.
Mikrosk. Anat." I., page 57, 1866.) Owing to ill-health, and being
busy when formerly well, I have for some years neglected periodical
scientific literature, and have lately been reading up, and have thus
read translations of several of your papers; amongst which I have been
particularly glad to read and see the drawings of the metamorphoses
of Peneus. (188/2. "On the Metamorphoses of the Prawns," by Dr. Fritz
Muller.--"Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist." Volume XIV., page 104 (with plate),
1864. Translated by W.S. Dallas from "Wiegmann's Archiv," 1863 (see also
"Facts and Arguments for Darwin," passim, translated by W.S. Dallas:
London, 1869).) This seems to me the most interesting discovery in
embryology which has been made for years.

I am much obliged to you for telling me a little of your plans for the
future; what a strange, but to my taste interesting life you will lead
when you retire to your estate on the Itajahy!

You refer in your letter to the facts which Agassiz is collecting,
against our views, on the Amazons. Though he has done so much for
science, he seems to me so wild and paradoxical in all his views that I
cannot regard his opinions as of any value.


LETTER 189. TO A.R. WALLACE. Down, January 22nd, 1866.

I thank you for your paper on pigeons (189/1. "On the Pigeons of the
Malay Archipelago" (The "Ibis," October, 1865). Mr. Wallace points out
(page 366) that "the most striking superabundance of pigeons, as well
as of parrots, is confined to the Australo-Malayan sub-region in
which...the forest-haunting and fruit-eating mammals, such as monkeys
and squirrels, are totally absent." He points out also that monkeys are
"exceedingly destructive to eggs and young birds."), which interested
me, as everything that you write does. Who would ever have dreamed that
monkeys influenced the distribution of pigeons and parrots! But I have
had a still higher satisfaction, for I finished your paper yesterday in
the "Linnean Transactions." (189/2. "Linn. Soc. Trans." XXV.: a paper
on the geographical distribution and variability of the Malayan
Papilionidae.) It is admirably done. I cannot conceive that the most
firm believer in species could read it without being staggered. Such
papers will make many more converts among naturalists than long-winded
books such as I shall write if I have strength. I have been particularly
struck with your remarks on dimorphism; but I cannot quite understand
one point (page 22), (189/3. The passage referred to in this letter as
needing further explanation is the following: "The last six cases of
mimicry are especially instructive, because they seem to indicate one of
the processes by which dimorphic forms have been produced. When, as in
these cases, one sex differs much from the other, and varies greatly
itself, it may happen that individual variations will occasionally
occur, having a distant resemblance to groups which are the objects
of mimicry, and which it is therefore advantageous to resemble. Such
a variety will have a better chance of preservation; the individuals
possessing it will be multiplied; and their accidental likeness to the
favoured group will be rendered permanent by hereditary transmission,
and each successive variation which increases the resemblance being
preserved, and all variations departing from the favoured type having
less chance of preservation, there will in time result those singular
cases of two or more isolated and fixed forms bound together by that
intimate relationship which constitutes them the sexes of a single
species. The reason why the females are more subject to this kind of
modification than the males is, probably, that their slower flight,
when laden with eggs, and their exposure to attack while in the act of
depositing their eggs upon leaves, render it especially advantageous
for them to have some additional protection. This they at once obtain
by acquiring a resemblance to other species which, from whatever cause,
enjoy a comparative immunity from persecution." Mr. Wallace has been
good enough to give us the following note on the above passage: "The
above quotation deals solely with the question of how certain females
of the polymorphic species (Papilio Memnon, P. Pammon, and others) have
been so modified as to mimic species of a quite distinct section of
the genus; but it does not attempt to explain why or how the other very
variable types of female arose, and this was Darwin's difficulty. As
the letter I wrote in reply is lost, and as it is rather difficult to
explain the matter clearly without reference to the coloured figures,
I must go into some little detail, and give now what was probably the
explanation I gave at the time. The male of Papilio Memnon is a large
black butterfly with the nervures towards the margins of the wings
bordered with bluish gray dots. It is a forest insect, and the very
dark colour renders it conspicuous; but it is a strong flier, and thus
survives. To the female, however, this conspicuous mass of colour
would be dangerous, owing to her slower flight, and the necessity for
continually resting while depositing her eggs on the leaves of the
food-plant of the larva. She has accordingly acquired lighter and more
varied tints. The marginal gray-dotted stripes of the male have become
of a brownish ash and much wider on the fore wings, while the margin
of the hind wings is yellowish, with a more defined spot near the
anal angle. This is the form most nearly like the male, but it is
comparatively rare, the more common being much lighter in colour, the
bluish gray of the hind wings being often entirely replaced by a broad
band of yellowish white. The anal angle is orange-yellow, and there is
a bright red spot at the base of the fore wings. Between these two
extremes there is every possible variation. Now, it is quite certain
that this varying mixture of brown, black, white, yellow, and red is far
less conspicuous amid the ever-changing hues of the forest with their
glints of sunshine everywhere penetrating so as to form strong contrasts
and patches of light and shade. Hence ALL the females--one at one time
and one at another--get SOME protection, and that is sufficient to
enable them to live long enough to lay their eggs, when their work is
finished. Still, under bad conditions they only just managed to
survive, and as the colouring of some of these varying females very
much resembled that of the protected butterflies of the P. coon
group (perhaps at a time when the tails of the latter were not fully
developed) any rudiments of a prolongation of the wing into a tail added
to the protective resemblance, and was therefore preserved. The woodcuts
of some of these forms in my "Malay Archipelago" (i., page 200) will
enable those who have this book at hand better to understand the
foregoing explanation."), and should be grateful for an explanation, for
I want fully to understand you. How can one female form be selected and
the intermediate forms die out, without also the other extreme form also
dying out from not having the advantages of the first selected form?
for, as I understand, both female forms occur on the same island. I
quite agree with your distinction between dimorphic forms and varieties;
but I doubt whether your criterion of dimorphic forms not producing
intermediate offspring will suffice, for I know of a good many varieties
which must be so called that will not blend or intermix, but produce
offspring quite like either parent.

I have been particularly struck with your remarks on geographical
distribution in Celebes. It is impossible that anything could be better
put, and would give a cold shudder to the immutable naturalists.

And now I am going to ask a question which you will not like. How does
your journal get on? It will be a shame if you do not popularise your
researches.


LETTER 190. A.R. WALLACE TO CHARLES DARWIN. Hurstpierpoint, Sussex, July
2nd, 1866.

I have been so repeatedly struck by the utter inability of numbers
of intelligent persons to see clearly, or at all, the self-acting and
necessary effects of Natural Selection, that I am led to conclude that
the term itself, and your mode of illustrating it, however clear and
beautiful to many of us, are yet not the best adapted to impress it
on the general naturalist public. The two last cases of the
misunderstanding are: (1) the article on "Darwin and his Teachings" in
the last "Quarterly Journal of Science," which, though very well written
and on the whole appreciative, yet concludes with a charge of something
like blindness, in your not seeing that Natural Selection requires the
constant watching of an intelligent "chooser," like man's selection to
which you so often compare it; and (2) in Janet's recent work on the
"Materialism of the Present Day," reviewed in last Saturday's "Reader,"
by an extract from which I see that he considers your weak point to be
that you do not see that "thought and direction are essential to the
action of Natural Selection." The same objection has been made a score
of times by your chief opponents, and I have heard it as often stated
myself in conversation. Now, I think this arises almost entirely from
your choice of the term "Natural Selection" and so constantly comparing
it in its effects to Man's Selection, and also your so frequently
personifying nature as "selecting," as "preferring," as "seeking only
the good of the species," etc., etc. To the few this is as clear as
daylight, and beautifully suggestive, but to many it is evidently a
stumbling-block. I wish, therefore, to suggest to you the possibility
of entirely avoiding this source of misconception in your great work (if
not now too late), and also in any future editions of the "Origin,"
and I think it may be done without difficulty and very effectually
by adopting Spencer's term (which he generally uses in preference to
Natural Selection)--viz., "survival of the fittest."

This term is the plain expression of the fact; Natural Selection is
a metaphorical expression of it, and to a certain degree indirect and
incorrect, since, even personifying Nature, she does not so much select
special variations as exterminate the most unfavourable ones.

Combined with the enormous multiplying powers of all organisms, and the
"struggle for existence" leading to the constant destruction of by far
the largest proportion--facts which no one of your opponents, as far as
I am aware, has denied or misunderstood--"the survival of the fittest"
rather than of those who were less fit could not possibly be denied or
misunderstood. Neither would it be possible to say that to ensure the
"survival of the fittest" any intelligent chooser was necessary; whereas
when you say Natural Selection acts so as to choose those that are
fittest, it IS misunderstood, and apparently always will be. Referring
to your book, I find such expressions as "Man selects only for his
own good; Nature only for that of the being which she tends." This, it
seems, will always be misunderstood; but if you had said "Man selects
only for his own good; Nature, by the inevitable 'survival of the
fittest,' only for that of the being she tends," it would have been less
liable to be so.

I find you use the term "Natural Selection" in two senses: (1) for
the simple preservation of favourable and rejection of unfavourable
variations, in which case it is equivalent to "survival of the fittest";
and (2) for the effect or change produced by this preservation, as when
you say, "To sum up the circumstances favourable or unfavourable to
Natural Selection," and again, "Isolation, also, is an important element
in the process of Natural Selection." Here it is not merely "survival
of the fittest," but change produced by survival of the fittest, that
is meant. On looking over your fourth chapter, I find that these
alterations of terms can be in most cases easily made, while in some
cases the addition of "or survival of the fittest" after "Natural
Selection" would be best; and in others, less likely to be
misunderstood, the original term may stand alone.

I could not venture to propose to any other person so great an
alteration of terms, but you, I am sure, will give it an impartial
consideration, and if you really think the change will produce a better
understanding of your work, will not hesitate to adopt it.

It is evidently also necessary not to personify "Nature" too
much--though I am very apt to do it myself--since people will not
understand that all such phrases are metaphors. Natural Selection is,
when understood, so necessary and self-evident a principle, that it is a
pity it should be in any way obscured; and it therefore seems to me
that the free use of "survival of the fittest," which is a compact and
accurate definition of it, would tend much to its being more widely
accepted, and prevent it being so much misrepresented and misunderstood.

There is another objection made by Janet which is also a very common
one. It is that the chances are almost infinite against the particular
kind of variation required being coincident with each change of external
conditions, to enable an animal to become modified by Natural Selection
in harmony with such changed conditions; especially when we consider
that, to have produced the almost infinite modifications of organic
beings, this coincidence must have taken place an almost infinite number
of times.

Now, it seems to me that you have yourself led to this objection being
made, by so often stating the case too strongly against yourself. For
example, at the commencement of Chapter IV. you ask if it is "improbable
that useful variations should sometimes occur in the course of thousands
of generations"; and a little further on you say, "unless profitable
variations do occur, Natural Selection can do nothing." Now, such
expressions have given your opponents the advantage of assuming that
favourable variations are rare accidents, or may even for long periods
never occur at all, and thus Janet's argument would appear to many to
have great force. I think it would be better to do away with all such
qualifying expressions, and constantly maintain (what I certainly
believe to be the fact) that variations of every kind are always
occurring in every part of every species, and therefore that favourable
variations are always ready when wanted. You have, I am sure, abundant
materials to prove this; and it is, I believe, the grand fact that
renders modification and adaptation to conditions almost always
possible. I would put the burthen of proof on my opponents to show that
any one organ, structure, or faculty does not vary, even during one
generation, among all the individuals of a species; and also to show any
mode or way in which any such organ, etc., does not vary. I would ask
them to give any reason for supposing that any organ, etc., is ever
absolutely identical at any one time in all the individuals of a
species, and if not then it is always varying, and there are always
materials which, from the simple fact that "the fittest survive,"
will tend to the modification of the race into harmony with changed
conditions.

I hope these remarks may be intelligible to you, and that you will be so
kind as to let me know what you think of them.

I have not heard for some time how you are getting on. I hope you are
still improving in health, and that you will now be able to get on with
your great work, for which so many thousands are looking with interest.


LETTER 191. TO A.R. WALLACE.

(191/1. From "Life and Letters," III., page 45.)

Down, July 5th [1866].

I have been much interested by your letter, which is as clear as
daylight. I fully agree with all that you say on the advantages of H.
Spencer's excellent expression of "the survival of the fittest."
This, however, had not occurred to me till reading your letter. It is,
however, a great objection to this term that it cannot be used as a
substantive governing a verb; and that this is a real objection I
infer from H. Spencer continually using the words Natural Selection. I
formerly thought, probably in an exaggerated degree, that it was a great
advantage to bring into connection natural and artificial selection;
this indeed led me to use a term in common, and I still think it some
advantage. I wish I had received your letter two months ago, for I would
have worked in "the survival," etc., often in the new edition of the
"Origin," which is now almost printed off, and of which I will of
course send you a copy. I will use the term in my next book on domestic
animals, etc., from which, by the way, I plainly see that you expect
MUCH too much. The term Natural Selection has now been so largely used
abroad and at home that I doubt whether it could be given up, and with
all its faults I should be sorry to see the attempt made. Whether it
will be rejected must now depend "on the survival of the fittest." As in
time the term must grow intelligible the objections to its use will grow
weaker and weaker. I doubt whether the use of any term would have made
the subject intelligible to some minds, clear as it is to others; for
do we not see even to the present day Malthus on Population absurdly
misunderstood? This reflection about Malthus has often comforted me when
I have been vexed at this misstatement of my views. As for M. Janet, he
is a metaphysician, and such gentlemen are so acute that I think they
often misunderstand common folk. Your criticism on the double sense in
which I have used Natural Selection is new to me and unanswerable;
but my blunder has done no harm, for I do not believe that any one,
excepting you, has ever observed it. Again, I agree that I have said too
much about "favourable variations," but I am inclined to think that you
put the opposite side too strongly: if every part of every being varied,
I do not think we should see the same end or object gained by such
wonderfully diversified means.

I hope you are enjoying the country, and are in good health, and are
working hard at your "Malay Archipelago" book, for I will always put
this wish in every note I write to you, as some good people always put
in a text. My health keeps much the same, or rather improves, and I am
able to work some hours daily.


LETTER 192. TO C. LYELL. Down, October 9th [1866].

One line to say that I have received your note and the proofs safely,
and will read them with the greatest pleasure; but I am certain I shall
not be able to send any criticism on the astronomical chapter (192/1.
"Principles of Geology," by Sir Charles Lyell; Edition X., London, 1867.
Chapter XIII. deals with "Vicissitudes in Climate how far influenced
by Astronomical Causes."), as I am as ignorant as a pig on this head.
I shall require some days to read what has been sent. I have just read
Chapter IX. (192/2. Chapter IX., "Theory of the Progressive Development
of Organic Life at Successive Geological Periods."), and like it
extremely; it all seems to me very clear, cautious, and sagacious. You
do not allude to one very striking point enough, or at all--viz., the
classes having been formerly less differentiated than they now are;
and this specialisation of classes must, we may conclude, fit them
for different general habits of life as well as the specialisation of
particular organs.

Page 162 (192/3. On page 163 Lyell refers to the absence of Cetacea
in Secondary rocks, and expresses the opinion that their absence "is a
negative fact of great significance, which seems more than any other to
render it highly improbable that we shall ever find air-breathers of
the highest class in any of the Primary strata, or in any of the older
members of the Secondary series.") I rather demur to your argument from
Cetacea: as they are such greatly modified mammals, they ought to have
come in rather later in the series. You will think me rather impudent,
but the discussion at the end of Chapter IX. on man (192/4. Loc. cit.,
pages 167-73, "Introduction of Man, to what extent a Change of the
System."), who thinks so much of his fine self, seems to me too long, or
rather superfluous, and too orthodox, except for the beneficed clergy.


LETTER 193. TO V. CARUS.

(193/1. The following letter refers to the 4th edition of the "Origin,"
1866, which was translated by Professor Carus, and formed the 3rd German
edition. Carus continued to translate Darwin's books, and a strong
bond of friendship grew up between author and translator (see "Life and
Letters," III., page 48). Nageli's pamphlet was first noticed in the 5th
English edition.)

Down, November 21st, 1866.

...With respect to a note on Nageli (193/2. "Entstehung und Begriff der
Naturhistorischen Art," an Address given before the Royal Academy of
Sciences at Munich, March 28th, 1865. See "Life and Letters," III.,
page 50, for Mr. Darwin's letter to the late Prof. Nageli.) I find on
consideration it would be too long; for so good a pamphlet ought to be
discussed at full length or not at all. He makes a mistake in supposing
that I say that useful characters are always constant. His view about
distinct species converging and acquiring the same identical structure
is by implication answered in the discussion which I have given on the
endless diversity of means for gaining the same end.

The most important point, as it seems to me, in the pamphlet is that on
the morphological characters of plants, and I find I could not answer
this without going into much detail.

The answer would be, as it seems to me, that important morphological
characters, such as the position of the ovules and the relative position
of the stamens to the ovarium (hypogynous, perigynous, etc.) are
sometimes variable in the same species, as I incidentally mention when
treating of the ray-florets in the Compositae and Umbelliferae; and I
do not see how Nageli could maintain that differences in such characters
prove an inherent tendency towards perfection. I see that I have
forgotten to say that you have my fullest consent to append any
discussion which you may think fit to the new edition. As for myself I
cannot believe in spontaneous generation, and though I expect that at
some future time the principle of life will be rendered intelligible, at
present it seems to me beyond the confines of science.


LETTER 194. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, December 22nd [1866?].

I suppose that you have received Hackel's book (194/1. "Generelle
Morphologie," 1866.) some time ago, as I have done. Whenever you have
had time to read through some of it, enough to judge by, I shall be very
curious to hear your judgment. I have been able to read a page or two
here and there, and have been interested and instructed by parts. But my
vague impression is that too much space is given to methodical details,
and I can find hardly any facts or detailed new views. The number of new
words, to a man like myself, weak in his Greek, is something dreadful.
He seems to have a passion for defining, I daresay very well, and for
coining new words. From my very vague notions on the book, and from its
immense size, I should fear a translation was out of the question. I see
he often quotes both of us with praise. I am sure I should like the book
much, if I could read it straight off instead of groaning and swearing
at each sentence. I have not yet had time to read your Physiology
(194/2. "Lessons in Elementary Physiology," 1866.) book, except one
chapter; but I have just re-read your book on "Man's Place, etc.," and
I think I admire it more this second time even than the first. I doubt
whether you will ever have time, but if ever you have, do read the
chapter on hybridism in the new edition of the "Origin" (194/3. Fourth
Edition (1866).), for I am very anxious to make you think less seriously
on that difficulty. I have improved the chapter a good deal, I think,
and have come to more definite views. Asa Gray and Fritz Muller (the
latter especially) think that the new facts on illegitimate offspring of
dimorphic plants, throw much indirect light on the subject. Now that
I have worked up domestic animals, I am convinced of the truth of
the Pallasian (194/4. See Letter 80.) view of loss of sterility under
domestication, and this seems to me to explain much. But I had no
intention, when I began this note, of running on at such length on
hybridism; but you have been Objector-General on this head.


LETTER 195. TO T. RIVERS.

(195/1. For another letter of Mr. Darwin's to him see "Life and
Letters," III., page 57.)

Down, December 23rd [1866?].

I do not know whether you will forgive a stranger addressing you.
My name may possibly be known to you. I am now writing a book on the
variation of animals and plants under domestication; and there is one
little piece of information which it is more likely that you could give
me than any man in the world, if you can spare half an hour from your
professional labours, and are inclined to be so kind. I am collecting
all accounts of what some call "sports," that is, of what I shall call
"bud-variations," i.e. a moss-rose suddenly appearing on a Provence
rose--a nectarine on a peach, etc. Now, what I want to know, and
which is not likely to be recorded in print, is whether very slight
differences, too slight to be worth propagating, thus appear suddenly
by buds. As every one knows, in raising seedlings you may have every
gradation from individuals identical with the parent, to slight
varieties, to strongly marked varieties. Now, does this occur with
buds or do only rather strongly marked varieties thus appear at rare
intervals of time by buds? (195/2. Mr. Rivers could not give a decided
answer, but he did not remember to have seen slight bud-variations. The
question is discussed in "Variation under Domestication," Edition II.,
Volume I., page 443.) I should be most grateful for information. I may
add that if you have observed in your enormous experience any remarkable
"bud-variations," and could spare time to inform me, and allow me to
quote them on your authority, it would be the greatest favour. I
feel sure that these "bud-variations" are most interesting to any one
endeavouring to make out what little can be made out on the obscure
subject of variation.


LETTER 196. TO T. RIVERS. Down, January 7th [1867?].

I thank you much for your letter and the parcel of shoots. The case
of the yellow plum is a treasure, and is now safely recorded on your
authority in its proper place, in contrast with A. Knight's case of
the yellow magnum bonum sporting into red. (196/1. See "Variation
under Domestication," Edition II., Volume I., page 399.) I could see no
difference in the shoots, except that those of the yellow were thicker,
and I presume that this is merely accidental: as you do not mention it,
I further presume that there are no further differences in leaves or
flowers of the two plums. I am very glad to hear about the yellow ash,
and that you yourself have seen the jessamine case. I must confess that
I hardly fully believed in it; but now I do, and very surprising it is.

In an old French book, published in Amsterdam in 1786 (I think), there
is an account, apparently authentic and attested by the writer as an
eye-witness, of hyacinth bulbs of two colours being cut in two and
grafted, and they sent up single stalks with differently coloured
flowers on the two sides, and some flowers parti-coloured. I once
thought of offering 5 pounds reward in the "Cottage Gardener" for such a
plant; but perhaps it would seem too foolish. No instructions are given
when to perform the operation; I have tried two or three times, and
utterly failed. I find that I have a grand list of "bud-variations," and
to-morrow shall work up such cases as I have about rose-sports, which
seem very numerous, and which I see you state to occur comparatively
frequently.

When a person is very good-natured he gets much pestered--a discovery
which I daresay you have made, or anyhow will soon make; for I do want
very much to know whether you have sown seed of any moss-roses, and
whether the seedlings were moss-roses. (196/2. Moss-roses can be raised
from seed ("Variation under Domestication," Edition II., Volume I., page
405.) Has a common rose produced by SEED a moss-rose?

If any light comes to you about very slight changes in the buds, pray
have the kindness to illuminate me. I have cases of seven or eight
varieties of the peach which have produced by "bud-variation"
nectarines, and yet only one single case (in France) of a peach
producing another closely similar peach (but later in ripening). How
strange it is that a great change in the peach should occur not rarely
and slighter changes apparently very rarely! How strange that no case
seems recorded of new apples or pears or apricots by "bud-variation"!
How ignorant we are! But with the many good observers now living our
children's children will be less ignorant, and that is a comfort.


LETTER 197. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, January 7th [1867].

Very many thanks for your letter, which has told me exactly what I
wanted to know. I shall give up all thoughts of trying to get the book
(197/1. Hackel's "Generelle Morphologie," 1866. See "Life and Letters,"
III., pages 67, 68.) translated, for I am well convinced that it would
be hopeless without too great an outlay. I much regret this, as I should
think the work would be useful, and I am sure it would be to me, as I
shall never be able to wade through more than here and there a page of
the original. To all people I cannot but think that the number of new
terms would be a great evil. I must write to him. I suppose you know
his address, but in case you do not, it is "to care of Signor Nicolaus
Krohn, Madeira." I have sent the MS. of my big book (197/2. "The
Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication," 1868.), and
horridly, disgustingly big it will be, to the printers, but I do not
suppose it will be published, owing to Murray's idea on seasons, till
next November. I am thinking of a chapter on Man, as there has lately
been so much said on Natural Selection in relation to man. I have not
seen the Duke's (or Dukelet's? how can you speak so of a living real
Duke?) book, but must get it from Mudie, as you say he attacks us.
(197/3. "The Reign of Law" (1867), by the late Duke of Argyll. See "Life
and Letters," III., page 65.)

P.S.--Nature never made species mutually sterile by selection, nor will
men.


LETTER 197. TO E. HACKEL. Down, January 8th [1867].

I received some weeks ago your great work (198/1. "Generelle
Morphologie," 1866.); I have read several parts, but I am too poor a
German scholar and the book is too large for me to read it all. I cannot
tell you how much I regret this, for I am sure that nearly the whole
would interest me greatly, and I have already found several parts very
useful, such as the discussion on cells and on the different forms of
reproduction. I feel sure, after considering the subject deliberately
and after consulting with Huxley, that it would be hopeless to endeavour
to get a publisher to print an English translation; the work is too
profound and too long for our English countrymen. The number of new
terms would also, I am sure, tell much against its sale; and, indeed,
I wish for my own sake that you had printed a glossary of all the
new terms which you use. I fully expect that your book will be highly
successful in Germany, and the manner in which you often refer to me in
your text, and your dedication and the title, I shall always look at as
one of the greatest honours conferred on me during my life. (198/2. As
regards the dedication and title this seems a strong expression. The
title is "Generelle Morphologie der Organismen. Allgemeine Grundzuge
der organischen Formen-Wissenschaft mechanisch begrundet durch die von
Charles Darwin reformirte Descendenz-Theorie." The dedication of the
second volume is "Den Begrundern der Descendenz-Theorie, den denkenden
Naturforschern, Charles Darwin, Wolfgang Goethe, Jean Lamarck widmet
diese Grundzuge der Allgemeinen Entwickelungsgeschichte in vorzuglicher
Verehrung, der Verfasser.")

I sincerely hope that you have had a prosperous expedition, and have met
with many new and interesting animals. If you have spare time I should
much like to hear what you have been doing and observing. As for
myself, I have sent the MS. of my book on domestic animals, etc., to the
printers. It turns out to be much too large; it will not be published,
I suppose, until next November. I find that we have discussed several
of the same subjects, and I think we agree on most points fairly well.
I have lately heard several times from Fritz Muller, but he seems now
chiefly to be working on plants. I often think of your visit to this
house, which I enjoyed extremely, and it will ever be to me a real
pleasure to remember our acquaintance. From what I heard in London I
think you made many friends there. Shall you return through England?
If so, and you can spare the time, we shall all be delighted to see you
here again.


LETTER 199. TO T. RIVERS. Down, January 11th [1867?].

How rich and valuable a letter you have most kindly sent me! The case
of Baronne Prevost (199/1. See "Variation under Domestication," Edition
II., Volume I., page 406. Mr. Rivers had a new French rose with a
delicate smooth stem, pale glaucous leaves and striped flesh-coloured
flowers; on branches thus characterised there appeared "the famous old
rose called 'Baronne Prevost,'" with its stout thorny stem and uniform
rich-coloured double flowers.), with its different shoots, foliage,
spines, and flowers, will be grand to quote. I am extremely glad to hear
about the seedling moss-roses. That case of a seedling like a Scotch
rose, unless you are sure that no Scotch rose grew near (and it is
unlikely that you can remember), must, one would think, have been a
cross.

I have little compunction for being so troublesome--not more than a
grand Inquisitor has in torturing a heretic--for am I not doing a real
good public service in screwing crumbs of knowledge out of your wealth
of information?

P.S. Since the above was written I have read your paper in the
"Gardeners' Chronicle": it is admirable, and will, I know, be a treasure
to me. I did not at all know how strictly the character of so many
flowers is inherited.

On my honour, when I began this note I had no thought of troubling you
with a question; but you mention one point so interesting, and which I
have had occasion to notice, that I must supplicate for a few more facts
to quote on your authority. You say that you have one or two seedling
peaches (199/2. "On raising Peaches, Nectarines, and other Fruits from
Seed." By Thomas Rivers, Sawbridgeworth.--"Gard. Chron." 1866, page
731.) approaching very nearly to thick-fleshed almonds (I know about A.
Knight and the Italian hybrid cases). Now, did any almond grow near your
mother peach? But especially I want to know whether you remember what
shape the stone was, whether flattened like that of an almond; this,
botanically, seems the most important distinction. I earnestly wish to
quote this. Was the flesh at all sweet?

Forgive if you can.

Have you kept these seedling peaches? if you would give me next summer a
fruit, I want to have it engraved.


LETTER 200. TO I. ANDERSON-HENRY. May 22nd [1867].

You are so kind as to offer to lend me Maillet's (200/1. For De Maillet
see Mr. Huxley's review on "The Origin of Species" in the "Westminster
Review," 1860, reprinted in "Lay Sermons," 1870, page 314. De Maillet's
evolutionary views were published after his death in 1748 under the name
of Telliamed (De Maillet spelt backwards).) work, which I have often
heard of, but never seen. I should like to have a look at it, and would
return it to you in a short time. I am bound to read it, as my former
friend and present bitter enemy Owen generally ranks me and Maillet as a
pair of equal fools.


LETTER 201. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, April 4th [1867].

You have done me a very great service in sending me the pages of the
"Farmer." I do not know whether you wish it returned; but I will keep
it unless I hear that you want it. Old I. Anderson-Henry passes a
magnificent but rather absurd eulogium on me; but the point of such
extreme value in my eyes is Mr. Traill's (201/1. Mr. Traill's results
are given at page 420 of "Animals and Plants," Edition II., Volume I.
In the "Life and Letters of G.J. Romanes," 1896, an interesting
correspondence is published with Mr. Darwin on this subject. The plan
of the experiments suggested to Romanes was to raise seedlings from
graft-hybrids: if the seminal offspring of plants hybridised by grafting
should show the hybrid character, it would be striking evidence in
favour of pangenesis. The experiment, however, did not succeed.)
statement that he made a mottled mongrel by cutting eyes through
and joining two kinds of potatoes. (201/2. For an account of similar
experiments now in progress, see a "Note on some Grafting Experiments"
by R. Biffen in the "Annals of Botany," Volume XVI., page 174, 1902.) I
have written to him for full information, and then I will set to work
on a similar trial. It would prove, I think, to demonstration that
propagation by buds and by the sexual elements are essentially the same
process, as pangenesis in the most solemn manner declares to be the
case.


LETTER 202. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, June 12th [1867?].

We come up on Saturday, the 15th, for a week. I want much to see you for
a short time to talk about my youngest boy and the School of Mines. I
know it is rather unreasonable, but you must let me come a little after
10 o'clock on Sunday morning, the 16th. If in any way inconvenient, send
me a line to "6, Queen Anne Street W.,"; but if I do not hear, I will
(stomacho volente) call, but I will not stay very long and spoil your
whole morning as a holiday. Will you turn two or three times in your
mind this question: what I called "pangenesis" means that each cell
throws off an atom of its contents or a gemmule, and that these
aggregated form the true ovule or bud, etc.? Now I want to know
whether I could not invent a better word. "Cyttarogenesis" (202/1. From
kuttaros, a bee's-cell: cytogenesis would be a natural form of the word
from kutos.)--i.e. cell-genesis--is more true and expressive, but long.
"Atomogenesis" sounds rather better, I think, but an "atom" is an object
which cannot be divided; and the term might refer to the origin of
atoms of inorganic matter. I believe I like "pangenesis" best, though
so indefinite; and though my wife says it sounds wicked, like pantheism;
but I am so familiar now with this word, that I cannot judge. I
supplicate you to help me.


LETTER 203. TO A.R. WALLACE. Down, October, 12th and 13th [1867].

I ordered the journal (203/1. "Quarterly Journal of Science," October,
1867, page 472. A review of the Duke of Argyll's "Reign of Law.") a long
time ago, but by some oversight received it only yesterday, and read it.
You will think my praise not worth having, from being so indiscriminate;
but if I am to speak the truth, I must say I admire every word. You have
just touched on the points which I particularly wished to see noticed.
I am glad you had the courage to take up Angraecum (203/2. Angraecum
sesquipedale, a Madagascan orchid, with a whiplike nectary, 11 to
12 inches in length, which, according to Darwin ("Fertilisation of
Orchids," Edition II., page 163), is adapted to the visits of a moth
with a proboscis of corresponding length. He points out that there is no
difficulty in believing in the existence of such a moth as F. Muller
has described ("Nature," 1873, page 223)--a Brazilian sphinx-moth with a
trunk of 10 to 11 inches in length. Moreover, Forbes has given evidence
to show that such an insect does exist in Madagascar ("Nature," VIII.,
1873, page 121). The case of Angraecum was put forward by the Duke
of Argyll as being necessarily due to the personal contrivance of the
Deity. Mr. Wallace (page 476) shows that both proboscis and nectary
might be increased in length by means of Natural Selection. It may be
added that Hermann Muller has shown good grounds for believing that
mutual specialisation of this kind is beneficial both to insect and
plant.) after the Duke's attack; for I believe the principle in this
case may be widely applied. I like the figure, but I wish the artist had
drawn a better sphinx. With respect to beauty, your remarks on hideous
objects and on flowers not being made beautiful except when of practical
use to them, strike me as very good. On this one point of beauty I
can hardly think that the Duke was quite candid. I have used in the
concluding paragraph of my present book precisely the same argument as
you have, even bringing in the bull-dog (203/3. "Variation of Animals
and Plants," Edition I., Volume II., page 431: "Did He cause the frame
and mental qualities of the dog to vary in order that a breed might be
formed of indomitable ferocity, with jaws fitted to pin down the bull
for man's brutal sport?"), with respect to variations not having been
specially ordained. Your metaphor of the river (203/4. See Wallace,
op. cit., pages 477-8. He imagines an observer examining a great
river-system, and finding everywhere adaptations which reveal the design
of the Creator. "He would see special adaptation to the wants of man
in broad, quiet, navigable rivers, through fertile alluvial plains that
would support a large population, while the rocky streams and mountain
torrents were confined to those sterile regions suitable only for
a small population of shepherds and herdsmen.') is new to me, and
admirable; but your other metaphor, in which you compare classification
and complex machines, does not seem to me quite appropriate, though
I cannot point out what seems deficient. The point which seems to
me strong is that all naturalists admit that there is a natural
classification, and it is this which descent explains. I wish you had
insisted a little more against the "North British" (203/5. At page 485
Mr. Wallace deals with Fleeming Jenkin's review in the "North British
Review," 1867. The review strives to show that there are strict limits
to variation, since the most rigorous and long-continued selection
does not indefinitely increase such a quality as the fleetness of a
racehorse. On this Mr. Wallace remarks that "this argument fails to meet
the real question," which is, not whether indefinite change is possible,
"but whether such differences as do occur in nature could have been
produced by the accumulation of variations by selection.") on the
reviewer assuming that each variation which appears is a strongly marked
one; though by implication you have made this very plain. Nothing in
your whole article has struck me more than your view with respect to the
limit of fleetness in the racehorse and other such cases: I shall try
and quote you on this head in the proof of my concluding chapter. I
quite missed this explanation, though in the case of wheat I hit upon
something analogous. I am glad you praise the Duke's book, for I was
much struck with it. The part about flight seemed to me at first very
good; but as the wing is articulated by a ball-and-socket joint, I
suspect the Duke would find it very difficult to give any reason against
the belief that the wing strikes the air more or less obliquely. I have
been very glad to see your article and the drawing of the butterfly
in "Science Gossip." By the way, I cannot but think that you push
protection too far in some cases, as with the stripes on the tiger. I
have also this morning read an excellent abstract in the "Gardeners'
Chronicle" of your paper on nests. (203/6. An abstract of a paper on
"Birds' Nests and Plumage," read before the British Association: see
"Gard. Chron." 1867, page 1047.) I was not by any means fully converted
by your letter, but I think now I am so; and I hope it will be published
somewhere in extenso. It strikes me as a capital generalisation, and
appears to me even more original than it did at first...

I have finished Volume I. of my book ["Variation of Animals and
Plants"], and I hope the whole will be out by the end of November. If
you have the patience to read it through, which is very doubtful, you
will find, I think, a large accumulation of facts which will be of
service to you in future papers; and they could not be put to better
use, for you certainly are a master in the noble art of reasoning.


LETTER 204. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, October 3rd [no date].

I know you have no time for speculative correspondence; and I did not
in the least expect an answer to my last. But I am very glad to have
had it, for in my eclectic work the opinions of the few good men are of
great value to me.

I knew, of course, of the Cuvierian view of classification (204/1.
Cuvier proved that "animals cannot be arranged in a single series, but
that there are several distinct plans of organisation to be observed
among them, no one of which, in its highest and most complicated
modification, leads to any of the others" (Huxley's "Darwiniana," page
215).); but I think that most naturalists look for something further,
and search for "the natural system,"--"for the plan on which the Creator
has worked," etc., etc. It is this further element which I believe to be
simply genealogical.

But I should be very glad to have your answer (either when we meet or by
note) to the following case, taken by itself, and not allowing yourself
to look any further than to the point in question. Grant all races of
man descended from one race--grant that all the structure of each race
of man were perfectly known--grant that a perfect table of the descent
of each race was perfectly known--grant all this, and then do you not
think that most would prefer as the best classification, a genealogical
one, even if it did occasionally put one race not quite so near to
another, as it would have stood, if collocated by structure alone?
Generally, we may safely presume, that the resemblance of races and
their pedigrees would go together.

I should like to hear what you would say on this purely theoretical
case.

It might be asked why is development so all-potent in classification,
as I fully admit it is? I believe it is because it depends on, and best
betrays, genealogical descent; but this is too large a point to enter
on.


LETTER 205. TO C. LYELL. Down, December 7th [1867].

I send by this post the article in the Victorian Institute with respect
to frogs' spawn. If you remember in your boyhood having ever tried to
take a small portion out of the water, you will remember that it is most
difficult. I believe all the birds in the world might alight every day
on the spawn of batrachians, and never transport a single ovum. With
respect to the young of molluscs, undoubtedly if the bird to which they
were attached alighted on the sea, they would be instantly killed; but
a land-bird would, I should think, never alight except under dire
necessity from fatigue. This, however, has been observed near Heligoland
(205/1. Instances are recorded by Gatke in his "Heligoland as an
Ornithological Observatory" (translated by Rudolph Rosenstock,
Edinburgh, 1895) of land-birds, such as thrushes, buntings, finches,
etc., resting for a short time on the surface of the water. The
author describes observations made by himself about two miles west of
Heligoland (page 129).); and land-birds, after resting for a time on the
tranquil sea, have been seen to rise and continue their flight. I cannot
give you the reference about Heligoland without much searching. This
alighting on the sea may aid you in your unexpected difficulty of the
too-easy diffusion of land-molluscs by the agency of birds. I much
enjoyed my morning's talk with you.


LETTER 206. TO F. HILDEBRAND. Down, January 5th [1868].

I thank you for your letter, which has quite delighted me. I sincerely
congratulate you on your success in making a graft-hybrid (206/1. Prof.
Hildebrand's paper is in the "Bot. Zeitung," 1868: the substance is
given in "Variation of Animals and Plants," Edition II., Volume I., page
420.), for I believe it to be a most important observation. I trust that
you will publish full details on this subject and on the direct action
of pollen (206/2. See Prof. Hildebrand, "Bot. Zeitung," 1868, and
"Variation of Animals and Plants," Edition II., Volume I., page 430.
A yellow-grained maize was fertilised with pollen from a brown-grained
one; the result was that ears were produced bearing both yellow and
dark-coloured grains.): I hope that you will be so kind as to send me a
copy of your paper. If I had succeeded in making a graft-hybrid of the
potato, I had intended to raise seedlings from the graft-hybrid and
from the two parent-forms (excluding insects) and carefully compare the
offspring. This, however, would be difficult on account of the sterility
and variability of the potato. When in the course of a few months you
receive my second volume (206/3. This sentence may be paraphrased--"When
you receive my book and read the second volume."), you will see why
I think these two subjects so important. They have led me to form
a hypothesis on the various forms of reproduction, development,
inheritance, etc., which hypothesis, I believe, will ultimately be
accepted, though how it will be now received I am very doubtful.

Once again I congratulate you on your success.


LETTER 207. TO J.D. HOOKER. Down, January 6th [1868].

Many thanks about names of plants, synonyms, and male flowers--all that
I wanted.

I have been glad to see Watson's letter, and am sorry he is a renegade
about Natural Selection. It is, as you say, characteristic, with the
final fling at you.

His difficulty about the difference between the two genera of St. Helena
Umbellifers is exactly the same as what Nageli has urged in an able
pamphlet (207/1. "Ueber Entstehung und Begriff der naturhist. Art."
"Sitz. der K. Bayer. Akad. Der Wiss. zu Munchen," 1865. Some of Nageli's
points are discussed in the "Origin," Edition V., page 151.), and who
in consequence maintains that there is some unknown innate tendency to
progression in all organisms. I said in a letter to him that of course I
could not in the least explain such cases; but that they did not seem
to me of overwhelming force, as long as we are quite ignorant of the
meaning of such structures, whether they are of any service to the
plants, or inevitable consequences of modifications in other parts.

I cannot understand what Watson means by the "counter-balance in nature"
to divergent variation. There is the counterbalance of crossing,
of which my present work daily leads me to see more and more the
efficiency; but I suppose he means something very different. Further, I
believe variation to be divergent solely because diversified forms can
best subsist. But you will think me a bore.

I enclose half a letter from F. Muller (which please return) for the
chance of your liking to see it; though I have doubted much about
sending it, as you are so overworked. I imagine the Solanum-like flower
is curious.

I heard yesterday to my joy that Dr. Hildebrand has been experimenting
on the direct action of pollen on the mother-plant with success. He has
also succeeded in making a true graft-hybrid between two varieties of
potatoes, in which I failed. I look at this as splendid for pangenesis,
as being strong evidence that bud-reproduction and seminal reproduction
do not essentially differ.

My book is horribly delayed, owing to the accursed index-maker. (207/2.
Darwin thoroughly appreciated the good work put into the index of "The
Variation of Animals and Plants.") I have almost forgotten it!


LETTER 208. TO T.H. HUXLEY. Down, January 30th [1868].

Most sincere thanks for your kind congratulations. I never received a
note from you in my life without pleasure; but whether this will be so
after you have read pangenesis (208/1. In Volume II. of "Animals and
Plants, 1868.), I am very doubtful. Oh Lord, what a blowing up I may
receive! I write now partly to say that you must not think of looking
at my book till the summer, when I hope you will read pangenesis, for I
care for your opinion on such a subject more than for that of any other
man in Europe. You are so terribly sharp-sighted and so confoundedly
honest! But to the day of my death I will always maintain that you have
been too sharp-sighted on hybridism; and the chapter on the subject in
my book I should like you to read: not that, as I fear, it will produce
any good effect, and be hanged to you.

I rejoice that your children are all pretty well. Give Mrs. Huxley the
enclosed (208/2. Queries on Expression.), and ask her to look out when
one of her children is struggling and just going to burst out crying. A
dear young lady near here plagued a very young child for my sake, till
it cried, and saw the eyebrows for a second or two beautifully oblique,
just before the torrent of tears began.

The sympathy of all our friends about George's success (it is the young
Herald) (208/3. His son George was Second Wrangler in 1868; as a boy
he was an enthusiast in heraldry.) has been a wonderful pleasure to
us. George has not slaved himself, which makes his success the more
satisfactory. Farewell, my dear Huxley, and do not kill yourself with
work.


(209/1. The following group of letters deals with the problem of the
causes of the sterility of hybrids. Mr. Darwin's final view is given in
the "Origin," sixth edition (page 384, edition 1900). He acknowledges
that it would be advantageous to two incipient species, if by
physiological isolation due to mutual sterility, they could be kept from
blending: but he continues, "After mature reflection it seems to me
that this could not have been effected through Natural Selection." And
finally he concludes (page 386):--

"But it would be superfluous to discuss this question in detail; for
with plants we have conclusive evidence that the sterility of crossed
species must be due to some principle quite independent of Natural
Selection. Both Gartner and Kolreuter have proved that in genera
including numerous species, a series can be formed from species which
when crossed yield fewer and fewer seeds, to species which never produce
a single seed, but yet are affected by the pollen of certain other
species, for the germen swells. It is here manifestly impossible to
select the more sterile individuals, which have already ceased to
yield seeds; so that this acme of sterility, when the germen alone is
affected, cannot have been gained through selection; and from the laws
governing the various grades of sterility being so uniform throughout
the animal and vegetable kingdoms, we may infer that the cause, whatever
it may be, is the same or nearly the same in all cases."

Mr. Wallace, on the other hand, still adheres to his view: see his
"Darwinism," 1889, page 174, and for a more recent statement see page
292, note 1, Letter 211, and page 299.

The discussion of 1868 began with a letter from Mr. Wallace, written
towards the end of February, giving his opinion on the "Variation of
Animals and Plants;" the discussion on the sterility of hybrids is at
page 185, Volume II., of the first edition.)


LETTER 209. A.R. WALLACE TO CHARLES DARWIN. February 1868.

The only parts I have yet met with where I somewhat differ from your
views, are in the chapter on the causes of variability, in which I think
several of your arguments are unsound: but this is too long a subject
to go into now. Also, I do not see your objection to sterility between
allied species having been aided by Natural Selection. It appears to me
that, given a differentiation of a species into two forms, each of which
was adapted to a special sphere of existence, every slight degree of
sterility would be a positive advantage, not to the individuals who
were sterile, but to each form. If you work it out, and suppose the
two incipient species a...b to be divided into two groups, one of which
contains those which are fertile when the two are crossed, the other
being slightly sterile, you will find that the latter will certainly
supplant the former in the struggle for existence; remembering that you
have shown that in such a cross the offspring would be more vigorous
than the pure breed, and therefore would certainly soon supplant them,
and as these would not be so well adapted to any special sphere of
existence as the pure species a and b, they would certainly in their
turn give way to a and b.


LETTER 210. TO A.R. WALLACE. February 27th [1868].

I shall be very glad to hear, at some future day, your criticisms on
the "causes of variability." Indeed, I feel sure that I am right about
sterility and Natural Selection. Two of my grown-up children who are
acute reasoners have two or three times at intervals tried to prove
me wrong; and when your letter came they had another try, but ended
by coming back to my side. I do not quite understand your case, and
we think that a word or two is misplaced. I wish some time you would
consider the case under the following point of view. If sterility is
caused or accumulated through Natural Selection, then, as every degree
exists up to absolute barrenness, Natural Selection must have the power
of increasing it. Now take two species A and B, and assume that they
are (by any means) half-sterile, i.e., produce half the full number of
offspring. Now try and make (by Natural Selection) A and B absolutely
sterile when crossed, and you will find how difficult it is. I
grant, indeed it is certain, that the degree of the sterility of the
individuals of A and B will vary; but any such extra-sterile individuals
of, we will say A, if they should hereafter breed with other individuals
of A, will bequeath no advantage to their progeny, by which these
families will tend to increase in number over other families of A, which
are not more sterile when crossed with B. But I do not know that I
have made this any clearer than in the chapter in my book. It is a most
difficult bit of reasoning, which I have gone over and over again on
paper with diagrams. (210/1. This letter appeared in "Life and Letters,"
III., page 80.)


LETTER 211. A.R. WALLACE TO CHARLES DARWIN. March 1st, 1868.

I beg to enclose what appears to me a demonstration on your own
principles, that Natural Selection could produce sterility of hybrids.
If it does not convince you, I shall be glad if you will point out
where the fallacy lies. I have taken the two cases of a slight sterility
overcoming perfect fertility, and of a perfect sterility overcoming a
partial fertility,--the beginning and end of the process. You admit that
variations in fertility and sterility occur, and I think you will also
admit that if I demonstrate that a considerable amount of sterility
would be advantageous to a variety, that is sufficient proof that the
slightest variation in that direction would be useful also, and would go
on accumulating.

1. Let there be a species which has varied into two forms, each adapted
to existing conditions (211/1. "Existing conditions," means of course
new conditions which have now come into existence. And the "two" being
both better adapted than the parent form, means that they are better
adapted each to a special environment in the same area--as one to damp,
another to dry places; one to woods, another to open grounds, etc.,
etc., as Darwin had already explained. A.R.W. (1899).) better than the
parent form, which they supplant.

2. If these two forms, which are supposed to co-exist in the same
district, do not intercross, Natural Selection will accumulate
favourable variations, till they become sufficiently well adapted to
their conditions of life and form two allied species.

3. But if these two forms freely intercross with each other and produce
hybrids which are also quite fertile inter se, then the formation of
the two distinct races or species will be retarded or perhaps entirely
prevented; for the offspring of the crossed unions will be more vigorous
owing to the cross, although less adapted to their conditions of
life than either of the pure breeds. (211/2. After "pure breeds," add
"because less specialised." A.R.W. (1899).)

4. Now let a partial sterility of some individuals of these two forms
arise when they intercross; and as this would probably be due to some
special conditions of life, we may fairly suppose it to arise in some
definite portion of the area occupied by the two forms.

5. The result is that in this area hybrids will not increase so rapidly
as before; and as by the terms of the problem the two pure forms are
better suited to the conditions of life than the hybrids, they will tend
to supplant the latter altogether whenever the struggle for existence
becomes severe.

6. We may fairly suppose, also, that as soon as any sterility appears
under natural conditions, it will be accompanied by some disinclination
to cross-unions; and this will further diminish the production of
hybrids.

7. In the other part of the area, however, where hybridism occurs
unchecked, hybrids of various degrees will soon far outnumber the parent
or pure form.

8. The first result, then, of a partial sterility of crosses appearing
in one part of the area occupied by the two forms, will be, that the
GREAT MAJORITY of the individuals will there consist of the pure forms
only, while in the rest of the area these will be in a minority,--which
is the same as saying, that the new sterile or physiological variety of
the two forms will be better suited to the conditions of existence than
the remaining portion which has not varied physiologically.

9. But when the struggle for existence becomes severe, that variety
which is best adapted to the conditions of existence always supplants
that which is imperfectly adapted; therefore by Natural Selection the
sterile varieties of the two forms will become established as the only
ones.

10. Now let a fresh series of variations in the amount of sterility and
in the disinclination to crossed unions occur,--also in certain parts
of the area: exactly the same result must recur, and the progeny of this
new physiological variety again in time occupy the whole area.

11. There is yet another consideration that supports this view. It seems
probable that the variations in amount of sterility would to some extent
concur with and perhaps depend upon the structural variations; so that
just in proportion as the two forms diverged and became better adapted
to the conditions of existence, their sterility would increase. If this
were the case, then Natural Selection would act with double strength,
and those varieties which were better adapted to survive both
structurally and physiologically, would certainly do so. (211/3. The
preceding eleven paragraphs are substantially but not verbally identical
with the statement of the argument in Mr. Wallace's "Darwinism," 1889.
Pages 179, 180, note 1.)

12. Let us now consider the more difficult case of two allied species
A, B, in the same area, half the individuals of each (As, Bs) being
absolutely sterile, the other half (Af, Bf) being partially fertile:
will As, Bs ultimately exterminate Af, Bf?

13. To avoid complication, it must be granted, that between As and Bs
no cross-unions take place, while between Af and Bf cross-unions are as
frequent as direct unions, though much less fertile. We must also leave
out of consideration crosses between As and Af, Bs and Bf, with their
various approaches to sterility, as I believe they will not affect the
final result, although they will greatly complicate the problem.

14. In the first generation there will result: 1st, The pure progeny of
As and Bs; 2nd, The pure progeny of Af and of Bf; and 3rd, The hybrid
progeny of Af, Bf.

15. Supposing that, in ordinary years, the increased constitutional
vigour of the hybrids exactly counterbalances their imperfect
adaptations to conditions, there will be in the second generation,
besides these three classes, hybrids of the second degree between the
first hybrids and Af and Bf respectively. In succeeding generations
there will be hybrids of all degrees, varying between the first hybrids
and the almost pure types of Af and Bf.

16. Now, if at first the number of individuals of As, Bs, Af and Bf
were equal, and year after year the total number continues stationary,
I think it can be proved that, while half will be the pure progeny of As
and Bs, the other half will become more and more hybridised, until the
whole will be hybrids of various degrees.

17. Now, this hybrid and somewhat intermediate race cannot be so well
adapted to the conditions of life as the two pure species, which have
been formed by the minute adaptation to conditions through Natural
Selection; therefore, in a severe struggle for existence, the hybrids
must succumb, especially as, by hypothesis, their fertility would not be
so great as that of the two pure species.

18. If we were to take into consideration the unions of As with Af and
Bs with Bf, the results would become very complicated, but it must still
lead to there being a number of pure forms entirely derived from As and
Bs, and of hybrid forms mainly derived from Af and Bf; and the result of
the struggle of these two sets of individuals cannot be doubtful.

19. If these arguments are sound, it follows that sterility may
be accumulated and increased, and finally made complete by Natural
Selection, whether the sterile varieties originate together in a
definite portion of the area occupied by the two species, or occur
scattered over the whole area. (211/4. The first part of this discussion
should be considered alone, as it is both more simple and more
important. I now believe that the utility, and therefore the cause of
sterility between species, is during the process of differentiation.
When species are fully formed, the occasional occurrence of hybrids
is of comparatively small importance, and can never be a danger to the
existence of the species. A.R.W. (1899).)

P.S.--In answer to the objection as to the unequal sterility of
reciprocal crosses ("Variation, etc." Volume II., page 186) I
reply that, as far as it went, the sterility of one cross would be
advantageous even if the other cross was fertile: and just as characters
now co-ordinated may have been separately accumulated by Natural
Selection, so the reciprocal crosses may have become sterile one at a
time.


LETTER 212. TO A.R. WALLACE. 4, Chester Place, March 17th, 1868.

(212/1. Mr. Darwin had already written a short note to Mr. Wallace
expressing a general dissent from his view.)

I do not feel that I shall grapple with the sterility argument till my
return home; I have tried once or twice, and it has made my stomach feel
as if it had been placed in a vice. Your paper has driven three of my
children half mad--one sat up till 12 o'clock over it. My second son,
the mathematician, thinks that you have omitted one almost inevitable
deduction which apparently would modify the result. He has written out
what he thinks, but I have not tried fully to understand him. I suppose
that you do not care enough about the subject to like to see what he has
written.


LETTER 212A. A.R. WALLACE TO CHARLES DARWIN. Hurstpierpoint, March, 24th
[1868].

I return your son's notes with my notes on them. Without going into any
details, is not this a strong general argument?

1. A species varies occasionally in two directions, but owing to their
free intercrossing the varieties never increase.

2. A change of conditions occurs which threatens the existence of the
species; but the two varieties are adapted to the changing conditions,
and if accumulated will form two new species adapted to the new
conditions.

3. Free crossing, however, renders this impossible, and so the species
is in danger of extinction.

4. If sterility would be induced, then the pure races would increase
more rapidly, and replace the old species.

5. It is admitted that partial sterility between varieties does
occasionally occur. It is admitted [that] the degree of this sterility
varies; is it not probable that Natural Selection can accumulate these
variations, and thus save the species? If Natural Selection can NOT do
this, how do species ever arise, except when a variety is isolated?

Closely allied species in distinct countries being sterile is no
difficulty; for either they diverged from a common ancestor in contact,
and Natural Selection increased the sterility, or they were isolated,
and have varied since: in which case they have been for ages influenced
by distinct conditions which may well produce sterility.

If the difficulty of grafting was as great as the difficulty of
crossing, and as regular, I admit it would be a most serious objection.
But it is not. I believe many distinct species can be grafted, while
others less distinct cannot. The regularity with which natural species
are sterile together, even when very much alike, I think is an argument
in favour of the sterility having been generally produced by Natural
Selection for the good of the species.

The other difficulty, of unequal sterility of reciprocal crosses, seems
none to me; for it is a step to more complete sterility, and as such
would be increased by selection.


LETTER 213. TO A.R. WALLACE. Down, April 6th [1868].

I have been considering the terrible problem. Let me first say that
no man could have more earnestly wished for the success of Natural
Selection in regard to sterility than I did; and when I considered a
general statement (as in your last note) I always felt sure it could be
worked out, but always failed in detail. The cause being, as I
believe, that Natural Selection cannot effect what is not good for the
individual, including in this term a social community. It would take a
volume to discuss all the points, and nothing is so humiliating to me
as to agree with a man like you (or Hooker) on the premises and disagree
about the result.

I agree with my son's argument and not with the rejoinder. The cause of
our difference, I think, is that I look at the number of offspring as an
important element (all circumstances remaining the same) in keeping up
the average number of individuals within any area. I do not believe that
the amount of food by any means is the sole determining cause of number.
Lessened fertility is equivalent to a new source of destruction. I
believe if in one district a species produced from any cause fewer
young, the deficiency would be supplied from surrounding districts. This
applies to your Paragraph 5. (213/1. See Letter 211.) If the species
produced fewer young from any cause in every district, it would become
extinct unless its fertility were augmented through Natural Selection
(see H. Spencer).

I demur to probability and almost to possibility of Paragraph 1., as
you start with two forms within the same area, which are not mutually
sterile, and which yet have supplanted the parent-form.

(Paragraph 6.) I know of no ghost of a fact supporting belief that
disinclination to cross accompanies sterility. It cannot hold with
plants, or the lower fixed aquatic animals. I saw clearly what an
immense aid this would be, but gave it up. Disinclination to cross seems
to have been independently acquired, probably by Natural Selection; and
I do not see why it would not have sufficed to have prevented incipient
species from blending to have simply increased sexual disinclination to
cross.

(Paragraph 11.) I demur to a certain extent to amount of sterility and
structural dissimilarity necessarily going together, except indirectly
and by no means strictly. Look at vars. of pigeons, fowls, and cabbages.

I overlooked the advantage of the half-sterility of reciprocal crosses;
yet, perhaps from novelty, I do not feel inclined to admit probability
of Natural Selection having done its work so queerly.

I will not discuss the second case of utter sterility, but your
assumptions in Paragraph 13 seem to me much too complicated. I cannot
believe so universal an attribute as utter sterility between remote
species was acquired in so complex a manner. I do not agree with
your rejoinder on grafting: I fully admit that it is not so closely
restricted as crossing, but this does not seem to me to weaken the case
as one of analogy. The incapacity of grafting is likewise an invariable
attribute of plants sufficiently remote from each other, and sometimes
of plants pretty closely allied.

The difficulty of increasing the sterility through Natural Selection of
two already sterile species seems to me best brought home by considering
an actual case. The cowslip and primrose are moderately sterile, yet
occasionally produce hybrids. Now these hybrids, two or three or a
dozen in a whole parish, occupy ground which might have been occupied
by either pure species, and no doubt the latter suffer to this small
extent. But can you conceive that any individual plants of the primrose
and cowslip which happened to be mutually rather more sterile (i.e.
which, when crossed, yielded a few less seed) than usual, would profit
to such a degree as to increase in number to the ultimate exclusion of
the present primrose and cowslip? I cannot.

My son, I am sorry to say, cannot see the full force of your rejoinder
in regard to second head of continually augmented sterility. You speak
in this rejoinder, and in Paragraph 5, of all the individuals becoming
in some slight degree sterile in certain districts: if you were to admit
that by continued exposure to these same conditions the sterility would
inevitably increase, there would be no need of Natural Selection. But
I suspect that the sterility is not caused so much by any particular
conditions as by long habituation to conditions of any kind. To speak
according to pangenesis, the gemmules of hybrids are not injured, for
hybrids propagate freely by buds; but their reproductive organs are
somehow affected, so that they cannot accumulate the proper gemmules,
in nearly the same manner as the reproductive organs of a pure species
become affected when exposed to unnatural conditions.

This is a very ill-expressed and ill-written letter. Do not answer it,
unless the spirit urges you. Life is too short for so long a discussion.
We shall, I greatly fear, never agree.


LETTER 214. A.R. WALLACE TO CHARLES DARWIN. Hurstpierpoint, [April?]
8th, 1868.

I am sorry you should have given yourself the trouble to answer my ideas
on sterility. If you are not convinced, I have little doubt but that I
am wrong; and, in fact, I was only half convinced by my own arguments,
and I now think there is about an even chance that Natural Selection may
or may not be able to accumulate sterility. If my first proposition is
modified to the existence of a species and a variety in the same area,
it will do just as well for my argument. Such certainly do exist. They
are fertile together, and yet each maintains itself tolerably distinct.
How can this be, if there is no disinclination to crossing?

My belief certainly is that number of offspring is not so important
an element in keeping up population of a species as supply of food and
other favourable conditions; because the numbers of a species constantly
vary greatly in different parts of its own area, whereas the average
number of offspring is not a very variable element.

However, I will say no more, but leave the problem as insoluble, only
fearing that it will become a formidable weapon in the hands of the
enemies of Natural Selection.


LETTER 215. TO J.D. HOOKER.

(215/1. The following extract from a letter to Sir Joseph Hooker (dated
April 3rd, 1868) refers to his Presidential Address for the approaching
meeting of the British Association at Norwich.

Some account of Sir Joseph's success is given in the "Life and Letters,"
III., page 100, also in Huxley's "Life," Volume I., page 297, where
Huxley writes to Darwin:--

"We had a capital meeting at Norwich, and dear old Hooker came out in
great force, as he always does in emergencies. The only fault was the
terrible 'Darwinismus' which spread over the section and crept out
when you least expected it, even in Fergusson's lecture on 'Buddhist
Temples.' You will have the rare happiness to see your ideas triumphant
during your lifetime.

"P.S.--I am going into opposition; I can't stand it.")

Down, April 3rd [1868].

I have been thinking over your Presidential Address; I declare I made
myself quite uncomfortable by fancying I had to do it, and feeling
myself utterly dumbfounded.

But I do not believe that you will find it so difficult. When you come
to Down I shall be very curious to hear what your ideas are on the
subject.

Could you make anything out of a history of the great steps in the
progress of Botany, as representing the whole of Natural History? Heaven
protect you! I suppose there are men to whom such a job would not be
so awful as it appears to me...If you had time, you ought to read an
article by W. Bagehot in the April number of the "Fortnightly" (215/2.
"Physic and Politics," "Fortnightly Review," Volume III., page 452,
1868.), applying Natural Selection to early or prehistoric politics,
and, indeed, to late politics,--this you know is your view.


LETTER 216. A.R. WALLACE TO CHARLES DARWIN. 9, St. Mark's Crescent,
N.W., August 16th [1868].

I ought to have written before to thank you for the copies of your
papers on Primula and on "Cross-unions of Dimorphic Plants, etc." The
latter is particularly interesting and the conclusion most important;
but I think it makes the difficulty of how these forms, with their
varying degrees of sterility, originated, greater than ever. If "natural
selection" could not accumulate varying degrees of sterility for the
plant's benefit, then how did sterility ever come to be associated with
one cross of a trimorphic plant rather than another? The difficulty
seems to be increased by the consideration that the advantage of a cross
with a distinct individual is gained just as well by illegitimate as
by legitimate unions. By what means, then, did illegitimate unions ever
become sterile? It would seem a far simpler way for each plant's pollen
to have acquired a prepotency on another individual's stigma over that
of the same individual, without the extraordinary complication of three
differences of structure and eighteen different unions with varying
degrees of sterility!

However, the fact remains an excellent answer to the statement that
sterility of hybrids proves the absolute distinctness of the parents.

I have been reading with great pleasure Mr. Bentham's last admirable
address (216/1. "Proc. Linn. Soc." 1867-8, page lvii.), in which he so
well replies to the gross misstatements of the "Athenaeum;" and also
says award in favour of pangenesis. I think we may now congratulate you
on having made a valuable convert, whose opinions on the subject, coming
so late and being evidently so well considered, will have much weight.

I am going to Norwich on Tuesday to hear Dr. Hooker, who I hope will
boldly promulgate "Darwinism" in his address. (216/2. Sir Joseph
Hooker's Presidential Address at the British Association Meeting.) Shall
we have the pleasure of seeing you there?

I am engaged in negociations about my book.

Hoping you are well and getting on with your next volumes.

(216/3. We are permitted by Mr. Wallace to append the following note
as to his more recent views on the question of Natural Selection and
sterility:--

"When writing my "Darwinism," and coming again to the consideration
of this problem of the effect of Natural Selection in accumulating
variations in the amount of sterility between varieties or incipient
species twenty years later, I became more convinced, than I was when
discussing with Darwin, of the substantial accuracy of my argument.
Recently a correspondent who is both a naturalist and a mathematician
has pointed out to me a slight error in my calculation at page 183
(which does not, however, materially affect the result), disproving the
'physiological selection' of the late Dr. Romanes, but he can see no
fallacy in my argument as to the power of Natural Selection to increase
sterility between incipient species, nor, so far as I am aware, has any
one shown such fallacy to exist.

"On the other points on which I differed from Mr. Darwin in the
foregoing discussion--the effect of high fertility on population of a
species, etc.--I still hold the views I then expressed, but it would be
out of place to attempt to justify them here."

A.R.W. (1899).)


LETTER 217. TO C. LYELL. Down, October 4th [1867].

With respect to the points in your note, I may sometimes have expressed
myself with ambiguity. At the end of Chapter XXIII., where I say that
marked races are not often (you omit "often") produced by changed
conditions (217/1. "Hence, although it must be admitted that new
conditions of life do sometimes definitely affect organic beings, it
may be doubted whether well-marked races have often been produced by the
direct action of changed conditions without the aid of selection either
by man or nature." ("Animals and Plants," Volume II., page 292, 1868.)),
I intended to refer to the direct action of such conditions in causing
variation, and not as leading to the preservation or destruction of
certain forms. There is as wide a difference in these two respects
as between voluntary selection by man and the causes which induce
variability. I have somewhere in my book referred to the close
connection between Natural Selection and the action of external
conditions in the sense which you specify in your note. And in this
sense all Natural Selection may be said to depend on changed conditions.
In the "Origin" I think I have underrated (and from the cause which
you mention) the effects of the direct action of external conditions in
producing varieties; but I hope in Chapter XXIII. I have struck as fair
a balance as our knowledge permits.

It is wonderful to me that you have patience to read my slips, and I
cannot but regret, as they are so imperfect; they must, I think, give
you a wrong impression, and had I sternly refused, you would perhaps
have thought better of my book. Every single slip is greatly altered,
and I hope improved.

With respect to the human ovule, I cannot find dimensions given, though
I have often seen the statement. My impression is that it would be just
or barely visible if placed on a clear piece of glass. Huxley could
answer your question at once.

I have not been well of late, and have made slow progress, but I think
my book will be finished by the middle of November.