[Start of "VOLUME FIVE: SONGS OF THE AGES"]

{1}

THE BIBLE STORY

{2}

{3}

{4}

[Illustration]
  "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of
  God dwelleth in you?"

  Then Paul said, "Ye men of Athens, I perceive in all things ye are
  very religious."

  Then Paul said, . . . "Whom ye ignorantly worship, him I declare
  unto you."

  "God that made the world and all things therin, seeing he is Lord of
  heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands."
[End illustration]

{5}

THE BIBLE STORY

VOLUME FIVE

SONGS OF THE AGES

ARRANGED AND EDITED BY

REV. NEWTON MARSHALL HALL, D.D.
MINISTER OF THE NORTH CHURCH, SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS

AND

REV. IRVING FRANCIS WOOD, PH.D.
PROFESSOR OF
BIBLICAL LITERATURE AND COMPARATIVE RELIGION
AT SMITH COLLEGE

_Authors of "The Early Days of Israel" "Advanced Bible Studies" Etc._


THE KING-RICHARDSON COMPANY
SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS

CHICAGO
CLEVELAND

{6}

COPYRIGHT, 1906,
COPYRIGHT, 1917,

BY THE KING-RICHARDSON COMPANY,
SPRINGFIELD, MASS.

{7}

PREFACE

In this volume are gathered up selections of the most inspiring
literature which the Bible contains. The Psalms are given nearly entire,
but with fresh titles and a new typographical arrangement. The book of
Job is presented in a way to interest the modern reader. The material
found in the "Prophets," usually entirely unintelligible to young
readers, is given in a form which should prove interesting and
inspiring. In addition to the sublime poetry of the Old Testament
inspiring passages from the New Testament not elsewhere used are given
here. These are not in poetic form, but the sublimity of thought and
lofty style of utterance entitle them to a place beside the splendid
poetry of the Old Testament. The contents of this volume ought to become
perfectly familiar to older children by frequent reading and study.

We hope that it may be found extremely useful also for devotional
reading; for family and public devotions and for private reading. Here,
in one volume, are those portions of the Holy Scriptures which, in a
peculiar sense, grew out of a deep spiritual feeling. To these portions
particularly, the best minds of the ages have turned for spiritual
uplift, for inspiration and consolation. The editors can hope for no
higher reward than that this book should contribute to the growth of
personal spiritual life.

{8}

{9}

CONTENTS.

THE POETRY OF THE BIBLE.               11

SELECTIONS FROM THE PSALMS.            15

SELECTIONS FROM JOB.                  177

SELECTIONS FROM THE SONG OF SONGS.    233

SELECTIONS FROM ECCLESIASTES.         241

SELECTIONS FROM THE PROVERBS.         247

SELECTIONS FROM THE PROPHETS.         259

   1 Isaiah.                          264
   2 Jeremiah.                        297
   3 Ezekiel.                         344
   4 Amos.                            354
   5 Hosea.                           363
   6 Micah.                           367
   7 Obadiah.                         370
   8 Joel.                            374
   9 Zephaniah.                       380
  10 Nahum.                           385
  11 Habakkuk.                        392
  12 Haggai.                          397
  13 Zechariah.                       401
  14 Malachi.                         408

{10}

SELECTIONS FROM THE NEW TESTAMENT.    411
  1 The Christian Life and Service.   413
  2 The Greatest Thing in the World   425
  3 Following in the Footsteps of
    Jesus (from the book of James)    426

  4 The Gospel of Love and Sonship.   435
  5 The Christian Athlete.            438
  6 The Christian Temple.             440
  7 The Christian Warrior.            447
  8 The Hope of Immortality.          449
  9 Selections from the Apocalypse.   456

HYMNS OF THE AGES                     479

NOTES                                 495

{11}

THE POETRY OF THE BIBLE

The first poetry was made to be sung. It almost made itself. It had two
qualities--the expression of strong feeling of some kind, and some sort
of rhythm that could be put into song. Ever since the days when all men
were savages, and told simple stories and sang rude songs as they
gathered about the campfires, those two things have marked the
difference between poetry and prose. Poetry must have feeling and
rhythm. In most languages the rhythm is one of sound. The words flow
along so easily that they run themselves into a sort of tune. That is
what is called measure. Measure cannot be easily translated from one
language to another. Even if it could, it would not always be so
beautiful as it is in the language in which it is first written. So it
comes about that we do not often try to get the rhythm of the words in
the poetry of the Bible. Indeed, scholars have puzzled themselves
greatly over just what sort of rhythm the words of Hebrew poetry have.
The Hebrews who wrote the poetry did not think it worth while to say
anything about that, and later men forgot that there was any rhythm at
all; so now it has to be all discovered over again. But Hebrew poetry
has also another kind of rhythm beside that of words--a kind which
English poetry does not have. It is the rhythm of thought. In Hebrew
poetry a thought is expressed in the first line, {12} then either
repeated with some slight change, its opposite expressed, or something
added to it, in the second. The following are illustrations:--

The thought repeated:--

  The Lord is my light and my salvation;
    whom shall I fear?
  The Lord is the strength of my life;
    of whom shall I be afraid?

The opposite expressed:--

  A wise son maketh a glad father,
   But a foolish son is the heaviness of his mother.

Additions made to the thought:--

  All the paths of the Lord are lovingkindness and truth
  Unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies.

This rhythm of thought is called parallelism; and parallelism is the one
thing that makes Hebrew poetry differ from prose.

In most Eastern languages the line between poetry and prose is not so
sharply drawn as in our Western languages. When a man made a speech, it
often fell quite naturally into poetry. So a good deal of the talk of
Jesus, even, seems to have been in the form of Hebrew poetry; as when he
said:--

{13}

  Be not anxious for your life,
    what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink,
    Nor yet for your body,
     what ye shall put on.
  Is not the life more than the food
  And the body than the raiment?

In the same way the New Testament writers also, being mostly Hebrews in
thought, although they wrote in Greek, often fell into poetry, when some
strong feeling moved them.

The study of the form of the poetry of the Bible is very fascinating,
the form is so rich in variety and often so remarkably well fitted to
express the thought of the poetry.

Yet after all the richest part of the Biblical poetry is the strong
feeling that it shows. For example, in that little song of the shepherd,
the twenty-third Psalm, the form is very beautiful with its rhythm of
thought, but much more beautiful is the strong feeling of perfect trust
in the loving care of the Good Shepherd.

{14}

{15}

SELECTIONS FROM THE PSALMS

{16}

{17}

THE BOOK OF PSALMS

The Book of Psalms is the Hebrew hymn book. The Psalms were gathered to
sing at the services in the temple at Jerusalem. Here there was no
sermon, as there is in our churches, and as there often was in the
synagogues which were scattered all over the land, but there was a large
choir which sung these Psalms of praise, while the people stood below
and listened. Some of the Psalms were written for this choir. Others,
written for other purposes, were put into this hymn book, sometimes with
more or less change from their first form, as is the case with many
hymns in our own hymn books. Praise to God is the most common thought of
these poems, but many other thoughts are found in them--sorrow for sin
and trust in God's goodness and hope for the future and thanksgiving for
God's care in the past. Hardly a thought about God's relation to man but
finds its expression in these songs. They were the work of many men
through many years. They express the joy and the sorrow of many minds in
many different situations. That is why they still fit so many different
lives in all parts of the world. They are very simple and very
beautiful, and they have always been, and doubtless always will be, dear
to the hearts of all those who try to find God. Mr. Gilmour, the
missionary to the Mongols, once wrote: "When I find I cannot make
headway in {18} devotion, I open in the Psalms, and push out in my
canoe, and let myself be carried along in the stream of devotion which
flows through the whole book. The current always sets toward God, and in
most places is strong and deep." So many men have found that the broad
river of the Psalms bore them toward God.

{19}

SELECTIONS FROM THE PSALMS


THE RIGHTEOUS MAN

  Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the wicked,
  Nor standeth in the way of sinners,
  Nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful.
  But his delight is in the law of the Lord;
  And in his law doth he meditate day and night.
  And he shall be like a tree planted by the streams of water,
  That bringeth forth its fruit in its season,
  Whose leaf also doth not wither;
  And whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.

  The wicked are not so;
  But are like the chaff which the wind driveth away.
  Therefore the wicked shall not stand in the judgment,
  Nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.
  For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous:
  But the way of the wicked shall perish.
                                                    --_Psalm 1_.

{20}

A MORNING PRAYER

  Lord, how are mine adversaries increased!
  Many are they that rise up against me.
  Many there be which say of my soul,
  There is no help for him in God.
  But thou, O Lord, art a shield about me;
  My glory, and the lifter up of mine head.

  I cry unto the Lord with my voice,
  And he answereth me out of his holy hill.
  I laid me down and slept;
  I awaked; for the Lord sustaineth me.
                                         --_Psalm 3:1-5_.

{21}

AN EVENING PRAYER

  Answer me when I call, O God of my righteousness;
  Thou hast set me at large when I was in distress:
  Have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer.
  O ye sons of men, how long shall my glory be turned into dishonour?
  How long will ye love vanity, and seek after falsehood?

  But know that the Lord hath set apart him that is godly for himself:
  The Lord will hear when I call unto him.
  Stand in awe, and sin not:
  Commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still.
  Offer the sacrifices of righteousness,
  And put your trust in the Lord.

  Many there be that say, Who will shew us any good?
  Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.
  Thou hast put gladness in my heart,
  More than they have when their corn and their wine are increased.
  In peace will I both lay me down and sleep:
  For thou, Lord, alone makest me dwell in safety.
                                                      --_Psalm 4_.

{22}

A LITTLE LOWER THAN GOD

  O Lord, our Lord,
  How excellent is thy name in all the earth!
  Who hast set thy glory upon the heavens.
  Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou established strength,
  Because of thine adversaries,
  That thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger.

  When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers,
  The moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained;
  What is man, that thou art mindful of him?
  And the son of man, that thou visitest him?
  For thou hast made him but little lower than God,
  And crownest him with glory and honour.
  Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands;
  Thou hast put all things under his feet:
  All sheep and oxen,
  Yea, and the beasts of the field;
  The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea,
  Whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas.
  O Lord, our Lord,
  How excellent is thy name in all the earth!
                                                --_Psalm 8_.

{23}

THE UPRIGHT MAN.

  Lord, who shall sojourn in thy tabernacle?
  Who shall dwell in thy holy hill?
  He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness,
  And speaketh truth in his heart.
  He that slandereth not with his tongue,
  Nor doeth evil to his friend,
  Nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour.
  In whose eyes a reprobate is despised;
  But he honoureth them that fear the Lord.
  He that sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not.
  He that putteth not out his money to usury,
  Nor taketh reward against the innocent.
  He that doeth these things shall never be moved.
                                                  --_Psalm 15_.

{24}

TRUST IN THE LORD

  Preserve me, O God: for in thee do I put my trust.
  I have said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord:
  I have no good beyond thee.
  The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup:
  Thou maintainest my lot.
  The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places;
  Yea, I have a goodly heritage.
  I will bless the Lord, who hath given me counsel:
  Yea, my heart instructeth me in the night seasons.
  I have set the Lord always before me:
  Because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.
  Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth;
  My flesh also shall dwell in safety.
  For thou wilt not leave my soul to Sheol;
  Neither wilt thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption.
  Thou wilt shew me the path of life:
  In thy presence is fulness of joy;
  In thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.
                                                      --_Psalm 16_.


{25}

A PLEA FOR HELP.

  Hear the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry;
  Give ear unto my prayer, that goeth not out of feigned lips.
  Let my sentence come forth from thy presence;
  Let thine eyes look upon equity.
  Thou hast proved mine heart; thou hast visited me in the night;
  Thou hast tried me, and findest nothing;
  I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress,
  As for the works of men, by the word of thy lips
  I have kept me from the ways of the violent.
  My steps have held fast to thy paths,
  My feet have not slipped.
  I have called upon thee, for thou wilt answer me, O God:
  Incline thine ear unto me, and hear my speech.
  Shew thy marvellous lovingkindness, O thou that savest
    them which put their trust in thee
  From those that rise up against them, by thy right hand.
  Keep me as the apple of the eye,
  Hide me under the shadow of thy wings.
  As for me, I shall behold thy face in righteousness:
  I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.
                                                        --_Psalm 17_.

{26}

A SONG OF DELIVERANCE.

  In my distress I called upon the Lord,
  And cried unto my God:
  He heard my voice out of his temple,
  And my cry before him came into his ears.
  Then the earth shook and trembled,
  The foundations also of the mountains moved
  And were shaken, because he was wroth.
  There went up a smoke out of his nostrils,
  And fire out of his mouth devoured:
  Coals were kindled by it.
  He bowed the heavens also, and came down;
  And thick darkness was under his feet.
  And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly:
  Yea, he flew swiftly upon the wings of the wind.
  He made darkness his hiding place, his pavilion round about him;
  Darkness of waters, thick clouds of the skies.
  At the brightness before him his thick clouds passed,
  Hailstones and coals of fire.
  The Lord also thundered in the heavens,
  And the Most High uttered his voice;
  Hailstones and coals of fire.
  And he sent out his arrows, and scattered them;
  Yea, lightnings manifold, and discomfited them.   {27}
  Then the channels of waters appeared,
  And the foundations of the world were laid bare,
  At thy rebuke, O Lord,
  At the blast of the breath of thy nostrils.
  He sent from on high, he took me;
  He drew me out of many waters.
  He delivered me from my strong enemy,
  And from them that hated me, for they were too mighty for me.
  I love thee, O Lord, my strength.
  The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer;
  My God, my strong rock, in him will I trust;
  My shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower.
  I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised:
  So shall I be saved from mine enemies.
  The cords of death compassed me,
  And the floods of ungodliness made me afraid.
  The cords of Sheol were round about me:
  The snares of death came upon me.
  They came upon me in the day of my calamity:
  But the Lord was my stay.
  He brought me forth also into a large place;
  He delivered me, because he delighted in me.
  The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness;
  According to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.
  For I have kept the ways of the Lord,
  And have not wickedly departed from my God.
  For all his judgments were before me,        {28}
  And I put not away his statutes from me.
  I was also perfect with him,
  And I kept myself from mine iniquity.
  Therefore hath the Lord recompensed me according to my righteousness,
  According to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight.
  With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful;
  With the perfect man thou wilt shew thyself perfect;
  With the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure;
  And with the perverse thou wilt shew thyself froward.
  For thou wilt save the afflicted people;
  But the haughty eyes thou wilt bring down.
  For thou wilt light my lamp:
  The Lord my God will lighten my darkness.
  For by thee I run upon a troop;
  And by my God do I leap over a wall.
  As for God, his way is perfect:
  The word of the Lord is tried;
  He is a shield unto all them that trust in him.
  For who is God, save the Lord?
  And who is a rock, beside our God?
  The God that girdeth me with strength,
  And maketh my way perfect.
  He maketh my feet like hinds' feet:
  And setteth me upon my high places.

  The Lord liveth; and blessed be my rock;
  And exalted be the God of my salvation:
  Even the God that executeth vengeance for me,   {29}
  And subdueth peoples under me.
  He rescueth me from mine enemies:
  Yea, thou liftest me up above them that rise up against me;
  Thou deliverest me from the violent man.
  Therefore I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the nations,
  And will sing praises unto thy name.
  Great deliverance giveth he to his king,
  And showeth lovingkindness to his anointed,
  To David and to his seed, for evermore.
                                           --_Psalm 18:1-33,46-50_.

{30}

SONG OF THE EARTH AND SKY.

  The heavens declare the glory of God;
  And the firmament sheweth his handiwork.
  Day unto day uttereth speech,
  And night unto night sheweth knowledge.
  There is no speech nor language;
  Their voice cannot be heard.
  Their line is gone out through all the earth,
  And their words to the end of the world.
  In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun,
  Which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber,
  And rejoiceth as a strong man to run his course.
  His going forth is from the end of the heaven,
  And his circuit unto the ends of it:
  And there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.
  The law of the Lord is perfect, restoring the soul:
  The testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple.
  The precepts of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart:
  The commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.
  The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever:
  The judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether.
  More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold:   {31}
  Sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb.
  Moreover by them is thy servant warned:
  In keeping of them there is great reward.
  Who can understand his errors?
  Clear thou me from hidden faults.
  Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins;
  Let them not have dominion over me: then shall I be perfect,
  And I shall be clear from great transgression.
  Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart
    be acceptable in thy sight,
  O Lord, my strength, and my redeemer.
                                                    --_Psalm 19_.

{32}

OUR TRUST IS IN GOD

  The Lord answer thee in the day of trouble:
  The name of the God of Jacob set thee up on high;
  Send thee help from the sanctuary,
  And strengthen thee out of Zion;
  Remember all thy offerings,
  And accept thy burnt sacrifice;
  Grant thee thy heart's desire,
  And fulfil all thy counsel.
  We will triumph in thy salvation,
  And in the name of our God we will set up our banners:
  The Lord fulfil all thy petitions.
  Now know I that the Lord saveth his anointed;
  He will answer him from his holy heaven
  With the saving strength of his right hand.
  Some trust in chariots, and some in horses:
  But we will make mention of the name of the Lord our God.
  They are bowed down and fallen:
  But we are risen, and stand upright.
                                             --_Psalm 20:1-8_.

{33}{34}

[Illustration]
  "He maketh me to lie down in green pastures,
  He leadeth me beside the still waters"
[End illustration]


{35}

THE GOOD SHEPHERD

  The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.
  He maketh me to lie down in green pastures:
  He leadeth me beside the still waters.
  He restoreth my soul:
  He guideth me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake.
  Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
  I will fear no evil; for thou art with me:
  Thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me.
  Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies;
  Thou hast anointed my head with oil; my cup runneth over.
  Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life:
  And I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.
                                                        --_Psalm 23_.


{36}

THE EARTH IS THE LORD'S

  The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof;
  The world, and they that dwell therein.
  For he hath founded it upon the seas.
  And established it upon the floods.
  Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord?
  And who shall stand in his holy place?
  He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart;
  Who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity.
  And hath not sworn deceitfully.
  He shall receive a blessing from the Lord,
  And righteousness from the God of his salvation.
  This is the generation of them that seek after him,
  That seek thy face, O God of Jacob.

  Lift up your heads, O ye gates;
  And be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors:
  And the King of glory shall come in.
  Who is the King of glory?
  The Lord strong and mighty,
  The Lord mighty in battle.
  Lift up your heads, O ye gates;
  Yea, lift them up, ye everlasting doors:
  And the King of glory shall come in.
  Who is this King of glory?
  The Lord of hosts,
  He is the King of glory.
                                 --_Psalm 24_.

{37}

SHOW ME THY WAYS, TEACH ME THY PATHS

  Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.
  O my God, in thee have I trusted,
  Let me not be ashamed;
  Let not mine enemies triumph over me.
  Yea, none that wait on thee shall be ashamed:
  They shall be ashamed that deal treacherously without cause.
  Shew me thy ways, O Lord;
  Teach me thy paths.
  Guide me in thy truth, and teach me;
  For thou art the God of my salvation;
  On thee do I wait all the day.
  Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses;
  For they have been ever of old.
  Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions:
  According to thy lovingkindness remember thou me,
  For thy goodness' sake, O Lord.
  Good and upright is the Lord:
  Therefore will he instruct sinners in the way.
  The meek will he guide in judgment:
  And the meek will he teach his way.
  All the paths of the Lord are lovingkindness and truth   {38}
  Unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies.
  For thy name's sake, O Lord,
  Pardon mine iniquity, for it is great.
  What man is he that feareth the Lord?
  Him shall he instruct in the way that he shall choose.
  His soul shall dwell at ease;
  And his seed shall inherit the land.
  The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him;
  And he will shew them his covenant.
  Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord;
  For he shall pluck my feet out of the net.
  Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me;
  For I am desolate and afflicted.
  The troubles of my heart are enlarged:
  O bring thou me out of my distresses.
  Consider mine affliction and my travail;
  And forgive all my sins.
  Consider mine enemies, for they are many;
  And they hate me with cruel hatred.
  O keep my soul, and deliver me:
  Let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in thee.
  Let integrity and uprightness preserve me,
  For I wait on thee.
  Redeem Israel, O God,
  Out of all his troubles.
                                         --_Psalm 25_.


{39}

I HAVE WALKED IN THY TRUTH

  Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine integrity:
  I have trusted also in the Lord without wavering.
  Examine me, O Lord, and prove me;
  Try my heart and my mind.
  For thy lovingkindness is before mine eyes;
  And I have walked in thy truth.
  I have not sat with men of falsehood;
  Neither will I go in with dissemblers.
  I hate the assembly of evil-doers,
  And will not sit with the wicked.
  I will wash my hands in innocency:
  So will I compass thine altar, O Lord;
  That I may make the voice of thanksgiving to be heard,
  And tell of all thy wondrous works.
  Lord, I love the habitation of thy house,
  And the place where thy glory dwelleth.
  Gather not my soul with sinners,
  Nor my life with men of blood;
  In whose hands is wickedness,
  And their right hand is full of bribes.
  But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity:
  Redeem me, and be merciful unto me.
  My foot standeth in an even place:
  In the congregations will I bless the Lord.
                                               --_Psalm 26_.


{40}

THE LORD IS MY SALVATION

  The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear?
  The Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?
  Though an host should encamp against me,
  My heart shall not fear:
  Though war should rise against me,
  Even then will I be confident.
  One thing have I asked of the Lord, that will I seek after;
  That I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life,
  To behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his temple.
  For in the day of trouble he shall keep me secretly in his pavilion:
  In the covert of his tabernacle shall he hide me;
  He shall lift me up upon a rock.
  And now shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round about me;
  And I will offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joy;
  I will sing, yea, I will sing praises unto the Lord.

  Hear, O Lord, when I cry with my voice:
  Have mercy also upon me, and answer me.
  When thou saidst, Seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee,   {41}
  Thy face, Lord, will I seek.
  Hide not thy face from me;
  Put not thy servant away in anger:
  Thou hast been my help;
  Cast me not off, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.
  For my father and my mother have forsaken me,
  But the Lord will take me up.
  Teach me thy way, O Lord;
  And lead me in a plain path,
  Because of mine enemies.
  Deliver me not over unto the will of mine adversaries:
  For false witnesses are risen up against me, and such as
    breathe out cruelty.
  I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord:
  In the land of the living.
  Wait on the Lord:
  Be strong, and let thine heart take courage;
  Yea, wait thou on the Lord.
                                                --_Psalm 27_.


{42}

THE GLORY OF THE LORD.

  Give unto the Lord, O ye sons of the mighty,
  Give unto the Lord glory and strength.
  Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name;
  Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness.

  The voice of the Lord is upon the waters:
  The God of glory thundereth,
  Even the Lord upon many waters.
  The voice of the Lord is powerful;
  The voice of the Lord is full of majesty.
  The voice of the Lord breaketh the cedars;
  Yea, the Lord breaketh in pieces the cedars of Lebanon.
  He maketh them also to skip like a calf;
  Lebanon and Sirion like a young wild-ox.
  The voice of the Lord cleaveth the flames of fire.
  The voice of the Lord shaketh the wilderness;
  The Lord shaketh the wilderness of Kadesh.
  The voice of the Lord maketh the hinds to calve,
  And strippeth the forests bare:
  And in his temple everything saith, Glory!

  The Lord sat as king at the Flood;
  Yea, the Lord sitteth as king for ever.
  The Lord will give strength unto his people;
  The Lord will bless his people with peace.
                                                 --_Psalm 29_.

{43}{44}

[Illustration]
  A VILLAGE IN THE LEBANON.

  From an old engraving.

  "The voice of the Lord is full of majesty,
  The voice of the Lord breaketh the cedars,
  Yea, the Lord breaketh the cedars of Lebanon"
[End illustration]

{45}

WEEPING MAY ENDURE FOR A NIGHT,
BUT JOY COMETH IN THE MORNING.

  I will extol thee, O Lord; for thou hast raised me up,
  And hast not made my foes to rejoice over me.
  O Lord my God,
  I cried unto thee, and thou hast healed me.
  O Lord, thou hast brought up my soul from Sheol;
  Thou hast kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit.
  Sing praise unto the Lord, O ye saints of his,
  And give thanks to his holy name.
  For his anger is but for a moment;
  His favor is for a lifetime:
  Weeping may tarry for the night,
  But joy cometh in the morning.

  As for me, I said in my prosperity,
  I shall never be moved.
  Thou, Lord, of thy favor hadst made my mountain to stand strong:
  Thou didst hide thy face; I was troubled.
  I cried to thee, O Lord;
  And unto the Lord I made supplication:
  What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit?  {46}
  Shall the dust praise thee? shall it declare thy truth?
  Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me:
  Lord, be thou my helper.
  Thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing;
  Thou hast loosed my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness;
  To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent.
  O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.
                                                           --_Psalm 30_.

{47}

MY TIMES ARE IN THY HANDS

  In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never be ashamed:
  Deliver me in thy righteousness.
  Bow down thine ear unto me; deliver me speedily:
  Be thou to me a strong rock, an house of defence to save me.
  For thou art my rock and my fortress;
  Therefore for thy name's sake lead me and guide me.
  Pluck me out of the net that they have laid privily for me;
  For thou art my strong hold.
  Into thine hand I commend my spirit:
  Thou hast redeemed me, O Lord, thou God of truth.
  I hate them that regard lying vanities:
  But I trust in the Lord.
  I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy:
  For thou hast seen my affliction;
  Thou hast known my soul in adversities:
  And thou hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemy;
  Thou hast set my feet in a large place.

  Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in distress:
  Mine eye wasteth away with grief, yea, my soul and my body.
  For my life is spent with sorrow, and my years with sighing:   {48}
  My strength faileth because of mine iniquity,
    and my bones are wasted away.
  Because of all mine adversaries I am become a reproach,
  Yea, unto my neighbours exceedingly, and a fear to mine acquaintance:
  They that did see me without fled from me.
  I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind:
  I am like a broken vessel.
  For I have heard the defaming of many,
  Terror on every side:
  While they took counsel together against me,
  They devised to take away my life.
  But I trusted in thee, O Lord:
  I said, Thou art my God.
  My times are in thy hand:
  Deliver me from the hand of mine enemies,
    and from them that persecute me.
  Make thy face to shine upon thy servant:
  Save me in thy lovingkindness.
  Let me not be ashamed, O Lord; for I have called upon thee:
  Let the wicked be ashamed, let them be silent in Sheol.
  Let the lying lips be dumb;
  Which speak against the righteous insolently,
  With pride and contempt.

  Oh how great is thy goodness,
  Which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee,
  Which thou hast wrought for them that take refuge in thee,
  Before the sons of men!                                      {49}
  In the covert of thy presence wilt thou hide them
    from the plottings of man:
  Thou wilt keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues.
  Blessed be the Lord;
  For he hath showed me his marvellous lovingkindness in a strong city.
  As for me, I said in my haste,
  I am cut off from before thine eyes:
  Nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplications
  When I cried unto thee.
  O love the Lord, all ye his saints:
  The Lord preserveth the faithful,
  And plentifully rewardeth him that dealeth proudly.
  Be strong, and let your heart take courage,
  All ye that hope in the Lord.
                                                      --_Psalm 31_.

{50}

REJOICE

  Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous:
  Praise is comely for the upright.
  Give thanks unto the Lord with harp:
  Sing praises unto him with the psaltery of ten strings.
  Sing unto him a new song;
  Play skilfully with a loud noise.
  For the word of the Lord is right;
  And all his work is done in faithfulness.
  He loveth righteousness and judgment:
  The earth is full of the lovingkindness of the Lord.
  By the word of the Lord were the heavens made;
  And all the host of them by the breath of his mouth.
  He gathereth the waters of the sea together as an heap:
  He layeth up the deeps in storehouses.

  Let all the earth fear the Lord:
  Let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him.
  For he spake, and it was done;
  He commanded, and it stood fast.
  The Lord bringeth the counsel of the nations to nought:
  He maketh the thoughts of the peoples to be of none effect.
  The counsel of the Lord standeth fast for ever,
  The thoughts of his heart to all generations.
  Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord;             {51}
  The people whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance.
  The Lord looketh from heaven;
  He beholdeth all the sons of men;
  From the place of his habitation he looketh forth
  Upon all the inhabitants of the earth;
  He that fashioneth the hearts of them all,
  That considereth all their works.
  There is no king saved by the multitude of an host:
  A mighty man is not delivered by great strength.
  An horse is a vain thing for safety:
  Neither shall he deliver any by his great power.
  Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him,
  Upon them that hope in his mercy;
  To deliver their soul from death,
  And to keep them alive in famine.
  Our soul hath waited for the Lord:
  He is our help and our shield.
  For our heart shall rejoice in him,
  Because we have trusted in his holy name.
  Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us,
  According as we have hoped in thee.
                                            --_Psalm 33_.

{52}

I WILL BLESS THE LORD

  I will bless the Lord at all times:
  His praise shall continually be in my mouth.
  My soul shall make her boast in the Lord:
  The meek shall hear thereof, and be glad.
  O magnify the Lord with me,
  And let us exalt his name together.
  I sought the Lord, and he answered me,
  And delivered me from all my fears.
  They looked unto him, and were lightened:
  And their faces shall never be confounded.
  This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him,
  And saved him out of all his troubles.
  The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him,
  And delivereth them.
  O taste and see that the Lord is good:
  Blessed is the man that trusteth in him.
  O fear the Lord, ye his saints:
  For there is no want to them that fear him.
  The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger:
  But they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.

  Come, ye children, hearken unto me:
  I will teach you the fear of the Lord.     {53}
  What man is he that desireth life,
  And loveth many days, that he may see good?
  Keep thy tongue from evil,
  And thy lips from speaking guile.
  Depart from evil, and do good;
  Seek peace, and pursue it.
  The eyes of the Lord are toward the righteous,
  And his ears are open unto their cry.
  The face of the Lord is against them that do evil,
  To cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.
  The righteous cried, and the Lord heard,
  And delivered them out of all their troubles.
  The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart.
  And saveth such as be of a contrite spirit.
  Many are the afflictions of the righteous:
  But the Lord delivereth him out of them all.
  He keepeth all his bones:
  Not one of them is broken.
  Evil shall slay the wicked:
  And they that hate the righteous shall be condemned.
  The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants:
  And none of them that trust in him shall be condemned.
                                                          --_Psalm 34_.


{54}

UNDER THE SHADOW OF THY WINGS

  Thy lovingkindness, O Lord, is in the heavens;
  Thy faithfulness reacheth unto the skies.
  Thy righteousness is like the great mountains,
  Thy judgments are a great deep:
  O Lord, thou preservest man and beast.
  How precious is thy lovingkindness, O God!
  And the children of men take refuge under the shadow of thy wings.
  They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house;
  And thou shalt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.
  For with thee is the fountain of life:
  In thy light shall we see light.
  O continue thy lovingkindness unto them that know thee;
  And thy righteousness to the upright in heart.
                                                     --_Psalm 36:5-10_.


{55}

WAIT PATIENTLY

  Fret not thyself because of evil-doers,
  Neither be thou envious against them that work unrighteousness.
  For they shall soon be cut down like the grass,
  And wither as the green herb.
  Trust in the Lord, and do good;
  Dwell in the land, and follow after faithfulness.
  Delight thyself also in the Lord;
  And he shall give thee the desires of thine heart.
  Commit thy way unto the Lord;
  Trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass.
  And he shall make thy righteousness to go forth as the light,
  And thy judgment as the noonday.
  A man's goings are established of the Lord;
  And he delighteth in his way.
  Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down:
  For the Lord upholdeth him with his hand.
  I have been young, and now am old;
  Yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken,
  Nor his seed begging their bread.
  All the day long he dealeth graciously, and lendeth;
  And his seed is blessed.
  Depart from evil, and do good;
  And dwell for evermore.           {56}
  I have seen the wicked in great power,
  And spreading himself like a green tree in its native soil.
  But one passed by, and, lo, he was not:
  Yea, I sought him, but he could not be found.
  Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright:
  For the latter end of that man is peace.
  As for transgressors, they shall be destroyed together:
  The latter end of the wicked shall be cut off.
  But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord:
  He is their strong hold in the time of trouble.
  And the Lord helpeth them, and rescueth them:
  He rescueth them from the wicked, and saveth them,
  Because they have taken refuge in him.
                                         --_Psalm 37:1-6,23-27,35-40_.


{57}

A NEW SONG

  I waited patiently for the Lord;
  And he inclined unto me, and heard my cry.
  He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay;
  And he set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.
  And he hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God:
  Many shall see it, and fear,
  And shall trust in the Lord.
  Blessed is the man that maketh the Lord his trust,
  And respecteth not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.

  Many, O Lord my God, are the wonderful works which thou hast done,
  And thy thoughts which are to us-ward:
  They cannot be set in order unto thee;
  If I would declare and speak of them,
  They are more than can be numbered.
  Sacrifice and offering thou hast no delight in;
  Mine ears hast thou opened:
  Burnt offering and sin offering hast thou not required.
  Then said I, "Lo, I am come;
  In the roll of the book it is written of me:
  I delight to do thy will, O my God;
  Yea, thy law is within my heart."       {58}
  I have published righteousness in the great congregation;
  Lo, I will not refrain my lips,
  O Lord, thou knowest.
  I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart;
  I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation:
  I have not concealed thy lovingkindness and thy truth from
    the great congregation.
  Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord:
  Let thy lovingkindness and thy truth continually preserve me.

                                                --_Psalm 40:1-11_.

{59}{60}

[Illustration]
  MOUNT HERMON

  From a photograph belonging to the Forbes Library, Northampton, Mass.,
  and used by special permission.

  "Therefore do I remember thee from the land of Jordan,
  And the Hermons, from the hill Mizar."
[End illustration]

{61}

A SONG IN TIME OF TROUBLE

  As the hart panteth after the water brooks,
  So panteth my soul after thee, O God.
  My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God:
  When shall I come and appear before God?
  My tears have been my meat day and night,
  While they continually say unto me, "Where is thy God?"
  These things I remember, and pour out my soul within me,
  How I went with the throng, and led them to the house of God,
  With the voice of joy and praise, a multitude keeping holy-day.
  Why art thou cast down, O my soul?
  And why art thou disquieted within me?
  Hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him
  For the health of his countenance.
  O my God, my soul is cast down within me:
  Therefore do I remember thee from the land of Jordan,
  And the Hermons, from the hill Mizar.
  Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy waterspouts:
  All thy waves and thy billows are gone over me.
  Yet the Lord will command his lovingkindness in the daytime,
  And in the night his song shall be with me,
  Even a prayer unto the God of my life.              {62}
  I will say unto God my rock, "Why hast thou forgotten me?"
  Why go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?
  As with a sword in my bones, mine adversaries reproach me;
  While they continually say unto me, "Where is thy God?"
  Why art thou cast down, O my soul?
  And why art thou disquieted within me?
  Hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him,
  Who is the health of my countenance, and my God.

  Judge me, O God, and plead my cause against an ungodly nation:
  O deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man.
  For thou art the God of my strength; why hast thou cast me off?
  Why go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?
  O send out thy light and thy truth; let them lead me:
  Let them bring me unto thy holy hill,
  And to thy tabernacles.
  Then will I go unto the altar of God,
  Unto God my exceeding joy:
  And upon the harp will I praise thee, O God, my God.
  Why art thou cast down, O my soul?
  And why art thou disquieted within me?
  Hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him,
  Who is the health of my countenance, and my God.
                                                   --_Psalms 42, 43_.


{63}

IN THE DAY OF ADVERSITY

  We have heard with our ears, O God,
  Our fathers have told us,
  What work thou didst in their days,
  In the days of old.
  Thou didst drive out the nations with thy hand;
  But them thou didst plant:
  Thou didst afflict the peoples;
  But them thou didst spread abroad.
  For they got not the land in possession by their own sword,
  Neither did their own arm save them;
  But thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance,
  Because thou wast favorable unto them.
  Thou art my King, O God:
  Command deliverance for Jacob.
  Through thee will we push down our adversaries:
  Through thy name will we tread them under that rise up against us.
  For I will not trust in my bow,
  Neither shall my sword save me.
  But thou hast saved us from our adversaries,
  And hast put them to shame that hate us.
  In God have we made our boast all the day long,
  And we will give thanks unto thy name for ever.     {64}
  But now thou hast cast us off, and brought us to dishonour;
  And goest not forth with our hosts.
  Thou makest us to turn back from the adversary:
  And they which hate us spoil for themselves.
  Thou hast given us like sheep appointed for meat;
  And hast scattered us among the nations.
  Thou sellest thy people for nought,
  And hast not increased thy wealth by their price.
  Thou makest us a reproach to our neighbours,
  A scorn and a derision to them that are round about us.
  Thou makest us a byword among the nations,
  A shaking of the head among the peoples.
  All the day long is my dishonour before me,
  And the shame of my face hath covered me,
  For the voice of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth;
  By reason of the enemy and the avenger.

  All this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee,
  Neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant.
  Our heart is not turned back,
  Neither have our steps declined from thy way;
  That thou hast sore broken us in the place of jackals,
  And covered us with the shadow of death.
  If we have forgotten the name of our God,
  Or spread forth our hands to a strange god;
  Shall not God search this out?
  For he knoweth the secrets of the heart.
  Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long;
  We are counted as sheep for the slaughter.          {65}
  Awake, why sleepest thou, O Lord?
  Arise, cast us not off for ever.
  Wherefore hidest thou thy face,
  And forgettest our affliction and our oppression?
  For our soul is bowed down to the dust:
  Our belly cleaveth unto the earth.
  Rise up for our help,
  And redeem us for thy lovingkindness' sake.
                                                   --_Psalm 44_.


{66}

A MARRIAGE SONG FOR THE WEDDING OF A KING

  My heart overfloweth with a goodly matter:
  I speak the things which I have made touching the king:
  My tongue is the pen of a ready writer.

  Thou art fairer than the children of men;
  Grace is poured into thy lips:
  Therefore God hath blessed thee for ever.
  Gird thy sword upon thy thigh,
  O mighty one,
  Thy glory and thy majesty.
  And in thy majesty ride on prosperously,
  Because of truth and meekness and righteousness:
  And thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.
  Thine arrows are sharp;
  The peoples fall under thee;
  They are in the heart of the king's enemies.
  Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever:
  A sceptre of equity is the sceptre of thy kingdom.
  Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated wickedness:
  Therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee
  With the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
  All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia;
  Out of ivory palaces stringed instruments have made thee glad.   {67}
  Kings' daughters are among thy honourable women:
  Upon thy right hand did stand the queen in gold of Ophir.
  Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear;
  Forget also thine own people, and thy father's house:
  So will the king desire thy beauty;
  For he is thy lord; and reverence thou him.
  And the daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift;
  The rich among the people shall entreat thy favor.
  The king's daughter within the palace is all glorious:
  Her clothing is inwrought with gold.
  She shall be led unto the king in broidered work:
  The virgins her companions that follow her
  Shall be brought unto thee.
  With gladness and rejoicing shall they be led:
  They shall enter into the king's palace.
  Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children,
  Whom thou shalt make princes in all the earth.
  I will make thy name to be remembered in all generations:
  Therefore shall the peoples give thee thanks for ever and ever.

                                                         --_Psalm 45_.


{68}

GOD IS OUR REFUGE

  God is our refuge and strength,
  A very present help in trouble.
  Therefore will we not fear, though the earth do change,
  And though the mountains be moved in the heart of the seas;
  Though the waters thereof roar and be troubled,
  Though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof.
  There is a river, the streams whereof make glad the city of God,
  The holy place of the tabernacles of the Most High.
  God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved:
  God shall help her, and that right early.
  The nations raged, the kingdoms were moved:
  He uttered his voice, the earth melted.
  The Lord of hosts is with us;
  The God of Jacob is our refuge.

  Come, behold the works of the Lord,
  What desolations he hath made in the earth.
  He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth;
  He breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder;
  He burneth the chariots in the fire.
  Be still, and know that I am God:
  I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the earth.
  The Lord of hosts is with us;
  The God of Jacob is our refuge.
                                      --_Psalm 46_.


{69}

A SONG OF VICTORY

  O clap your hands, all ye peoples;
  Shout unto God with the voice of triumph.
  For the Lord Most High is terrible;
  He is a great King over all the earth.
  He shall subdue the peoples under us,
  And the nations under our feet.
  He shall choose our inheritance for us,
  The excellency of Jacob whom he loved.
  God is gone up with a shout,
  The Lord with the sound of a trumpet.

  Sing praises to God, sing praises.
  Sing praises unto our King, sing praises.
  For God is the King of all the earth:
  Sing ye praises with understanding.
  God reigneth over the nations:
  God sitteth upon his holy throne.
  The princes of the peoples are gathered together
  To be the people of the God of Abraham:
  For the shields of the earth belong unto God;
  He is greatly exalted.
                                                   --_Psalm 47_.


{70}

A SONG OF MOUNT ZION

  Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised,
  In the city of our God, in his holy mountain.
  Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth,
  Is mount Zion, on the sides of the north,
  The city of the great King.

  We have thought on thy lovingkindness, O God,
  In the midst of thy temple.
  As is thy name, O God,
  So is thy praise unto the ends of the earth:
  Thy right hand is full of righteousness.
  Let mount Zion be glad,
  Let the daughters of Judah rejoice,
  Because of thy judgments.
  Walk about Zion, and go round about her:
  Tell the towers thereof.
  Mark ye well her bulwarks,
  Consider her palaces;
  That ye may tell it to the generation following.
  For this God is our God for ever and ever:
  He will be our guide even unto death.
                                             --_Psalm 48:1, 2, 9-14_.

{71}{72}

[Illustration]
  SHEPHERD WITH HIS FLOCK.
  Copyright by Underwood & Underwood and used by special permission.

  This beautiful picture is typical of the Oriental country. The view is
  the Scamander made famous by Homer, and the country is in the vicinity
  of old Troy, mentioned in the New Testament and again brought to
  notice by the conflicts of the great European war (1916).
[End illustration]


{73}

THE CATTLE UPON A THOUSAND HILLS ARE HIS

  God, even God, the Lord, hath spoken,
  And called the earth from the rising of the sun unto the
    going down thereof.
  Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty,
  God hath shined forth.
  Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence:
  A fire shall devour before him,
  And it shall be very tempestuous round about him.
  He shall call to the heavens above,
  And to the earth, that he may judge his people:
  Gather my saints together unto me;
  Those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice.
  And the heavens shall declare his righteousness;
  For God is judge himself.
  Hear, O my people, and I will speak;
  O Israel, and I will testify unto thee:
  I am God, even thy God.
  I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices;
  And thy burnt offerings are continually before me.
  I will take no bullock out of thy house,
  Nor he-goats out of thy folds.
  For every beast of the forest is mine,
  And the cattle upon a thousand hills.     {74}
  I know all the fowls of the mountains:
  And the wild beasts of the field are mine.
  If I were hungry, I would not tell thee:
  For the world is mine, and the fulness thereof.
  Will I eat the flesh of bulls,
  Or drink the blood of goats?
  Offer unto God the sacrifice of thanksgiving;
  And pay thy vows unto the Most High:
  And call upon me in the day of trouble;
  I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me.
                                                   --_Psalm 50:1-15_.


{75}

A PRAYER OF REPENTANCE

  Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy lovingkindness:
  According to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out
    my transgressions.
  Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity,
  And cleanse me from my sin.
  For I acknowledge my transgressions:
  And my sin is ever before me.
  Against thee, thee only, have I sinned,
  And done that which is evil in thy sight:
  That thou mayest be justified when thou speakest,
  And be clear when thou judgest.
  Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean:
  Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
  Hide thy face from my sins,
  And blot out all mine iniquities.
  Create in me a clean heart, O God;
  And renew a right spirit within me.
  Cast me not away from thy presence;
  And take not thy holy spirit from me.
  Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation:
  And uphold me with a free spirit.
  Then will I teach transgressors thy ways;
  And sinners shall be converted unto thee.     {76}
  O Lord, open thou my lips;
  And my mouth shall shew forth thy praise.
  For thou delightest not in sacrifice; else would I give it:
  Thou hast no pleasure in burnt offering.
  The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit:
  A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.

                                              --_Psalm 51:1-17_.

{77}

BE THOU EXALTED, O GOD, ABOVE THE HEAVENS

  Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me;
  For my soul taketh refuge in thee:
  Yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I take refuge,
  Until these calamities be overpast.
  I will cry unto God Most High;
  Unto God that performeth all things for me.
  He shall send from heaven, and save me,
  When he that would swallow me up reproacheth;
  God shall send forth his mercy and his truth.
  My soul is among lions;
  I lie among them that are set on fire,
  Even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows,
  And their tongue a sharp sword.
  Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens;
  Let thy glory be above all the earth.

  They have prepared a net for my steps;
  My soul is bowed down:
  They have digged a pit before me;
  They are fallen into the midst thereof themselves.
  My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed:
  I will sing, yea, I will sing praises.
  Awake up, my glory; awake, psaltery and harp:
  I myself will awake right early.                {78}
  I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the peoples:
  I will sing praises unto thee among the nations.
  For thy mercy is great unto the heavens,
  And thy truth unto the skies.
  Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens;
  Let thy glory be above all the earth.
                                              --_Psalm 57_.


{79}

THE ROCK THAT IS HIGHER THAN I

  Hear my cry, O God;
  Attend unto my prayer.
  From the end of the earth will I call unto thee, when my
    heart is overwhelmed:
  Lead me to the rock that is higher than I.
  For thou hast been a refuge for me,
  A strong tower from the enemy.
  I will dwell in thy tabernacle for ever:
  I will take refuge in the covert of thy wings.
  My soul waiteth only upon God:
  From him cometh my salvation.
  He only is my rock and my salvation:
  He is my high tower; I shall not be greatly moved.

  My soul, wait thou only upon God;
  For my expectation is from him.
  He only is my rock and my salvation:
  He is my high tower; I shall not be moved.
  With God is my salvation and my glory:
  The rock of my strength, and my refuge, is in God.

                                    --_Psalms 61:1-4; 62:1, 2, 5-7_.


{80}

A SONG OF THANKSGIVING

  Praise waiteth for thee, O God, in Zion:
  And unto thee shall the vow be performed.
  O thou that hearest prayer,
  Unto thee shall all flesh come.
  Iniquities prevail against me:
  As for our transgressions, thou shalt purge them away.
  Blessed is the man whom thou choosest,
    and causest to approach unto thee,
  That he may dwell in thy courts:
  We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house,
  The holy place of thy temple.
  By terrible things thou wilt answer us in righteousness,
  O God of our salvation;
  Thou that art the confidence of all the ends of the earth,
  And of them that are afar off upon the sea:
  Which by his strength setteth fast the mountains;
  Being girded about with might:
  Which stilleth the roaring of the seas, the roaring of their waves,
  And the tumult of the peoples.
  They also that dwell in the uttermost parts are afraid at thy tokens:
  Thou makest the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.   {81}
  Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it,
  Thou greatly enrichest it;
  The river of God is full of water:
  Thou providest them corn, when thou hast so prepared the earth.
  Thou waterest her furrows abundantly;
  Thou settlest the ridges thereof:
  Thou makest it soft with showers;
  Thou blessest the springing thereof.
  Thou crownest the year with thy goodness;
  And thy paths drop fatness.
  They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness:
  And the hills are girded with joy.
  The pastures are clothed with flocks;
  The valleys also are covered over with corn;
  They shout for joy, they also sing.
                                              --_Psalm 65_.


{82}

MAKE A JOYFUL NOISE UNTO THE LORD

  Make a joyful noise unto God, all the earth:
  Sing forth the glory of his name:
  Make his praise glorious.
  All the earth shall worship thee,
  And shall sing unto thee;
  They shall sing to thy name.
  O bless our God, ye peoples,
  And make the voice of his praise to be heard:
  Which holdeth our soul in life,
  And suffereth not our feet to be moved.
  For thou, O God, hast proved us:
  Thou hast tried us, as silver is tried.
  Come, and hear, all ye that fear God,
  And I will declare what he hath done for my soul.
  I cried unto him with my mouth,
  And he was extolled with my tongue.
  If I regard iniquity in my heart,
  The Lord will not hear:
  But verily God hath heard;
  He hath attended to the voice of my prayer.
  Blessed be God,
  Which hath not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me.

                                    --_Psalm 66:1, 2, 4, 8-10, 16-20_.

{83}{84}

[Illustration]
  "The river of God is full of water."
[End illustration]


{85}

LET THE PEOPLES PRAISE THEE

  God be merciful unto us, and bless us,
  And cause his face to shine upon us;
  That thy way may be known upon earth,
  Thy saving health among all nations.
  Let the peoples praise thee, O God;
  Let all the peoples praise thee.
  O let the nations be glad and sing for joy:
  For thou shalt judge the peoples righteously,
  And govern the nations upon earth.
  Let the peoples praise thee, O God;
  Let all the peoples praise thee.
  The earth hath yielded her increase:
  God, even our own God, shall bless us.
  God shall bless us;
  And all the ends of the earth shall fear him.
                                                  --_Psalm 67_.


{86}

A BATTLE HYMN FOR THE HOSTS OF THE LORD

  Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered;
  Let them also that hate him flee before him.
  As smoke is driven away, so drive them away:
  As wax melteth before the fire,
  So let the wicked perish at the presence of God.
  But let the righteous be glad; let them exult before God:
  Yea, let them rejoice with gladness.
  Sing unto God, sing praises to his name:
  Cast up a highway for him that rideth through the deserts;
  His name is the Lord; and exult ye before him.
  A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows,
  Is God in his holy habitation.
  God setteth the solitary in families:
  He bringeth out the prisoners into prosperity;
  But the rebellious dwell in a parched land.

  O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people,
  When thou didst march through the wilderness;
  The earth trembled,
  The heavens also dropped rain at the presence of God:
  Yon Sinai trembled at the presence of God, the God of Israel.
  Thou, O God, didst send a plentiful rain,
  Thou didst confirm thine inheritance, when it was weary.
  Thy congregation dwelt therein:
  Thou, O God, didst prepare of thy goodness for the poor.
  The Lord giveth the word:
  The women that publish the tidings are a great host.
  Kings of armies flee, they flee;
  And she that tarrieth at home divideth the spoil.
                                                      --_Psalm 68:1-12_.


{87}

O LORD, MAKE NO TARRYING!

  Make haste, O God, to deliver me;
  Make haste to help me, O Lord.
  Let them be ashamed and confounded
  That seek after my soul:
  Let them be turned backward and brought to dishonour
  That delight in my hurt.
  Let them be turned back by reason of their shame
  That say, "Aha! Aha!"
  Let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee;
  And let such as love thy salvation say continually,
  "Let God be magnified."
  But I am poor and needy;
  Make haste unto me, O God:
  Thou art my help and my deliverer;
  O Lord, make no tarrying!
                                       --_Psalm 70_.

{88}

THE RIGHTEOUS KING

  He shall judge thy people with righteousness,
  And thy poor with judgment.
  The mountains shall bring peace to the people,
  And the hills, in righteousness.
  He shall judge the poor of the people,
  He shall save the children of the needy,
  And shall break in pieces the oppressor.
  They shall fear thee while the sun endureth,
  And so long as the moon, throughout all generations.
  He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass:
  As showers that water the earth.
  In his days shall the righteous flourish;
  And abundance of peace, till the moon be no more.
  He shall have dominion also from sea to sea,
  And from the River unto the ends of the earth.
  They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him;
  And his enemies shall lick the dust.
  The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents:
  The kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts.
  Yea, all kings shall fall down before him:
  All nations shall serve him.
  For he shall deliver the needy when he crieth;
  And the poor, that hath no helper.
  He shall have pity on the poor and needy,      {89}
  And the souls of the needy he shall save.
  He shall redeem their soul from oppression and violence;
  And precious shall their blood be in his sight:
  And they shall live; and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba:
  And men shall pray for him continually;
  They shall bless him all the day long.
  There shall be abundance of corn in the earth
    upon the top of the mountains;
  The fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon:
  And they of the city shall flourish like grass of the earth.
  His name shall endure for ever;
  His name shall be continued as long as the sun:
  And men shall be blessed in him;
  All nations shall call him blessed.
  Give the king thy judgments, O God,
  And thy righteousness unto the king's son.
  Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel,
  Who only doeth wondrous things:
  And blessed be his glorious name for ever;
  And let the whole earth be filled with his glory.
  Amen, and Amen.
                                               --_Psalm 72:2-19_.


{90}

THY WAY WAS IN THE SEA

  I will make mention of the deeds of the Lord;
  For I will remember thy wonders of old.
  I will meditate also upon all thy work,
  And muse on thy doings.

  Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary:
  Who is a great god like unto God?
  Thou art the God that doest wonders:
  Thou hast made known thy strength among the peoples.
  Thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people,
  The sons of Jacob and Joseph.
  The waters saw thee, O God;
  The waters saw thee, they were afraid:
  The depths also trembled.
  The clouds poured out water;
  The skies sent out a sound:
  Thine arrows also went abroad.
  The voice of thy thunder was in the whirlwind;
  The lightnings lightened the world:
  The earth trembled and shook.
  Thy way was in the sea,
  And thy paths in the great waters,
  And thy footsteps were not known.
  Thou leddest thy people like a flock,
  By the hand of Moses and Aaron.
                                         --_Psalm 77:11-20_.


{91}

GIVE EAR, O SHEPHERD OF ISRAEL

  Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel,
  Thou that leadest Joseph like a flock;
  Thou that sittest upon the cherubim, shine forth.
  Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, stir up thy might,
  And come to save us.
  Turn us again, O God;
  And cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.

  O Lord God of hosts,
  How long wilt thou be angry against the prayer of thy people?
  Thou hast fed them with the bread of tears,
  And given them tears to drink in large measure.
  Thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours:
  And our enemies laugh among themselves.
  Turn us again, O God of hosts;
  And cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.

  Thou broughtest a vine out of Egypt:
  Thou didst drive out the nations, and plantedst it.
  Thou preparedst room before it,
  And it took deep root, and filled the land.
  The mountains were covered with the shadow of it,    {92}
  And the boughs thereof were like cedars of God.
  She sent out her branches unto the sea,
  And her shoots unto the River.
  Why hast thou broken down her fences,
  So that all they which pass by the way do pluck her?
  The boar out of the wood doth ravage it,
  And the wild beasts of the field feed on it.
  Turn again, we beseech thee, O God of hosts:
  Look down from heaven, and behold, and visit this vine,
  And the stock which thy right hand hath planted,
  And the branch that thou madest strong for thyself.
  It is burned with fire, it is cut down:
  They perish at the rebuke of thy countenance.
  Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand,
  Upon the son of man whom thou madest strong for thyself.
  So shall we not go back from thee:
  Quicken thou us, and we will call upon thy name.
  Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts;
  Cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.
                                                      --_Psalm 80_.

{93}{94}

[Illustration]
  BEDOUINS WITH CAMELS IN THE PLAIN NEAR MOUNT SINAI.
 Copyright by Underwood & Underwood and used by special permission.

  "We arrived at a certain place where the mountains betwixt which we
  were traveling opened out into a huge, wide, and very fair valley,
  and beyond this valley appeared the Mount of God, Sinai. This is a
  very extensive valley, lying under the side of the Mount of God.
  This is the huge and wide valley in which the children of Israel
  sojourned in those days, when Saint Moses ascended into the Mount of
  God and was there forty days and forty nights. This is the valley in
  which the calf was made; the place is shown to this day, for a great
  stone stands fixed to the very spot. As you go round about the
  mountain it appears to be one, though when you get within it there
  are many; but the whole is called the Mount of God, especially the
  one on whose summit is the place where the glory of God descended,
  as it is written; and it is in the middle of them all; and while all
  these mountains that are in the group are more glorious than I had
  ever expected to see, yet this one in the middle is so much higher
  than all the others, that when we approached it, straightway all
  these mountains which had appeared to us so glorious seemed but as
  little hills."--From the very interesting Diary of Saint Sylvia of
  Aquitaine, who about the year 385 made a pilgrimage to the East.
  This diary, which is one of the earliest "travel books" ever
  written, has only recently been discovered.


{95}

THE HOUSE OF THE LORD

  How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!
  My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord;
  My heart and my flesh cry out unto the living God.
  Yea, the sparrow hath found her an house,
  And the swallow a nest for herself, where she may lay her young,
  Even thine altars, O Lord of hosts,
  My King, and my God.
  Blessed are they that dwell in thy house:
  They will be still praising thee.
  Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee;
  In whose heart are the high ways to Zion.
  Passing through the valley of Weeping they make it a place of springs;
  Yea, the early rain covereth it with blessings.
  They go from strength to strength,
  Everyone of them appeareth before God in Zion.

  O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer:
  Give ear, O God of Jacob.
  Behold, O God our shield,
  And look upon the face of thine anointed.
  For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand.   {96}
  I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God,
  Than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.
  For the Lord God is a sun and a shield:
  The Lord will give grace and glory:
  No good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.
  O Lord of hosts,
  Blessed is the man that trusteth in thee.
                                                      --_Psalm 84_.


{97}

A PLEA FOR MERCY

  Lord, thou hast been favourable unto thy land:
  Thou hast brought back the captivity of Jacob.
  Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people,
  Thou hast covered all their sin.
  Thou hast taken away all thy wrath:
  Thou hast turned thyself from the fierceness of thine anger.
  Turn us, O God of our salvation,
  And cause thine indignation toward us to cease.
  Wilt thou be angry with us for ever?
  Wilt thou draw out thine anger to all generations?
  Wilt thou not quicken us again:
  That thy people may rejoice in thee?
  Shew us thy mercy, O Lord,
  And grant us thy salvation.

  I will hear what God the Lord will speak:
  For he will speak peace unto his people, and to his saints:
  But let them not turn again to folly.
  Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him;
  That glory may dwell in our land.
  Mercy and truth are met together;
  Righteousness and peace have kissed each other.
  Truth springeth out of the earth;
  And righteousness hath looked down from heaven.
  Yea, the Lord shall give that which is good;
  And our land shall yield her increase.
  Righteousness shall go before him;
  And shall make his footsteps a way to walk in.
                                                  --_Psalm 85_.


{98}

THE CRY OF THE NEEDY

  Bow down thine ear, O Lord, and answer me;
  For I am poor and needy.
  Preserve my soul; for I am godly:
  O thou my God, save thy servant that trusteth in thee.
  Be merciful unto me, O Lord;
  For unto thee do I cry all the day long.
  Rejoice the soul of thy servant;
  For unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.
  For thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive,
  And plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon thee.
  Give ear, O Lord, unto my prayer;
  And hearken unto the voice of my supplications.
  In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee;
  For thou wilt answer me.
  There is none like unto thee among the gods, O Lord;
  Neither are there any works like unto thy works.
  All nations whom thou hast made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord;
  And they shall glorify thy name.
  For thou art great, and doest wondrous things:
  Thou art God alone.
  Teach me thy way, O Lord; I will walk in thy truth:
  Unite my heart to fear thy name.
  I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with my whole heart;    {99}
  And I will glorify thy name for evermore.
  For great is thy mercy toward me;
  And thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest pit.
  O God, the proud are risen up against me,
  And the congregation of violent men have sought after my soul,
  And have not set thee before them.
  But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion and gracious,
  Slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy and truth.
  O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me;
  Give thy strength unto thy servant,
  And save the son of thine handmaid.
  Shew me a token for good;
  That they which hate me may see it, and be ashamed,
  Because thou, Lord, hast helped me, and comforted me.
                                                       --_Psalm 86_.


{100}

THE PRAISE OF ZION

  His foundation is in the holy mountains.
  The Lord loveth the gates of Zion
  More than all the dwellings of Jacob.
  Glorious things are spoken of thee,
  O city of God.
  I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon as among them that know me:
  Behold, Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia:
  This one was born there.
  Yea, of Zion it shall be said,
  This one and that one was born in her;
  And the Most High himself will establish her.
  The Lord will count, when he writeth up the peoples,
  This one was born there.
  They that sing as well as they that dance shall say,
  All my fountains are in thee.
                                                         --_Psalm 87_.

{101}{102}

[Illustration]
  MOUNT TABOR

  From a photograph in the possession of Rev. Louis F. Giroux of the
  American International College, Springfield, Mass., and used by his
  kind permission.

  "Esdraelon's plain still boasts its myrtle bowers,
  Golden with corn, or carpeted with flowers:
  How like a sainted mind that seeks the skies,
  Crowned with a glory, Tabor's tops arise.
  Jasmine's white bells and henna's yellow bloom,
  Breathe out their sweets till rocks e'en drink perfume;
  In viewless clouds those odors mount the air,
  And Tabor stands like some rich altar there."
                                                  --_Nicolas Michell_


{103}

THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH ARE THINE

  I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever:
  With my mouth will I make known thy faithfulness to all generations.
  For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever;
  Thy faithfulness shalt thou establish in the very heavens.

  And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O Lord;
  Thy faithfulness also in the assembly of the holy ones.
  For who in the skies can be compared unto the Lord?
  Who among the sons of the mighty is like unto the Lord?
  Thou rulest the pride of the sea:
  When the waves thereof arise, thou stillest them.
  The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine:
  The world and the fulness thereof, thou hast founded them.
  The north and the south, thou hast created them:
  Tabor and Hermon rejoice in thy name.
  Thou hast a mighty arm:
  Strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand.
  Righteousness and judgment are the foundation of thy throne:
  Mercy and truth go before thy face.
  Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound:
  They walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance.
  In thy name do they rejoice all the day:
  And in thy righteousness are they exalted.
  For thou art the glory of their strength:
  And in thy favour our horn shall be exalted.
  For our shield belongeth unto the Lord;
  And our king to the Holy One of Israel.

                                     --_Psalm 89:1, 2, 5, 6, 9, 11-18_.


{104}

AS A WATCH IN THE NIGHT

  Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place
  In all generations.
  Before the mountains were brought forth,
  Or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world,
  Even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.
  Thou turnest man to destruction;
  And sayest, Return, ye children of men.
  For a thousand years in thy sight
  Are but as yesterday when it is past,
  And as a watch in the night.
  Thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are as a sleep:
  In the morning they are like grass which groweth up.
  In the morning it flourisheth, and groweth up;
  In the evening it is cut down, and withereth.
  For we are consumed in thine anger,
  And in thy wrath are we troubled.
  Thou hast set our iniquities before thee,
  Our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.
  For all our days are passed away in thy wrath:
  We bring our years to an end as a tale that is told.
  The days of our years are threescore years and ten,
  Or even by reason of strength fourscore years;
  Yet is their pride but labour and sorrow;            {105}
  For it is soon gone, and we fly away.
  Who knoweth the power of thine anger,
  And thy wrath according to the fear that is due unto thee?
  So teach us to number our days,
  That we may get us an heart of wisdom.
  Return, O Lord; how long?
  And let it repent thee concerning thy servants.
  O satisfy us in the morning with thy mercy;
  That we may rejoice and be glad all our days.
  Make us glad according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted us,
  And the years wherein we have seen evil.
  Let thy work appear unto thy servants,
  And thy glory upon their children.
  And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us:
  And establish thou the work of our hands upon us;
  Yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.
                                                      --_Psalm 90_.


{106}

THE LORD IS OUR REFUGE

  He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High
  Shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.
  I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress;
  My God, in whom I trust.
  For he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler,
  And from the noisome pestilence.
  He shall cover thee with his pinions,
  And under his wings shalt thou take refuge:
  His truth is a shield and a buckler.
  Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night,
  Nor for the arrow that flieth by day;
  For the pestilence that walketh in darkness,
  Nor for the destruction that wasteth at noonday.
  A thousand shall fall at thy side,
  And ten thousand at thy right hand;
  But it shall not come nigh thee.
  Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold,
  And see the reward of the wicked.
  For thou, O Lord, art my refuge!
  Thou hast made the Most High thy habitation;
  There shall no evil befall thee,
  Neither shall any plague come nigh thy tent.
  For he shall give his angels charge over thee,
  To keep thee in all thy ways.                    {107}
  They shall bear thee up in their hands,
  Lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.
  Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder:
  The young lion and the serpent shalt thou trample under feet.
  Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him:
  I will set him on high, because he hath known my name.
  He shall call upon me, and I will answer him;
  I will be with him in trouble:
  I will deliver him, and honour him.
  With long life will I satisfy him,
  And shew him my salvation.
                                                  --_Psalm 91_.


{108}

THE SONG OF THE FLOODS

  The Lord reigneth; he is clothed with majesty;
  The Lord is clothed with strength wherewith he hath girded himself:
  The world also is established, that it cannot be moved.
  Thy throne is established of old:
  Thou art from everlasting.
  The floods have lifted up, O Lord,
  The floods have lifted up their voice;
  The floods lift up their waves.
  Above the voices of many waters,
  The mighty breakers of the sea,
  The Lord on high is mighty.
  Thy testimonies are very sure:
  Holiness becometh thine house,
  O Lord, for evermore.
                                      --_Psalm 93_.

{109}{110}

[Illustration]
  ON THE COAST OF PALESTINE AT SUNSET.
  From a photograph taken by Mrs. Fontaine Meriwether,
  and used by her kind permission.

  "The sea is his and he made it,
  And his hands formed the dry land."
[End illustration]


{111}

THE SEA AND THE LAND ARE HIS

  O come, let us sing unto the Lord:
  Let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation.
  Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving,
  Let us make a joyful noise unto him with psalms.
  For the Lord is a great God,
  And a great King above all gods.
  In his hand are the deep places of the earth;
  The heights of the mountains are his also.
  The sea is his, and he made it;
  And his hands formed the dry land.
  O come, let us worship and bow down;
  Let us kneel before the Lord our Maker:
  For he is our God,
  And we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand.

                                        --_Psalm 95:1-7_.


{112}

O SING UNTO THE LORD A NEW SONG

  O sing unto the Lord a new song:
  Sing unto the Lord, all the earth.
  Sing unto the Lord, bless his name;
  Shew forth his salvation from day to day.
  Declare his glory among the nations,
  His marvellous works among all the peoples.
  For great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised:
  He is to be feared above all gods.
  For all the gods of the peoples are idols:
  But the Lord made the heavens.
  Honour and majesty are before him:
  Strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.
  Give unto the Lord, ye kindreds of the peoples,
  Give unto the Lord glory and strength.
  Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name:
  Bring an offering, and come into his courts.
  O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness:
  Tremble before him, all the earth.
  Say among the nations, The Lord reigneth:
  The world also is established that it cannot be moved:
  He shall judge the peoples with equity.
  Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice;
  Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof;
  Let the field exult, and all that is therein;
  Then shall all the trees of the wood sing for joy
  Before the Lord, for he cometh;
  For he cometh to judge the earth:
  He shall judge the world with righteousness,
  And the peoples with his truth.
                                                 --_Psalm 96_.


{113}

THE LORD REIGNETH

  The Lord reigneth; let the earth rejoice;
  Let the multitude of isles be glad.
  Clouds and darkness are round about him:
  Righteousness and judgment are the foundation of his throne.
  A fire goeth before him,
  And burneth up his adversaries round about.
  His lightnings lightened the world:
  The earth saw, and trembled.
  The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord,
  At the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.
  The heavens declare his righteousness,
  And all the peoples have seen his glory.
  Ashamed be all they that serve graven images,
  That boast themselves of idols:
  Worship him, all ye gods.
  Zion heard and was glad,
  And the daughters of Judah rejoiced;
  Because of thy judgments, O Lord.
  For thou, Lord, art most high above all the earth:
  Thou art exalted far above all gods.
  O ye that love the Lord, hate evil:
  He preserveth the souls of his saints;
  He delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked.
  Light is sown for the righteous,
  And gladness for the upright in heart.
  Be glad in the Lord, ye righteous;
  And give thanks to his holy name.
                                           --_Psalm 97_.


{114}

LET THE SEA ROAR

  O sing unto the Lord a new song;
  For he hath done marvellous things:
  His right hand, and his holy arm, hath wrought salvation for him.
  The Lord hath made known his salvation:
  His righteousness hath he openly shewed in the sight of the nations.
  He hath remembered his mercy and his faithfulness toward
    the house of Israel:
  All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
  Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all the earth:
  Break forth and sing for joy, yea, sing praises.
  Sing praises unto the Lord with the harp;
  With the harp and the voice of melody.
  With trumpets and sound of cornet
  Make a joyful noise before the King, the Lord.
  Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof;
  The world, and they that dwell therein;
  Let the floods clap their hands;
  Let the hills sing for joy together
  Before the Lord, for he cometh to judge the earth:
  He shall judge the world with righteousness,
  And the peoples with equity.
                                               --_Psalm 98_.


{115}

HOLY IS THE LORD

  The Lord reigneth; let the peoples tremble:
  He sitteth above the cherubim; let the earth be moved.
  The Lord is great in Zion;
  And he is high above all the peoples.
  Let them praise thy great and terrible name:
  Holy is he.

  The king's strength also loveth justice;
  Thou dost establish equity;
  Thou executest justice and righteousness in Jacob.
  Exalt ye the Lord our God,
  And worship at his footstool:
  Holy is he.

  Moses and Aaron among his priests,
  And Samuel among them that call upon his name;
  They called upon the Lord, and he answereth them.
  He spake unto them in the pillar of cloud:
  They kept his testimonies,
  And the statute that he gave them.
  Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God:
  Thou wast a God that forgavest them,
  Though thou tookest vengeance of their doings.
  Exalt ye the Lord our God,
  And worship at his holy hill;
  For the Lord our God is holy.
                                       --_Psalm 99_.


{116}

THANKSGIVING AND PRAISE

  Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands.
  Serve the Lord with gladness:
  Come before his presence with singing.
  Know ye that the Lord he is God:
  It is he that hath made us, and we are his;
  We are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.
  Enter into his gates with thanksgiving,
  And into his courts with praise:
  Give thanks unto him, and bless his name.
  For the Lord is good; his mercy endureth for ever;
  And his faithfulness unto all generations.
                                               --_Psalm 100_.


{117}

GOD IS UNCHANGEABLE

  I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days:
  Thy years are throughout all generations.
  Of old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth;
  And the heavens are the work of thy hands.
  They shall perish, but thou shalt endure:
  Yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment;
  As a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed:
  But thou art the same,
  And thy years shall have no end.
                                            --_Psalm 102:24-27_.


{118}

OUR FATHER

  Bless the Lord, O my soul;
  And all that is within me, bless his holy name.
  Bless the Lord, O my soul,
  And forget not all his benefits:
  Who forgiveth all thine iniquities:
  Who healeth all thy diseases;
  Who redeemeth thy life from destruction;
  Who crowneth thee with lovingkindness and tender mercies:
  Who satisfieth thy mouth with good things;
  So that thy youth is renewed like the eagle.
  The Lord executeth righteous acts,
  And judgments for all that are oppressed.
  He made known his ways unto Moses,
  His doings unto the children of Israel.
  The Lord is full of compassion and gracious,
  Slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy.
  He will not always chide;
  Neither will he keep his anger for ever.
  He hath not dealt with us after our sins,
  Nor rewarded us after our iniquities.
  For as the heaven is high above the earth,
  So great is his mercy toward them that fear him.
  As far as the east is from the west,             {119}
  So far hath he removed our transgressions from us.
  Like as a father pitieth his children,
  So the Lord pitieth them that fear him.
  For he knoweth our frame;
  He remembereth that we are dust.
  As for man, his days are as grass;
  As a flower of the field, so he flourisheth.
  For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone;
  And the place thereof shall know it no more.
  But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting
    to everlasting upon them that fear him,
  And his righteousness unto children's children;
  To such as keep his covenant,
  And to those that remember his precepts to do them.
  The Lord hath established his throne in the heavens;
  And his kingdom ruleth over all.
  Bless the Lord, ye angels of his:
  Ye mighty in strength, that fulfil his word,
  Hearkening unto the voice of his word.
  Bless the Lord, all ye his hosts;
  Ye ministers of his, that do his pleasure.
  Bless the Lord, all ye his works,
  In all places of his dominion:
  Bless the Lord, O my soul.
                                        --_Psalm 108_.


{120}

GOD THE CREATOR

  Bless the Lord, O my soul.
  O Lord my God, thou art very great;
  Thou art clothed with honour and majesty.
  Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment;
  Who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain:
  Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters;
  Who maketh the clouds his chariot;
  Who walketh upon the wings of the wind:
  Who maketh winds his messengers;
  His ministers a flaming fire:
  Who laid the foundations of the earth,
  That it should not be moved for ever.
  Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a vesture;
  The waters stood above the mountains.
  At thy rebuke they fled;
  At the voice of thy thunder they hasted away;
  They went up by the mountains, they went down by the valleys,
  Unto the place which thou hadst founded for them.
  Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over;
  That they turn not again to cover the earth.
  He sendeth forth springs into the valleys;
  They run among the mountains:
  They give drink to every beast of the field;   {121}
  The wild asses quench their thirst.
  By them the birds of the heaven have their habitation,
  They sing among the branches.
  He watereth the mountains from his chambers:
  The earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works.
  He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle,
  And herb for the service of man;
  That he may bring forth food out of the earth:
  And wine that maketh glad the heart of man,
  And oil to make his face to shine,
  And bread that strengtheneth man's heart.
  The trees of the Lord are satisfied;
  The cedars of Lebanon, which he hath planted;
  Where the birds make their nests:
  As for the stork, the fir trees are her house.
  The high mountains are for the wild goats;
  The rocks are a refuge for the conies.
  He appointed the moon for seasons:
  The sun knoweth his going down.
  Thou makest darkness, and it is night;
  Wherein all the beasts of the forest do creep forth.
  The young lions roar after their prey,
  And seek their meat from God.
  The sun ariseth, they get them away,
  And lay them down in their dens.
  Man goeth forth unto his work
  And to his labour until the evening.
  O Lord, how manifold are thy works!
  In wisdom hast thou made them all:      {122}
  The earth is full of thy riches.
  Yonder is the sea, great and wide,
  Wherein are things creeping innumerable,
  Both small and great beasts.
  There go the ships;
  There is leviathan, whom thou hast formed to take his pastime therein.
  These wait all upon thee,
  That thou mayest give them their meat in due season.
  That thou givest unto them they gather;
  Thou openest thine hand, they are satisfied with good.
  Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled;
  Thou takest away their breath, they die,
  And return to their dust.
  Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created;
  And thou renewest the face of the ground.
  Let the glory of the Lord endure for ever;
  Let the Lord rejoice in his works:
  Who looketh on the earth, and it trembleth;
  He toucheth the mountains, and they smoke.
  I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live:
  I will sing praise to my God while I have any being.
  Let my meditation be sweet unto him:
  I will rejoice in the Lord.
  Let sinners be consumed out of the earth,
  And let the wicked be no more.
  Bless the Lord, O my soul.
  Praise ye the Lord.
                                    --_Psalm 104_.


{123}

HE HATH NOT DEALT SO WITH ANY NATION

  Oh give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his name;
  Make known among the peoples his doings.
  Sing unto him, sing praises unto him;
  Talk ye of all his marvellous works.
  Glory ye in his holy name:
  Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.
  Seek ye the Lord and his strength;
  Seek his face evermore.
  Remember his marvellous works that he hath done,
  His wonders, and the judgments of his mouth,
  O ye children of Abraham his servant,
  Ye children of Jacob, his chosen ones.
  He is the Lord our God:
  His judgments are in all the earth.
  He hath remembered his covenant for ever,
  The word which he commanded to a thousand generations,
  The covenant which he made with Abraham,
  And his oath unto Isaac,
  And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a statute,
  To Israel for an everlasting covenant,
  Saying, "Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan,
  The lot of your inheritance,"
  When they were but a few men in number,
  Yea, very few, and sojourners in it.   {124}
  And they went about from nation to nation,
  From one kingdom to another people.
  He suffered no man to do them wrong;
  Yea, he reproved kings for their sakes,
  Saying, "Touch not mine anointed ones,
  And do my prophets no harm."
  And he called for a famine upon the land;
  He brake the whole staff of bread.
  He sent a man before them;
  Joseph was sold for a servant:
  His feet they hurt with fetters;
  He was laid in chains of iron,
  Until the time that his word came to pass,
  The word of the Lord tried him.
  The king sent and loosed him;
  Even the ruler of peoples, and let him go free.
  He made him lord of his house,
  And ruler of all his substance;
  To bind his princes at his pleasure,
  And teach his elders wisdom.
  Israel also came into Egypt;
  And Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.
  And he increased his people greatly,
  And made them stronger than their adversaries.
  He turned their heart to hate his people,
  To deal subtilly with his servants.
  He sent Moses his servant,
  And Aaron whom he had chosen.
  They set among them his signs,        {125}
  And wonders in the land of Ham.
  He sent darkness, and made it dark;
  And they rebelled not against his words.
  He turned their waters into blood,
  And slew their fish.
  Their land swarmed with frogs,
  In the chambers of their kings.
  He spake, and there came swarms of flies,
  And lice in all their borders.
  He gave them hail for rain,
  And flaming fire in their land.
  He smote their vines also and their fig trees;
  And brake the trees of their borders.
  He spake, and the locust came,
  And the cankerworm, and that without number,
  And did eat up every herb in their land,
  And did eat up the fruit of their ground.
  He smote also all the firstborn in their land,
  The chief of all their strength.
  And he brought them forth with silver and gold:
  And there was not one feeble person among his tribes,
  Egypt was glad when they departed;
  For the fear of them had fallen upon them.
  He spread a cloud for a covering;
  And fire to give light in the night.
  They asked, and he brought quails,
  And satisfied them with the bread of heaven.
  He opened the rock, and waters gushed out;
  They ran in the dry places like a river.
  For he remembered his holy word.              {126}
  And Abraham his servant.
  And he brought forth his people with joy,
  And his chosen with singing.
  And he gave them the lands of the nations;
  And they took the labour of the peoples in possession:
  That they might keep his statutes,
  And observe his laws.
  Praise ye the Lord.

  Praise ye the Lord.
  O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord,
  Or shew forth all his praise?
  Blessed are they that keep judgment,
  And he that doeth righteousness at all times.
  Remember me, O Lord, with the favour that thou bearest unto thy people;
  O visit me with thy salvation:
  That I may see the prosperity of thy chosen,
  That I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation,
  That I may glory with thine inheritance.

  We have sinned with our fathers,
  We have committed iniquity, we have done wickedly.
  Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt;
  They remembered not the multitude of thy mercies;
  But were rebellious at the sea, even at the Red Sea.
  Nevertheless he saved them for his name's sake,
  That he might make his mighty power to be known.
  He rebuked the Red Sea also, and it was dried up:          {127}
  So he led them through the depths, as through a wilderness.
  And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them,
  And redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.
  And the waters covered their adversaries:
  There was not one of them left.
  Then believed they his words;
  They sang his praise.
  They soon forgot his works;
  They waited not for his counsel:
  But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness,
  And tempted God in the desert.
  And he gave them their request;
  But sent leanness into their soul.
  They envied Moses also in the camp,
  And Aaron the saint of the Lord.
  The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan,
  And covered the company of Abiram.
  And a fire was kindled in their company;
  The flame burned up the wicked.
  They made a calf in Horeb,
  And worshipped a molten image.
  Thus they changed their glory
  For the likeness of an ox that eateth grass.
  They forgot God their saviour,
  Which had done great things in Egypt;
  Wondrous works in the land of Ham,
  And terrible things by the Red Sea.
  Therefore he said that he would destroy them,
  Had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach,
  To turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them.      {128}
  Yea, they despised the pleasant land,
  They believed not his word;
  But murmured in their tents,
  And hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord.
  Therefore he lifted up his hand unto them,
  That he would overthrow them in the wilderness:
  And that he would overthrow them among the nations,
  And scatter them in the lands.
  They joined themselves also unto Baal-peor,
  And ate the sacrifices of the dead.
  Thus they provoked him to anger with their doings;
  And the plague broke in upon them.
  Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment:
  And so the plague was stayed.
  And that was counted unto him for righteousness,
  Unto all generations for evermore.
  They angered him also at the waters of Meribah,
  So that it went ill with Moses for their sakes:
  Because they were rebellious against his spirit,
  And he spake unadvisedly with his lips.
  They did not destroy the peoples,
  As the Lord commanded them;
  But mingled themselves with the nations,
  And learned their works:
  And they served their idols;
  Which became a snare unto them:
  Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto demons,
  And shed innocent blood, even the blood of
    their sons and of their daughters,             {129}
  Whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan;
  And the land was polluted with blood.
  Thus were they defiled with their works,
  And did very evil in their doings.
  Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against this people,
  And he abhorred his inheritance.
  And he gave them into the hand of the nations;
  And they that hated them ruled over them.
  Their enemies also oppressed them,
  And they were brought into subjection under their hand.
  Many times did he deliver them;
  But they were rebellious in their counsel,
  And were brought low in their iniquity.
  Nevertheless he regarded their distress,
  When he heard their cry:
  And he remembered for them his covenant,
  And repented according to the multitude of his lovingkindnesses.
  He made them also to be pitied
  Of all those that carried them captive.

  Save us, O Lord our God,
  And gather us from among the nations,
  To give thanks unto thy holy name,
  And to triumph in thy praise.

  Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel,
  From everlasting even to everlasting.
  And let all the people say, Amen.
  Praise ye the Lord.
                                           --_Psalms 105, 106_.


{130}

HIS MERCY ENDURETH FOREVER

  O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  Let the redeemed of the Lord say so,
  Whom he hath redeemed from the hand of the adversary;
  And gathered them out of the lands,
  From the east and from the west,
  From the north and from the south.

  They wandered in the wilderness in a desert way;
  They found no city of habitation.
  Hungry and thirsty,
  Their soul fainted in them.
  Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble,
  And he delivered them out of their distresses.
  He led them also by a straight way,
  That they might go to a city of habitation.
  Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
  And for his wonderful works to the children of men!
  For he satisfieth the longing soul,
  And the hungry soul he filleth with good.

  Such as sat in darkness and in the shadow of death,
  Being bound in affliction and iron;
  Because they rebelled against the words of God,
  And contemned the counsel of the Most High:
  Therefore he brought down their heart with labour;    {131}
  They fell down, and there was none to help.
  Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble,
  And he saved them out of their distresses.
  He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death,
  And brake their bands in sunder.
  Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
  And for his wonderful works to the children of men!
  For he hath broken the gates of brass,
  And cut the bars of iron in sunder.

  Fools because of their transgression,
  And because of their iniquities, are afflicted.
  Their soul abhorreth all manner of meat;
  And they draw near unto the gates of death.
  Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble,
  And he saveth them out of their distresses.
  He sendeth his word, and healeth them,
  And delivereth them from their destructions.
  Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
  And for his wonderful works to the children of men!
  And let them offer the sacrifices of thanksgiving,
  And declare his works with singing.
  They that go down to the sea in ships,
  That do business in great waters;
  These see the works of the Lord,
  And his wonders in the deep.
  For he commandeth, and raiseth the stormy wind,
  Which lifteth up the waves thereof.
  They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths: {132}
  Their soul melteth away because of trouble.
  They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man,
  And are at their wits' end.
  Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble,
  And he bringeth them out of their distresses.
  He maketh the storm a calm,
  So that the waves thereof are still.
  Then are they glad because they be quiet;
  So he bringeth them unto the haven where they would be.
  Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
  And for his wonderful works to the children of men!
  Let them exalt him also in the assembly of the people,
  And praise him in the seat of the elders.

  He turneth rivers into a wilderness,
  And watersprings into a thirsty ground;
  A fruitful land into a salt desert,
  For the wickedness of them that dwell therein.
  He turneth a wilderness into a pool of water,
  And a dry land into watersprings.
  And there he maketh the hungry to dwell,
  That they may prepare a city of habitation;
  And sow fields, and plant vineyards,
  And get them fruits of increase.
  He blesseth them also, so that they are multiplied greatly;
  And he suffereth not their cattle to decrease.
  Again, they are diminished and bowed down
  Through oppression, trouble, and sorrow.
  He poureth contempt upon princes,            {133}
  And causeth them to wander in the waste, where there is no way.
  Yet setteth he the needy on high from affliction,
  And maketh him families like a flock.
  The upright shall see it, and be glad;
  And all iniquity shall stop her mouth.
  Whoso is wise shall give heed to these things,
  And they shall consider the mercies of the Lord.
                                                     --_Psalm 107_.


{134}

HIS GLORY IS ABOVE THE HEAVENS

  Praise ye the Lord.
  Praise, O ye servants of the Lord,
  Praise the name of the Lord.
  Blessed be the name of the Lord
  From this time forth and for evermore.
  From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same
  The Lord's name is to be praised.
  The Lord is high above all nations,
  And his glory above the heavens.
  Who is like unto the Lord our God,
  Who hath his seat on high,
  Who humbleth himself to behold
  The things that are in heaven and in the earth?
  He raiseth up the poor out of the dust,
  And lifteth up the needy from the dunghill;
  That he may set him with princes,
  Even with the princes of his people.
  When Israel went forth out of Egypt,
  The house of Jacob from a people of strange language;
  Judah became his sanctuary,
  Israel his dominion.
  The sea saw it, and fled;          {135}
  Jordan was driven back.
  The mountains skipped like rams,
  The little hills like young sheep.
  What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleest?
  Thou Jordan, that thou turnest back?
  Ye mountains, that ye skip like rams;
  Ye little hills, like young sheep?
  Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord,
  At the presence of the God of Jacob;
  Who turned the rock into a pool of water,
  The flint into a fountain of waters.
                                        --_Psalms 113:1-8; 114_.


{136}

IDOLS OF SILVER AND GOLD

  Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us,
  But unto thy name give glory,
  For thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake.
  Wherefore should the nations say,
  Where is now their God?
  But our God is in the heavens:
  He hath done whatsoever he pleased.
  Their idols are silver and gold,
  The work of men's hands.
  They have mouths, but they speak not;
  Eyes have they, but they see not;
  They have ears, but they hear not;
  Noses have they, but they smell not;
  They have hands, but they handle not;
  Feet have they, but they walk not;
  Neither speak they through their throat.
  They that make them shall be like unto them;
  Yea, everyone that trusteth in them.
                                              --_Psalm 115:1-8_.


{137}

I WILL CALL UPON THE NAME OF THE LORD

  I love the Lord, because he hath heard
  My voice and my supplications.
  Because he hath inclined his ear unto me,
  Therefore will I call upon him as long as I live.
  The sorrows of death compassed me,
  And the pains of Sheol seized me:
  I found trouble and sorrow.
  Then called I upon the name of the Lord;
  O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul.
  Gracious is the Lord, and righteous;
  Yea, our God is merciful.
  The Lord preserveth the simple:
  I was brought low, and he saved me.
  Return unto thy rest, O my soul;
  For the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee.
  For thou hast delivered my soul from death,
  Mine eyes from tears,
  And my feet from falling.
  I will walk before the Lord
  In the land of the living.
  I believe, for I will speak:
  I was greatly afflicted:               {138}
  I said in my haste,
  All men are a lie.
  What shall I render unto the Lord
  For all his benefits toward me?
  I will take the cup of salvation,
  And call upon the name of the Lord.
  I will pay my vows unto the Lord,
  Yea, in the presence of all his people.
  Precious in the sight of the Lord
  Is the death of his saints.
  O Lord, truly I am thy servant:
  I am thy servant, the son of thine handmaid;
  Thou hast loosed my bonds.
  I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving,
  And will call upon the name of the Lord.
  I will pay my vows unto the Lord.
                                            --_Psalm 116:1-18_.


{139}

PRAISE THE LORD, YE NATIONS

  O praise the Lord, all ye nations;
  Laud him, all ye peoples.
  For his mercy is great toward us;
  And the truth of the Lord endureth for ever.
  Praise ye the Lord.
                                             --_Psalm 117_.


{140}

THE LORD IS MY STRENGTH AND SONG

  O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  Let Israel now say,
  That his mercy endureth for ever.
  Let the house of Aaron now say,
  That his mercy endureth for ever.
  Let them now that fear the Lord say,
  That his mercy endureth for ever.

  Out of my distress I called upon the Lord:
  The Lord answered me and set me in a large place.
  The Lord is on my side; I will not fear:
  What can man do unto me?
  The Lord is on my side among them that help me:
  Therefore shall I see my desire upon them that hate me.
  It is better to trust in the Lord
  Than to put confidence in man.
  It is better to trust in the Lord
  Than to put confidence in princes.
  All nations compassed me about:
  In the name of the Lord I will cut them off.
  They compassed me about; yea, they compassed me about:
  In the name of the Lord I will cut them off.
  They compassed me about like bees;
    they are quenched as the fire of thorns:    {141}
  In the name of the Lord I will cut them off.
  Thou didst thrust sore at me that I might fall:
  But the Lord helped me.
  The Lord is my strength and song;
  And he is become my salvation.
  The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tents of the righteous:
  The right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly.
  The right hand of the Lord is exalted:
  The right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly.
  I shall not die, but live,
  And declare the works of the Lord.
  The Lord hath chastened me sore:
  But he hath not given me over unto death.
  Open to me the gates of righteousness:
  I will enter into them, I will give thanks unto the Lord.
  This is the gate of the Lord;
  The righteous shall enter into it.
  I will give thanks unto thee, for thou hast answered me,
  And art become my salvation.
  The stone which the builders rejected
  Is become the head of the corner.
  This is the Lord's doing;
  It is marvellous in our eyes.
  This is the day which the Lord hath made;
  We will rejoice and be glad in it.
  Save now, we beseech thee, O Lord:
  O Lord, we beseech thee, send now prosperity.
  Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord:     {142}
  We have blessed you out of the house of the Lord.
  The Lord is God, and he hath given us light:
  Bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of the altar.
  Thou art my God, and I will give thanks unto thee:
  Thou art my God, I will exalt thee.
  O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good;
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
                                                       --_Psalm 118_.


{143}

THE SONGS OF THE PURE IN HEART

  Blessed are they that are perfect in the way,
  Who walk in the law of the Lord.
  Blessed are they that keep his testimonies,
  That seek him with the whole heart.
  Yea, they do no unrighteousness;
  They walk in his ways.
  Thou hast commanded us thy precepts,
  That we should observe them diligently.
  Oh that my ways were established
  To observe thy statutes!
  Then shall I not be ashamed,
  When I have respect unto all thy commandments.
  I will give thanks unto thee with uprightness of heart,
  When I learn thy righteous judgments.
  I will observe thy statutes:
  O forsake me not utterly.

  Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way?
  By taking heed thereto according to thy word.
  With my whole heart have I sought thee:
  O let me not wander from thy commandments.
  Thy word have I laid up in mine heart,
  That I might not sin against thee.
  Blessed art thou, O Lord:
  Teach me thy statutes.                    {144}
  With my lips have I declared
  All the judgments of thy mouth.
  I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies,
  As much as in all riches.
  I will meditate in thy precepts,
  And have respect unto thy ways.
  I will delight myself in thy statutes:
  I will not forget thy word.

  Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live;
  So will I observe thy word.
  Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold
  Wondrous things out of thy law.
  I am a sojourner in the earth:
  Hide not thy commandments from me.
  My soul breaketh for the longing
  That it hath unto thy judgments at all times.
  Thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed,
  Who wander from thy commandments.
  Take away from me reproach and contempt;
  For I have kept thy testimonies.
  Princes also sat and talked against me:
  But thy servant did meditate in thy statutes.
  Thy testimonies also are my delight
  And my counsellors.

  My soul cleaveth unto the dust:
  Quicken thou me according to thy word.
  I declared my ways, and thou answeredst me:
  Teach me thy statutes.                         {145}
  Make me to understand the way of thy precepts:
  So shall I meditate of thy wondrous works.
  My soul melteth for heaviness:
  Strengthen thou me according unto thy word.
  Remove from me the way of falsehood:
  And grant me thy law graciously.
  I have chosen the way of faithfulness:
  Thy judgments have I set before me.
  I cleave unto thy testimonies:
  O Lord, put me not to shame.
  I will run the way of thy commandments,
  When thou shalt enlarge my heart.

  Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes;
  And I shall keep it unto the end.
  Give me understanding, and I shall keep the law;
  Yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart.
  Make me to go in the path of thy commandments;
  For therein do I delight.
  Incline my heart unto thy testimonies,
  And not to covetousness.
  Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity,
  And quicken me in thy ways.
  Confirm thy word unto thy servant,
  Which belongeth unto the fear of thee.
  Turn away my reproach whereof I am afraid;
  For thy judgments are good.
  Behold, I have longed after thy precepts:
  Quicken me in thy righteousness.
  Let thy mercies also come unto me, O Lord,     {146}
  Even thy salvation, according to thy word.
  So shall I have an answer for him that reproacheth me;
  For I trust in thy word.
  And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth;
  For I have hoped in thy judgments.
  So shall I observe thy law continually
  For ever and ever.
  And I will walk at liberty;
  For I have sought thy precepts.
  I will also speak of thy testimonies before kings,
  And will not be ashamed.
  And I will delight myself in thy commandments,
  Which I have loved.
  I will lift up my hands also unto thy commandments, which I have loved;
  And I will meditate in thy statutes.

  Thy hands have made me and fashioned me:
  Give me understanding, that I may learn thy commandments.
  They that fear thee shall see me and be glad;
  Because I have hoped in thy word.
  I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are righteous,
  And that in faithfulness thou hast afflicted me.
  Let, I pray thee, thy lovingkindness be for my comfort,
  According to thy word unto thy servant.
  Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live:
  For thy law is my delight.
  Let the proud be ashamed; for they have overthrown me wrongfully:  {147}
  But I will meditate in thy precepts.
  Let those that fear thee turn unto me,
  And they shall know thy testimonies.
  Let my heart be perfect in thy statutes;
  That I be not ashamed.

  My soul fainteth for thy salvation:
  But I hope in thy word.
  Mine eyes fail for thy word,
  While I say, "When wilt thou comfort me?"
  For I am become like a bottle in the smoke;
  Yet do I not forget thy statutes.
  How many are the days of thy servant?
  When wilt thou execute judgment on them that persecute me?
  The proud have digged pits for me,
  Who are not after thy law.
  All thy commandments are faithful:
  They persecute me wrongfully; help thou me.
  They had almost consumed me upon earth;
  But I forsook not thy precepts.
  Quicken me after thy lovingkindness;
  So shall I observe the testimony of thy mouth.

  For ever, O Lord,
  Thy word is settled in heaven.
  Thy faithfulness is unto all generations:
  Thou hast established the earth, and it abideth.
  They abide this day according to thine ordinances;
  For all things are thy servants.                     {148}
  Unless thy law had been my delight,
  I should then have perished in mine affliction.
  I will never forget thy precepts;
  For with them thou hast quickened me.
  I am thine, save me;
  For I have sought thy precepts.
  The wicked have waited for me to destroy me;
  But I will consider thy testimonies.
  I have seen an end of all perfection;
  But thy commandment is exceeding broad.

  Oh how love I thy law!
  It is my meditation all the day.
  Thy commandments make me wiser than mine enemies;
  For they are ever with me.
  I have more understanding than all my teachers;
  For thy testimonies are my meditation.
  I understand more than the aged,
  Because I have kept thy precepts.
  I have refrained my feet from every evil way,
  That I might observe thy word.
  I have not turned aside from thy judgments;
  For thou hast taught me.
  How sweet are thy words unto my taste!
  Yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth!
  Through thy precepts I get understanding:
  Therefore I hate every false way.

  Thy word is a lamp unto my feet and a light unto my path.
  I have sworn, and have confirmed it,
  That I will observe thy righteous judgments.      {149}
  I am afflicted very much:
  Quicken me, O Lord, according unto thy word.
  Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill offerings of my mouth, O Lord,
  And teach me thy judgments.
  My soul is continually in my hand;
  Yet do I not forget thy law.
  The wicked have laid a snare for me;
  Yet went I not astray from thy precepts.
  Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever;
  For they are the rejoicing of my heart.
  I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes,
  For ever, even unto the end.
  I hate them that are of a double mind;
  But thy law do I love.
  Thou art my hiding place and my shield:
  I hope in thy word.
  Depart from me, ye evil-doers;
  That I may keep the commandments of my God.
  Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live;
  And let me not be ashamed of my hope.
  Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe,
  And shall have respect unto thy statutes continually.
  Thou hast set at nought all them that err from thy statutes;
  For their deceit is falsehood.
  Thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like dross:
  Therefore I love thy commandments.
  My flesh trembleth for fear of thee;       {150}
  And I am afraid of thy judgments.
  I have done judgment and justice:
  Leave me not to mine oppressors.
  Be surety for thy servant for good:
  Let not the proud oppress me.
  Mine eyes fail for thy salvation,
  And for thy righteous word.
  Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy,
  And teach me thy statutes.
  I am thy servant, give me understanding;
  That I may know thy testimonies.
  It is time for the Lord to work;
  For they have made void thy law.
  Therefore I love thy commandments
  Above gold, yea, above fine gold.
  Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right;
  And I hate every false way.

  Thy testimonies are wonderful:
  Therefore doth my soul keep them.
  The opening of thy words giveth light;
  It giveth understanding unto the simple.
  I opened wide my mouth, and panted;
  For I longed for thy commandments.
  Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me,
  As thou usest to do unto those that love thy name.
  Order my footsteps in thy word;
  And let not any iniquity have dominion over me.   {151}
  Redeem me from the oppression of man:
  So will I observe thy precepts.
  Make thy face to shine upon thy servant;
  And teach me thy statutes.
  Mine eyes run down with rivers of water,
  Because they observe not thy law.

  Righteous art thou, O Lord,
  And upright are thy judgments.
  Thou hast commanded thy testimonies in righteousness
    and very faithfulness.
  My zeal hath consumed me,
  Because mine adversaries have forgotten thy words.
  Thy word is very pure;
  Therefore thy servant loveth it.
  I am small and despised:
  Yet do not I forget thy precepts.
  Thy righteousness is everlasting righteousness,
  And thy law is truth.
  Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me:
  Yet thy commandments are my delight.
  Thy testimonies are righteous for ever:
  Give me understanding, and I shall live.

  I have called with my whole heart; answer me, O Lord:
  I will keep thy statutes.
  I have called unto thee; save me,
  And I shall observe thy testimonies.
  I rose before the dawning of the morning, and cried:
  I hoped in thy words.                                  {152}
  Mine eyes outwatched the night watches,
  That I might meditate in thy word.
  Hear my voice according unto thy lovingkindness:
  Quicken me, O Lord, according to thy judgments.
  They draw nigh that follow after wickedness;
  They are far from thy law.
  Thou art nigh, O Lord,
  And all thy commandments are truth.
  Of old have I known from thy testimonies,
  That thou hast founded them for ever.

  Consider mine affliction, and deliver me;
  For I do not forget thy law.
  Plead thou my cause, and redeem me:
  Quicken me according to thy word.
  Salvation is far from the wicked;
  For they seek not thy statutes.
  Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord:
  Quicken me according to thy judgments.
  Many are my persecutors and mine adversaries;
  Yet have I not swerved from thy testimonies.
  I beheld the treacherous dealers, and was grieved;
  Because they observe not thy word.
  Consider how I love thy precepts:
  Quicken me, O Lord, according to thy lovingkindness.
  The sum of thy word is truth;
  And everyone of thy righteous judgments endureth for ever.

                                           --_Psalm 119:1-48, 73-160_.

{153}{154}

[Illustration]
  MOUNT CARMEL

  "I will lift my eyes unto the mountains."
[End illustration]


{155}

I WILL LIFT MINE EYES UNTO THE MOUNTAINS

  I will lift up mine eyes unto the mountains:
  From whence shall my help come?
  My help cometh from the Lord,
  Who made heaven and earth.

  He will not suffer thy foot to be moved:
  He that keepeth thee will not slumber.
  Behold, he that keepeth Israel
  Shall neither slumber nor sleep.
  The Lord is thy keeper:
  The Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.
  The sun shall not smite thee by day,
  Nor the moon by night.
  The Lord shall keep thee from all evil;
  He shall keep thy soul.
  The Lord shall keep thy going out and thy coming in,
  From this time forth and for evermore.
                                                    --_Psalm 121_.


{156}

A PILGRIM SONG

  I was glad when they said unto me,
  "Let us go unto the house of the Lord."
  Our feet are standing
  Within thy gates, O Jerusalem;
  Jerusalem, that art builded
  As a city that is compact together:
  Whither the tribes go up, even the tribes of the Lord,
  For a testimony unto Israel,
  To give thanks unto the name of the Lord.
  For there are set thrones for judgment,
  The thrones of the house of David.
  Pray for the peace of Jerusalem:
  They shall prosper that love thee.
  Peace be within thy walls,
  And prosperity within thy palaces.
  For my brethren and companions' sakes,
  I will now say, "Peace be within thee."
  For the sake of the house of the Lord our God
  I will seek thy good.
                                               --_Psalm 122_.


{157}

A SONG OF THE EXILES

  When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion,
  We were like unto them that dream.
  Then was our mouth filled with laughter,
  And our tongue with singing:
  Then said they among the nations,
  The Lord hath done great things for them.
  The Lord hath done great things for us;
  Whereof we are glad.
  Turn again our captivity, O Lord,
  As the streams in the South.
  They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.
  Though he goeth on his way weeping, bearing forth the seed;
  He shall come again with joy, bringing his sheaves with him.

                                                     --_Psalm 126_.

{158}

"DE PROFUNDIS."

  Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord.
  Lord, hear my voice:
  Let thine ears be attentive
  To the voice of my supplications.
  If thou, Lord, shouldest mark iniquities,
  O Lord, who shall stand?
  But there is forgiveness with thee,
  That thou mayest be feared.
  I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait,
  And in his word do I hope.
  My soul looketh for the Lord,
  More than watchmen look for the morning;
  Yea, more than watchmen for the morning.
  O Israel, hope in the Lord;
  For with the Lord there is mercy,
  And with him is plenteous redemption.
  And he shall redeem Israel
  From all his iniquities.
                                           --_Psalm 130_.


{159}

BROTHERHOOD

  Behold, how good and how pleasant it is
  For brethren to dwell together in unity!
  It is like the precious oil upon the head,
  That ran down upon the beard,
  Even Aaron's beard;
  That came down upon the skirt of his garments;
  Like the dew of Hermon,
  That cometh down upon the mountains of Zion:
  For there the Lord commanded the blessing,
  Even life for evermore.
                                              --_Psalm 133_.


{160}

BLESS YE THE LORD

  Behold, bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord,
  Who by night stand in the house of the Lord.
  Lift up your hands to the sanctuary,
  And bless ye the Lord.
  The Lord bless thee out of Zion;
  Even he that made heaven and earth.

  Praise ye the Lord.
  Praise ye the name of the Lord;
  Praise him, O ye servants of the Lord:
  Ye that stand in the house of the Lord,
  In the courts of the house of our God.
  Praise ye the Lord; for the Lord is good:
  Sing praises unto his name; for it is pleasant.
  For the Lord hath chosen Jacob unto himself,
  And Israel for his peculiar treasure.
  For I know that the Lord is great,
  And that our Lord is above all gods.
  Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that hath he done,
  In heaven and in earth, in the seas and in all deeps.
  He causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth;
  He maketh lightnings for the rain;
  He bringeth forth the wind out of his treasuries.       {161}
  Who smote the firstborn of Egypt,
  Both of man and beast.
  He sent signs and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt,
  Upon Pharaoh, and upon all his servants.
  Who smote many nations,
  And slew mighty kings;
  Sihon king of the Amorites,
  And Og king of Bashan,
  And all the kingdoms of Canaan:
  And gave their land for an heritage,
  An heritage unto Israel his people.
  Thy name, O Lord, endureth for ever;
  Thy memorial, O Lord, throughout all generations.
  For the Lord shall judge his people,
  And repent himself concerning his servants.

  The idols of the nations are silver and gold,
  The work of men's hands.
  They have mouths, but they speak not;
  Eyes have they, but they see not;
  They have ears, but they hear not;
  Neither is there any breath in their mouths.
  They that make them shall be like unto them;
  Yea, everyone that trusteth in them.

  O house of Israel, bless ye the Lord:
  O house of Aaron, bless ye the Lord:
  O house of Levi, bless ye the Lord:
  Ye that fear the Lord, bless ye the Lord.
  Blessed be the Lord out of Zion,            {162}
  Who dwelleth at Jerusalem.
  Praise ye the Lord.

  O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  O give thanks unto the God of gods:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  O give thanks unto the Lord of lords:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  To him who alone doeth great wonders:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  To him who by understanding made the heavens:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  To him who spread forth the earth above the waters:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  To him who made great lights:
  For his mercy endureth for ever:
  The sun to rule by day:
  For his mercy endureth for ever:
  The moon and stars to rule by night:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  To him who smote Egypt in their firstborn:
  For his mercy endureth for ever:
  And brought out Israel from among them:
  For his mercy endureth for ever:
  With a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  To him who divided the Red Sea in sunder:
  For his mercy endureth for ever:
  And made Israel to pass through the midst of it:     {163}
  For his mercy endureth for ever:
  But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  To him who led his people through the wilderness:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  To him who smote great kings:
  For his mercy endureth for ever:
  And slew famous kings:
  For his mercy endureth for ever:
  Sihon king of the Amorites:
  For his mercy endureth for ever:
  And Og king of Bashan:
  For his mercy endureth for ever:
  And gave their land for an heritage:
  For his mercy endureth for ever:
  Even an heritage unto Israel his servant:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  Who remembered us in our low estate:
  For his mercy endureth for ever:
  And hath delivered us from our adversaries:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  He giveth food to all flesh:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
  O give thanks unto the God of heaven:
  For his mercy endureth for ever.
                                        --_Psalms 134-136_.


{164}

THE EYE OF THE LORD

  O Lord, thou hast searched me, and known me.
  Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising,
  Thou understandest my thought afar off.
  Thou searchest out my path and my lying down,
  And art acquainted with all my ways.
  For there is not a word in my tongue,
  But, lo, O Lord, thou knowest it altogether.
  Thou hast beset me behind and before,
  And laid thine hand upon me.
  Such knowledge is too wonderful for me;
  It is high, I cannot attain unto it.
  Whither shall I go from thy spirit?
  Or whither shall I flee from thy presence?
  If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there:
  If I make my bed in Sheol, behold, thou art there.
  If I take the wings of the morning,
  And dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea;
  Even there shall thy hand lead me,
  And thy right hand shall hold me.
  If I say, Surely the darkness shall overwhelm me,
  And the light about me shall be night;
  Even the darkness hideth not from thee,
  But the night shineth as the day:
  The darkness and the light are both alike to thee.    {165}
  How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God!
  How great is the sum of them!
  If I should count them, they are more in number than the sand:
  When I awake, I am still with thee.

  Search me, O God, and know my heart:
  Try me, and know my thoughts:
  And see if there be any way of wickedness in me,
  And lead me in the way everlasting.

                               --_Psalm 139:1-12, 17, 18, 23, 24_.


{166}

HAPPY IS THE PEOPLE WHOSE GOD IS THE LORD

  Blessed be the Lord my rock,
  Who teacheth my hands to war,
  And my fingers to fight:
  My lovingkindness, and my fortress,
  My high tower, and my deliverer;
  My shield, and he in whom I trust;
  Who subdueth my people under me.
  Lord, what is man, that thou takest knowledge of him?
  Or the son of man, that thou makest account of him?
  Man is like to vanity:
  His days are as a shadow that passeth away.
  Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down:
  Touch the mountains, and they shall smoke.
  Cast forth lightning, and scatter them;
  Send out thine arrows, and discomfit them.
  Stretch forth thy hand from above;
  Rescue me, and deliver me out of great waters,
  Out of the hand of aliens;
  Whose mouth speaketh deceit,
  And whose right hand is a right hand of falsehood,

  I will sing a new song unto thee, O God:
  Upon a psaltery of ten strings will I sing praises unto thee.  {167}
  Thou art he that giveth salvation unto kings;
  Who rescueth David his servant from the hurtful sword.
  Rescue me, and deliver me out of the hand of aliens,
  Whose mouth speaketh deceit,
  And whose right hand is a right hand of falsehood.

  When our sons shall be as plants grown up in their youth,
  And our daughters as corner stones hewn after the fashion of a palace;
  When our garners are full, affording all manner of store,
  And our sheep bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our fields;
  When our oxen are well laden;
  When there is no breaking in, and no going forth,
  And no outcry in our streets:
  Happy is the people that is in such a case;
  Yea, happy is the people whose God is the Lord.
                                                   --_Psalm 144_


{168}

SLOW TO ANGER AND PLENTEOUS IN MERCY

  I will extol thee, my God, O King;
  And I will bless thy name for ever and ever.
  Every day will I bless thee;
  And I will praise thy name for ever and ever.
  Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised;
  And his greatness is unsearchable.
  One generation shall laud thy works to another,
  And shall declare thy mighty acts.
  Of the glorious majesty of thine honour,
  And of thy wondrous works, will I meditate.
  And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts;
  And I will declare thy greatness.
  They shall utter the memory of thy great goodness,
  And shall sing of thy righteousness

  The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion;
  Slow to anger, and of great mercy.
  The Lord is good to all;
  And his tender mercies are over all his works.
  All thy works shall give thanks unto thee, O Lord;
  And thy saints shall bless thee.
  They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom,
  And talk of thy power;
  To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts,
  And the glory of the majesty of his kingdom.        {169}
  Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,
  And thy dominion endureth throughout all generations.
  The Lord upholdeth all that fall,
  And raiseth up all those that be bowed down.
  The eyes of all wait upon thee;
  And thou givest them their food in due season.
  Thou openest thine hand,
  And satisfiest the desire of every living thing.
  The Lord is righteous in all his ways,
  And gracious in all his works.
  The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him,
  To all that call upon him in truth.
  He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him;
  He also will hear their cry, and will save them.
  The Lord preserveth all them that love him;
  But all the wicked will he destroy.
  My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord;
  And let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.

                                                      --_Psalm 145_.


{170}

SONGS OF PRAISE

  Praise ye the Lord.
  Praise the Lord, O my soul.
  While I live will I praise the Lord:
  I will sing praises unto my God while I have any being.

  Put not your trust in princes,
  Nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help.
  His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth;
  In that very day his thoughts perish.
  Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help,
  Whose hope is in the Lord his God:
  Which made heaven and earth,
  The sea, and all that in them is;
  Which keepeth truth for ever:
  Which executeth judgment for the oppressed;
  Which giveth food to the hungry:
  The Lord looseth the prisoners;
  The Lord openeth the eyes of the blind;
  The Lord raiseth up them that are bowed down;
  The Lord loveth the righteous;
  The Lord preserveth the strangers;
  He upholdeth the fatherless and widow;
  But the way of the wicked he turneth upside down.
  The Lord shall reign for ever,                       {171}
  Thy God, O Zion, unto all generations.
  Praise ye the Lord.

  Praise ye the Lord;
  For it is good to sing praises unto our God;
  For it is pleasant, and praise is comely.

  The Lord doth build up Jerusalem;
  He gathereth together the outcasts of Israel.
  He healeth the broken in heart,
  And bindeth up their wounds.
  He telleth the number of the stars;
  He giveth them all their names.
  Great is our Lord, and mighty in power;
  His understanding is infinite.
  The Lord upholdeth the meek:
  He bringeth the wicked down to the ground.

  Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving;
  Sing praises upon the harp unto our God:
  Who covereth the heaven with clouds,
  Who prepareth rain for the earth,
  Who maketh grass to grow upon the mountains.
  He giveth to the beast his food,
  And to the young ravens which cry.
  He delighteth not in the strength of the horse:
  He taketh no pleasure in the legs of a man.
  The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear him,
  In those that hope in his mercy.
  Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem;
  Praise thy God, O Zion.                            {172}
  For he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates;
  He hath blessed thy children within thee.
  He maketh peace in thy borders;
  He filleth thee with the finest of the wheat.
  He sendeth out his commandment upon earth;
  His word runneth very swiftly.
  He giveth snow like wool;
  He scattereth the hoar frost like ashes.
  He casteth forth his ice like morsels:
  Who can stand before his cold?
  He sendeth out his word, and melteth them:
  He causeth his wind to blow, and the waters flow.
  He sheweth his word unto Jacob,
  His statutes and his judgments unto Israel.
  He hath not dealt so with any nation:
  And as for his judgments, they have not known them.
  Praise ye the Lord.

  Praise ye the Lord.
  Praise ye the Lord from the heavens:
  Praise him in the heights.
  Praise ye him, all his angels:
  Praise ye him, all his host.
  Praise ye him, sun and moon:
  Praise him, all ye stars of light.
  Praise him, ye heavens of heavens,
  And ye waters that be above the heavens.
  Let them praise the name of the Lord:
  For he commanded, and they were created.    {173}
  He hath also established them for ever and ever:
  He hath made a decree which shall not pass away.
  Praise the Lord from the earth.
  Ye dragons, and all deeps:
  Fire and hail, snow and vapour;
  Stormy wind, fulfilling his word:
  Mountains and all hills;
  Fruitful trees and all cedars:
  Beasts and all cattle;
  Creeping things and flying fowl:
  Kings of the earth and all peoples;
  Princes and all judges of the earth:
  Both young men and maidens;
  Old men and children:
  Let them praise the name of the Lord;
  For his name alone is exalted:
  His glory is above the earth and heaven.
  And he hath lifted up the horn of his people,
  The praise of all his saints;
  Even of the children of Israel, a people near unto him.
  Praise ye the Lord.

  Praise ye the Lord.
  Praise God in his sanctuary:
  Praise him in the firmament of his power.
  Praise him for his mighty acts:
  Praise him according to his excellent greatness.
  Praise him with the sound of the trumpet:
  Praise him with the psaltery and harp.            {174}
  Praise him with the timbrel and dance:
  Praise him with stringed instruments and the pipe.
  Praise him upon the loud cymbals:
  Praise him upon the high sounding cymbals.
  Let every thing that hath breath praise the Lord.
  Praise ye the Lord.
                                             --_Psalms 146-148, 150_.


{175}{176}

[Illustration]
  TWO WOMEN GRINDING AT THE MILL
  Copyright by Underwood & Underwood and used by special permission.

  The hand mill for grinding grain shown in the picture is exactly the
  same as those in use in Palestine from the earliest times. It
  consists of two circular stones, one of which is placed on top of
  the other, the upper and lower surfaces being flat. The underside of
  the upper stone is slightly concave, fitting into the convex surface
  of the lower stone. From the center of the lower stone a strong pin of
  wood passes through a funnel-shaped hole in the upper stone. Into
  this hole the grain is thrown, and as it is ground escapes as meal
  to a smooth sheepskin placed beneath. On the surface of the upper
  stone near the circumference, a handle is fixed by which the stone
  is turned. The meal is ground every day. The work, which is very
  laborious, is performed by the women of the household. In the
  picture this mill is rather more elaborate than usual, the lower
  stone being elongated and used as a trough for the meal as it falls
  over the edges of the mill. There are two baskets of grain and one
  of meal. One of the women is about to put a handful of grain in the
  mill. Both are helping to turn the upper stone by the handle
[End illustration]


{177}

SELECTIONS FROM JOB

{178}

PERSONS REPRESENTED.
  _Friends of Job_.
    _Job, a rich man of the East_.
    _Eliphaz, the Temanite_.
    _Bildad, the Shuhite_.
    _Zophar, the Naamathite_.
    _Elihu, son of Barachel, the Buzite_.

  _The Wife of Job_.
  _The LORD_.
  _Satan_.
  _Sons of God, Messengers, Friends, Spectators_.


PLACES.
  _The Land of Uz, a country east of Palestine_.
  _The Court of Heaven_.


TIME.
  The Patriarchal Age.


{179}

JOB

There is one question over which men have puzzled for many, many
hundreds of years. It is the question, "Why do good people suffer?"
When wicked people suffered, the reason seemed to be plain. It was
because they had done wrong; and people who do wrong ought to suffer.
But good people as well as wicked people suffer, and it has always
been very hard for many to see how God can be good and this still be
true.

This is the question that a Hebrew poet tried to answer in the book of
Job. He pictured a man named Job who had lived a good life and feared
God, and yet who suffered. He lost the flocks and herds which had made
him rich. A whirlwind swept away the house in which his sons and
daughters were feasting, and killed them all. At last a disease for
which there was no known cure came upon him. Poor and alone, he faced
a certain death of great suffering.

Then three friends came to see him. Finding him suffering so, they
believed that he must have been a great sinner, and that the suffering
was God's punishment for his sin. They tried to make him see that he
had sinned. At first they only hint it, very gently and tenderly, but
when he still insists that he has not sinned in any way which should
bring such suffering, they become more harsh and {180} plainly charge
him with being greedy of gain and cruel to the poor. He says that he
has not been guilty of these things. And so, the poet means to say,
when men suffer, it does not always mean that they have sinned. Then,
in the poem, God speaks out of a storm. He says that Job cannot
understand the sea or the sky or the storm or the winter's cold or the
instincts of the animals. Does he think, then, that he will be able to
understand how God deals with men? He trusts God in the things that
are good. Can he not trust him in the things that seem evil also? Job
is willing to trust God, and the book ends with a picture of a happy,
prosperous old age for this man who has suffered so much.

What is the writer's answer, then, to the question why good men
suffer? His answer is that we cannot tell why such men suffer. But we
know that God is wise and good, and we may trust him, even if we find
it impossible, as we always shall, to answer all the questions of
life.

The book of Job is a great dramatic poem. It is dramatic not because
it was meant to be acted as the Greek and English drama; the Hebrews
knew nothing about drama of this kind. But it consists of dialogue
between various speakers, and has the true dramatic spirit and
intensity of personal feeling. It is the nearest approach to the drama
in the Bible. It is printed here in dramatic form because it was felt
that this would be suggestive and helpful to the reader. It has a
prologue and an epilogue which are in prose, while the speeches are in
poetic form, and are printed like the blank verse of the Greek or
English drama.


{181}

PROLOGUE

There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job; and that man
was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and shunned evil.
And there were born unto him seven sons and three daughters. His
substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels,
and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she-asses, and a very
great household; so that this man was the greatest of all the children
of the east. And his sons went and held a feast in the house of each
one upon his day; and they sent and called for their three sisters to
eat and to drink with them. And whenever the feast days came round Job
sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and
offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all; for Job
said, "It may be that my sons have sinned, and renounced God in their
hearts." Thus did Job continually.

Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves
before the Lord, and Satan came also among them.

And thus they spoke:--

THE LORD--"Whence comest thou?"

SATAN--"From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and
down in it."

THE LORD--"Hast thou considered my servant Job? for there is none like
him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God,
and shunneth evil."

SATAN--"Doth Job fear God for nought? Hast not thou made an hedge
about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath, on every
side? thou hast blessed the {182} work of his hands, and his substance
is increased in the land. But put forth thine hand now, and touch all
that he hath, and he will renounce thee to thy face."

THE LORD--"Behold, all that he hath is in thy power; only upon himself
put not forth thine hand."

Then Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord. After this on a
certain day messengers came with tidings to Job.

FIRST MESSENGER--"The oxen were plowing, and the asses feeding beside
them: and the Sabeans fell upon them, and took them away; yea, they
have slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am
escaped alone to tell thee."

SECOND MESSENGER--"The fire of God is fallen from heaven, and hath
burned up the sheep, and the servants, and consumed them; and I only
am escaped alone to tell thee."

THIRD MESSENGER--"The Chaldeans made three bands, and fell upon the
camels, and have taken them away, yea, and slain the servants with the
edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee."

FOURTH MESSENGER--"Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking
wine in their eldest brother's house: and, behold, there came a great
wind from the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and
it fell upon the young men, and they are dead; and I only am escaped
alone to tell thee."

JOB--(He arose, rent his mantle, shaved his head, and fell on the
ground and worshipped.)

{183}

"Naked came I into the world, and naked I must return out of it. The
Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the
Lord."

Again there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves
before the Lord, and Satan came also among them to present himself
before the Lord.

And thus they spoke:--

THE LORD--"From whence comest thou?"

SATAN--"From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and
down in it."

THE LORD--"Hast thou considered my servant Job? for there is none like
him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God,
and shunneth evil: and he still holdeth fast his integrity, although
thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause."

SATAN--"Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for his
life. But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh,
and he will renounce thee to thy face."

THE LORD--"Behold, he is in thy hands; only spare his life."

Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with
sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown. And he took him a
potsherd to scrape himself, and he sat among the ashes.

THE WIFE OF JOB--"Dost thou still hold fast thine integrity? renounce
God, and die."

JOB--"Thou speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh. What? shall
we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?"

{184}

Now when Job's three friends heard of all this evil that was come upon
him, they came everyone from his own place; Eliphaz the Temanite, and
Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite: and they made an
appointment together to come to mourn with him and to comfort him. And
when they lifted up their eyes afar off, and knew him not, they lifted
up their voice, and wept; and they rent everyone his mantle, and
sprinkled dust upon their heads. So they sat down with him upon the
ground seven days and seven nights, and none spake a word unto him:
for they saw that his grief was very great.

(The action of the dramatic poem itself now begins.)

I

JOB.

  Why died I not at birth?
  Why did life receive me?
  For now should I have lain down and been quiet;
  I should have slept; then had I been at rest:
  With kings and counsellors of the earth,
  Which built up waste places for themselves;
  Or with princes that had gold,
  Who filled their houses with silver:
  There the wicked cease from troubling;
  And there the weary be at rest.
  There the prisoners are at ease together;
  They hear not the voice of the taskmaster.
  The small and great are there;                     {185}
  And the servant is free from his master.
  Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery,
  And life unto the bitter in soul;
  Which long for death, but it cometh not;
  And dig for it more than for hid treasures;
  Which rejoice exceedingly,
  And are glad, when they can find the grave?
  Why is light given to a man whose way is hid,
  And whom God hath hedged in?
  For my sighing cometh before I eat,
  And my groans are poured out like water.
  For the thing which I fear cometh upon me,
  And that which I am afraid of cometh unto me.
  I am not at ease, neither am I quiet, neither have I rest;
  But trouble cometh.


ELIPHAZ.

  If one assay to commune with thee, wilt thou be grieved?
  But who can withhold himself from speaking?
  Behold, thou hast instructed many,
  And thou hast strengthened the weak hands.
  Thy words have upholden him that was falling,
  And thou hast confirmed the feeble knees.
  But now it is come unto thee, and thou faintest;
  It toucheth thee, and thou art troubled.
  Is not thy fear of God thy confidence,
  And thy hope the integrity of thy ways?
  Now a thing was secretly brought to me,
  And mine ear received a whisper thereof.   {186}
  In thoughts from the visions of the night,
  When deep sleep falleth on men,
  Fear came upon me, and trembling,
  Which made all my bones to shake.
  Then a spirit glided before my face;
  The hair of my flesh stood up.
  It stood still, but I could not discern the appearance thereof;
  A form was before mine eyes:
  There was silence, and I heard a voice, saying,
  Shall mortal man be more just than God?
  Shall a man be more pure than his Maker?
  Behold, he putteth no trust in his servants;
  And his angels he chargeth with folly:
  How much more them that dwell in houses of clay.

  But man is born unto trouble,
  As the sparks fly upward.
  But as for me, I would seek unto God,
  And unto God would I commit my cause:
  Who doeth great things and unsearchable;
  Marvellous things without number:
  Who giveth rain upon the earth,
  And sendeth waters upon the fields:
  So that he setteth up on high those that be low;
  And those which mourn are exalted to safety.
  He frustrateth the devices of the crafty,
  So that their hands cannot perform their enterprise.
  He taketh the wise in their own craftiness:              {187}
  And the counsel of the froward is carried headlong.
  They meet with darkness in the daytime,
  And grope at noonday as in the night.
  But he saveth from the sword of their mouth,
  Even the needy from the hand of the mighty.
  So the poor hath hope,
  And iniquity stoppeth her mouth.

  Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth:
  Therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty.
  For he maketh sore, and bindeth up;
  He woundeth, and his hands make whole.
  In famine he shall redeem thee from death;
  And in war from the power of the sword.
  Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue;
  Neither shalt thou be afraid of destruction when it cometh.
  At destruction and dearth thou shalt laugh;
  Neither shalt thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth.
  For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field;
  And the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.
  Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age,
  Like as a shock of corn cometh in in its season.
  Lo this, we have searched it, so it is;
  Hear it, and know thou it for thy good.


JOB.

  Oh that my vexation were but weighed,
  And my calamity laid in the balances together!
  For now it would be heavier than the sand of the seas:
  Therefore have my words been rash.                        {188}
  For the arrows of the Almighty are within me,
  The poison whereof my spirit drinketh up:
  The terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.

  Oh that I might have my request;
  And that God would grant me the thing that I long for!
  Even that it would please God to crush me;
  That he would let loose his hand, and cut me off!
  Then should I yet have comfort;
  Yea, I would exult in pain that spareth not:
  For I have not denied the words of the Holy One.
  What is my strength, that I should wait?
  And what is mine end, that I should be patient?
  Is my strength the strength of stones?
  My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook,
  As the channel of brooks that pass away;
  Which are black by reason of the ice,
  And wherein the snow hideth itself:
  When they grow warm, they vanish:
  When it is hot, they are consumed out of their place.
  The caravans that travel by the way of them turn aside;
  They go up into the waste, and perish.
  The caravans of Tema looked,
  The companies of Sheba waited for them.
  They were ashamed because they had hoped;
  They came thither, and were confounded.
  See now,--ye are just like that,
  Ye see a terror, and are afraid.
  Did I say, Give unto me?
  Or, Offer a present for me of your substance?   {189}
  Or, Deliver me from the adversary's hand?
  Or, Redeem me from the hand of the oppressors?

  Teach me, and I will hold my peace:
  And cause me to understand wherein I have erred.


JOB.

(He speaks now to the Lord.)

  What is man, that thou shouldest magnify him,
  And that thou shouldest set thine heart upon him,
  And that thou shouldest visit him every morning,
  And try him every moment?

  If I have sinned, what do I unto thee, O thou watcher of men?
  Why hast thou set me as a mark for thee,
  So that I am a burden to myself?
  And why dost thou not pardon my transgression,
    and take away mine iniquity?
  For now shall I lie down in the dust;
  And thou shalt seek me diligently, but I shall not be.


BILDAD.

  How long wilt thou speak these things?
  And how long shall the words of thy mouth be like a mighty wind?
  Doth God pervert judgment?
  Or doth the Almighty pervert justice?
  If thy children have sinned against him,
  And he have delivered them into the hand of their transgression:  {190}
  If thou wouldest seek diligently unto God,
  And make thy supplication to the Almighty;
  If thou wert pure and upright;
  Surely now he would awake for thee,
  And make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.

  For inquire, I pray thee, of the former age,
  And apply thyself to that which their fathers have searched out:
  (For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing,
  Because our days upon earth are a shadow:)
  Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee,
  And utter words out of their heart?
  "Can the rush grow up without mire?
  Can the flag grow without water?"
  Whilst it is yet in its greenness, and not cut down,
  It withereth before any other herb.
  So are the paths of all that forget God;
  And the hope of the godless man shall perish:
  Whose confidence shall break in sunder,
  And whose trust is a spider's web.
  He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand:
  He shall hold fast thereby, but it shall not endure.
  He is green before the sun,
  And his shoots go forth over his garden.
  His roots are wrapped about the heap,
  He beholdeth the place of stones.
  If he be destroyed from his place,
  Then it shall deny him, saying, "I have not seen thee."   {191}
  Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man,
  Neither will he uphold the evil-doers.
  He will yet fill thy mouth with laughter,
  And thy lips with shouting.
  They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame;
  And the tent of the wicked shall be no more.


JOB.

  Of a truth I know that it is so:
  But how can man be just with God?
  Should he desire to contend with him,
  He cannot answer him one of a thousand.
  He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength:
  Who hath hardened himself against him, and prospered?
  Who removeth the mountains, and they know it not.
  When he overturneth them in his anger.
  Who shaketh the earth out of her place,
  And the pillars thereof tremble.
  Who commandeth the sun, and it riseth not;
  And sealeth up the stars.
  Who alone stretcheth out the heavens,
  And treadeth upon the waves of the sea.
  Who maketh the Bear, Orion, and the Pleiades,
  And the chambers of the south.
  Who doeth great things past finding out;
  Yea, marvellous things without number.
  Lo, he goeth by me, and I see him not:
  He passeth on also, but I perceive him not.     {192}
  If we speak of the strength of the mighty, lo, he is there!
  And if of judgment, who will appoint me a time?
  Though I be righteous, mine own mouth shall condemn me:
  Though I be perfect, it shall prove me perverse.
  I am perfect; I regard not myself;
  I despise my life.
  It is all one; therefore I say,
  He destroyeth the perfect and the wicked.

  Now my days are swifter than a courier:
  They flee away, they see no good.
  They are passed away as the swift ships:
  As the eagle that swoopeth on the prey.
  My soul is weary of my life;
  I will give free course to my complaint;
  I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
  I will say unto God, "Do not condemn me;
  Shew me wherefore thou contendest with me.
  Is it good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress,
  That thou shouldest despise the work of thine hands?

  Are not my days few? cease then,
  And let me alone, that I may take comfort a little,
  Before I go whence I shall not return,
  Even to the land of darkness and of the shadow of death;
  A land of thick darkness, as darkness itself;
  A land of the shadow of death, without any order,
  And where the light is as darkness."

{193}

ZOPHAR.

  Should not the multitude of words be answered?
  And should a man full of talk be justified?
  Should thy boastings make men hold their peace?
  And when thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed?
  For thou sayest, "My doctrine is pure,
  And I am clean in thine eyes."
  But Oh that God would speak,
  And open his lips against thee;
  And that he would shew thee the secrets of wisdom,
  That it is manifold in effectual working!
  Know therefore that God exacteth of thee
    less than thine iniquity deserveth.
  Canst thou by searching find out God?
  Canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection?
  It is high as heaven; what canst thou do?
  Deeper than Sheol; what canst thou know?
  The measure thereof is longer than the earth,
  And broader than the sea.

  For he knoweth vain men:
  He seeth iniquity also, even though he consider it not.
  If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away,
  And let not unrighteousness dwell in thy tents;
  Surely then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot;
  Yea, thou shalt be stedfast, and shalt not fear:
  For thou shalt forget thy misery;
  Thou shalt remember it as waters that are passed away:
  And thy life shall be clearer than the noonday;
  Though there be darkness, it shall be as the morning.

{194}

JOB.

  No doubt but ye are the people,
  And wisdom shall die with you.
  But I have understanding as well as you;
  I am not inferior to you:
  Yea, who knoweth not such things as these?
  Lo, mine eye hath seen all this,
  Mine ear hath heard and understood it.
  What ye know, the same do I know also:
  I am not inferior unto you.
  Surely I would speak to the Almighty,
  And I desire to reason with God.
  But ye are forgers of lies,
  Ye are all physicians of no value.
  Oh that ye would altogether hold your peace!
  And it should be your wisdom.
  Your memorable sayings are proverbs of ashes.

  Though he slay me, yet will I wait for him:
  Nevertheless I will maintain my ways before him.
  This also shall be my salvation;
  For a godless man shall not come before him.
  Hear diligently my speech,
  And let my declaration be in your ears.
  Behold now, I have ordered my cause;
  I know that I am righteous.
  Who is he that will contend with me?

  How many are mine iniquities and sins?
  Make me to know my transgression and my sin.
  Wherefore hidest thou thy face,                {195}
  And holdest me for thine enemy?
  Wilt thou harass a driven leaf?
  And wilt thou pursue the dry stubble?

  Man that is born of a woman
  Is of few days, and full of trouble.
  He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down:
  He fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not.
  And dost thou open thine eyes upon such an one,
  And bringest me into judgment with thee?

  For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again,
  And that the tender branch thereof will not cease.
  Though the root thereof grow old in the earth,
  And the stock thereof die in the ground;
  Yet through the scent of water it will bud,
  And put forth boughs like a plant.
  But man dieth, and wasteth away:
  Yea, man giveth up his spirit, and where is he?

  If a man die, shall he live again?
  All the days of my warfare would I wait,
  Till my release should come.
  Thou shouldest call, and I would answer thee:
  Thou wouldest have a desire to the work of thine hands.


THE FIRST CYCLE OF SPEECHES IS ENDED.

The three friends center their thought about God. The question is, why
has Job suffered? Their answer is, because he has sinned. God is just,
and would never make a man suffer unless he had sinned. _Eliphaz_ says
that all men are imperfect, and so {196} suffer. Let Job acknowledge
that he has sinned, and this suffering will be only discipline, and
God will again bless him. _Bildad_ says that the fathers have always
understood that God was just. The man who does not believe as they did
must be wicked. _Zophar_ says that God knows Job has sinned, even if
Job himself is too blind to see it; else he would not make Job suffer.
_Job_ is perplexed. Has he sinned so as to merit this suffering? No.
If they say that God is just--yes, but what does God mean, then, by
dealing thus with him? He had expected sympathy from his friends. Why
do they not give it? He can only turn helplessly to God himself. Would
that he could meet God as one might a man, and plead his cause! But,
no! Even that chance for justice is cut off. And yet they can talk of
God as being just!


II

ELIPHAZ.

  Should a wise man make answer with vain knowledge,
  And fill his belly with the east wind?
  Should he reason with unprofitable talk,
  Or with speeches wherewith he can do no good?
  Yea, thou doest away with fear,
  And restrainest devotion before God.
  For thine iniquity teacheth thy mouth,
  And thou choosest the tongue of the crafty.
  Thine own mouth condemneth thee, and not I;
  Yea, thine own lips testify against thee.
  Art thou the first man that was born?
  Or wast thou brought forth before the hills?
  Hast thou heard the secret counsel of God?
  And dost thou restrain wisdom to thyself?
  What knowest thou, that we know not?           {197}
  What understandest thou, which is not in us?
  With us are both the grayheaded and the very aged men,
  Much older than thy father.
  Are the consolations of God too small for thee,
  And the word that dealeth gently with thee?
  Why doth thine heart carry thee away?
  And why do thine eyes wink?
  That thou turnest thy spirit against God,
  And lettest such words go out of thy mouth.


JOB.

  I have heard many such things:
  Miserable comforters are ye all.
  Shall vain words have an end?
  Or what provoketh thee that thou answerest?
  I also could speak as ye do;
  If your soul were in my soul's stead,
  I could join words together against you,
  And shake mine head at you.
  But I would strengthen you with my mouth,
  And the solace of my lips should assuage your grief.

  God delivereth me to the ungodly,
  And casteth me into the hands of the wicked.
  I was at ease, and he brake me asunder;
  Yea, he hath taken me by the neck, and dashed me to pieces:
  He hath also set me up for his mark.
  His archers compass me round about,      {198}
  My face is red with weeping,
  And on my eyelids is the shadow of death;
  Although there is no violence in mine hands,
  And my prayer is pure.

  O earth, cover not thou my blood,
  And let my cry have no resting place.
  Even now, behold, my witness is in heaven,
  And he that voucheth for me is on high.
  My friends scorn me:
  But mine eye poureth out tears unto God;
  That he would maintain the right of a man with God,
  And of a son of man with his neighbour!
  For when a few years are come,
  I shall go the way whence I shall not return.
  My spirit is consumed, my days are extinct,
  The grave is ready for me.
  Surely there are mockers with me,
  And mine eye abideth in their provocation.
  But return ye, all of you, and come now:
  And I shall not find a wise man among you.
  My days are past, my purposes are broken off,
  Even the thoughts of my heart.
  They change the night into day:
  The light, say they, is near unto the darkness.
  If I look for Sheol as mine house:
  If I have spread my couch, in the darkness;
  If I have said to corruption, "Thou art my father";
  To the worm, "Thou art my mother, and my sister";       {199}
  Where then is my hope?
  And as for my hope, who shall see it?
  It shall go down to the bars of Sheol,
  When once there is rest in the dust.


BILDAD.

  How long will ye lay snares for words?
  Consider, and afterwards we will speak.
  Wherefore are we counted as beasts,
  And are become unclean in your sight?
  Thou that tearest thyself in thine anger,
  Shall the earth be forsaken for thee?
  Or shall the rock be removed out of its place?
  Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out,
  And the spark of his fire shall not shine.
  The light shall be dark in his tent,
  And his lamp above him shall be put out.
  The steps of his strength shall be straitened,
  And his own counsel shall cast him down.
  He shall be rooted out of his tent wherein he trusteth;
  And he shall be brought to the king of terrors.
  He shall be driven from light into darkness,
  And chased out of the world.
  He shall have neither son nor son's son among his people,
  Nor any remaining where he sojourned.
  They that come after shall be astonished at his day,
  As they that went before were frightened.
  Surely such are the dwellings of the unrighteous,
  And this is the place of him that knoweth not God.


{200}

JOB.

  How long will ye vex my soul,
  And break me in pieces with words?
  These ten times have ye reproached me:
  Ye are not ashamed that ye deal hardly with me.
  And if indeed I have erred,
  Mine error remaineth with myself.
  If indeed ye will magnify yourselves against me,
  And plead against me my reproach:
  Know now that God hath wronged me in my cause,
  And hath compassed me with his net.
  Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard:
  I cry for help, but there is no judgment.
  He hath fenced up my way that I cannot pass,
  And hath set darkness in my paths.
  He hath put my brethren far from me,
  And mine acquaintance are wholly estranged from me.
  My kinsfolk have failed,
  And my familiar friends have forgotten me.

  Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends;
  For the hand of God hath touched me.
  Why do ye persecute me as God,
  And are not satisfied with my flesh?
  Oh that my words were now written!
  Oh that they were inscribed in a book!
  That with an iron pen and lead
  They were graven in the rock for ever!
  But I know that my redeemer liveth,                      {201}
  And that he shall stand up at the last upon the earth:
  And after my skin hath been thus destroyed,
  Yet from my flesh shall I see God:
  Whom I shall see for myself,
  And mine eyes shall behold, and not another.


ZOPHAR.

  Knowest thou not this of old time,
  Since man was placed upon earth,
  That the triumphing of the wicked is short,
  And the joy of the godless but for a moment?
  Though his excellency mount up to the heavens,
  And his head reach unto the clouds;
  He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be found:
  Yea, he shall be chased away as a vision of the night.
  The eye which saw him shall see him no more;
  Neither shall his place any more behold him.
  For he hath oppressed and forsaken the poor;
  He hath violently taken away an house, and he shall not build it up.
  Because he knew no quietness within him,
  He shall not save aught of that wherein he delighteth.
  There was nothing left that he devoured not;
  Therefore his prosperity shall not endure.
  In the fulness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits:
  The hand of everyone that is in misery shall come upon him.
  The heavens shall reveal his iniquity,
  And the earth shall rise up against him.                     {202}
  The increase of his house shall depart,
  His goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath.
  This is the portion of a wicked man from God,
  And the heritage appointed unto him by God.


JOB.

  Hear diligently my speech;
  And let this be your consolations.
  Suffer me, and I also will speak;
  And after that I have spoken, mock on.
  As for me, is my complaint to man?
  And why should I not be impatient?

  Wherefore do the wicked live,
  Become old, yea, wax mighty in power?
  Their seed is established with them in their sight,
  And their offspring before their eyes.
  Their houses are safe from fear,
  Neither is the rod of God upon them.
  They send forth their little ones like a flock,
  And their children dance.
  They sing to the timbrel and harp,
  And rejoice at the sound of the pipe.
  They spend their days in prosperity,
  And in a moment they go down to Sheol.
  Yet they said unto God, "Depart from us;
  For we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
  What is the Almighty, that we should serve him?     {203}
  And what profit should we have, if we pray unto him?"
  Lo, their prosperity is not in their hand:
  The counsel of the wicked is far from me.

  How oft is it that the lamp of the wicked is put out?
  That their calamity cometh upon them?
  That God distributeth sorrows in his anger?
  That they are as stubble before the wind,
  And as chaff that the storm carrieth away?

  Ye say, God layeth up his iniquity for his children.
  Let him recompense it unto himself, that he may know it.
  Let his own eyes see his destruction,
  And let him drink of the wrath of the Almighty.
  For what pleasure hath he in his house after him,
  When the number of his months is cut off in the midst?

  Shall any teach God knowledge?
  Seeing he judgeth those that are high.
  One dieth in his full strength,
  Being wholly at ease and quiet:
  And another dieth in bitterness of soul,
  And never tasteth of good.
  They lie down alike in the dust,
  And the worm covereth them.

  Behold, I know your thoughts,
  And the devices which ye wrongfully imagine against me.
  For ye say, Where is the house of the tyrant?
  And where is the tent wherein the wicked dwelt?         {204}
  Have ye not asked them that go by the way?
  And do ye not know their tokens?
  That the evil man is reserved to the day of calamity?
  That they are led forth to the day of wrath?
  Who shall declare his way to his face?
  And who shall repay him what he hath done?
  Yet shall he be borne to the grave,
  And shall keep watch over the tomb.
  The clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him,
  And all men shall draw after him,
  As there were innumerable before him.
  How then comfort ye me in vain,
  Seeing in your answers there remaineth only falsehood?


THE SECOND CYCLE OF SPEECHES IS ENDED.

In the first cycle, the three friends had tried to bring Job to their
idea of God, and had failed. Now they center their thought about the
wicked man,--how his wickedness brings suffering. _Eliphaz_ says that
all men know that the wicked suffer. _Bildad_ says that the very order
of nature is such that the wicked suffer. _Zophar_ says that, even if
the wicked have any prosperity, it is short, and the end is suffering.
All this is to rouse the conscience of Job to believe that he is
suffering for his sins. Job, overwhelmed by their lack of sympathy, at
first does not try to meet their arguments, but continues his
complaint and prayer to God. Zophar's speech arouses him to answer,
and he says Zophar does not speak the truth. The wicked live and die
as happily as the righteous.

The real argument is ended. The friends have tried to show that Job
suffers because he has sinned. They have come to the question from the
side of God and from the side of man; and in each case Job has denied
their position. Nothing is left but to charge Job directly with sin.


{205}

III

ELIPHAZ.

  Can a man be profitable unto God?
  Surely he that is wise is profitable unto himself.
  Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou are righteous?
  Or, is it gain to him, that thou makest thy ways perfect?
  Is it for thy fear of him that he reproveth thee,
  That he entereth with thee into judgment?

  Is not thy wickedness great?
  Neither is there any end to thine iniquities.
  For thou hast taken pledges of thy brother for nought,
  And stripped the naked of their clothing.
  Thou hast not given water to the weary to drink,
  And thou hast withholden bread from the hungry.
  Thou hast sent widows away empty,
  And the arms of the fatherless have been broken.
  Therefore snares are round about thee,
  And sudden fear troubleth thee,
  Or darkness, that thou canst not see,
  And abundance of waters cover thee.
  Is not God in the height of heaven?
  And behold the height of the stars, how high they are!
  And thou sayest, "What doth God know?
  Can he judge through the thick darkness?
  Thick clouds are a covering to him, that he seeth not;
  And he walketh in the circuit of heaven."
  Wilt thou keep the old way
  Which wicked men have trodden?                           {206}
  If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up;
  If thou put away unrighteousness far from thy tents.
  And lay thou thy treasure in the dust,
  And the gold of Ophir among the stones of the brooks;
  And the Almighty shall be thy treasure,
  And precious silver unto thee.
  For then shalt thou delight thyself in the Almighty,
  And shalt lift up thy face unto God.
  Thou shalt make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee;
  And thou shalt pay thy vows.
  Thou shalt also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee;
  And light shall shine upon thy ways.


JOB.

  Even to-day is my complaint rebellious:
  My stroke is heavier than my groaning.
  Oh that I knew where I might find him,
  That I might come even to his dwelling place!
  I would order my cause before him,
  And fill my mouth with arguments.
  I would know the words which he would answer me,
  And understand what he would say unto me.
  Would he contend with me in the greatness of his power?
  Nay; but he would give heed unto me.
  There the upright might reason with him;
  So should I be delivered for ever from my judge.
  Behold, I go forward, but he is not there;                    {207}
  And backward, but I cannot perceive him:
  On the left hand, when he doth work, but I cannot behold him:
  He hideth himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him.
  But he knoweth the way: that I take;
  When he hath tried me, I shall come forth as gold.
  My foot hath held fast to his steps;
  His way have I kept, and turned not aside.
  I have not gone back from the commandment of his lips;
  I have treasured up the words of his mouth more than my necessary food.

  But he is in one mind, and who can turn him?
  And what his soul desireth, even that he doeth.
  For he performeth that which is appointed for me:
  And many such things are with him.
  Therefore am I troubled at his presence;
  When I consider, I am afraid of him.
  For God hath made my heart faint,
  And the Almighty hath troubled me:
  Because I was not cut off before the darkness,
  Neither did he cover the thick darkness from my face.


BILDAD.

  Dominion and fear are with him;
  He maketh peace in his high places.
  Is there any number of his armies?
  And upon whom doth not his light arise?
  How then can man be just with God?               {208}
  Or how can he be clean that is born of a woman?
  Behold, even the moon hath no brightness,
  And the stars are not pure in his sight:
  How much less man, that is a worm!
  And the son of man, which is a worm!


JOB.

  How hast thou helped him that is without power!
  How hast thou saved the arm that hath no strength!
  How hast thou counselled him that hath no wisdom,
  And plentifully declared sound knowledge!
  To whom hast thou uttered words?
  And whose spirit came forth from thee?

  They that are deceased tremble
  Beneath the waters and the inhabitants thereof.
  Sheol is naked before him,
  And Abaddon hath no covering.
  He stretcheth out the north over empty space,
  And hangeth the earth upon nothing.
  He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds;
  And the cloud is not rent under them.
  He closeth in the face of his throne,
  And spreadeth his cloud upon it.
  He hath described a boundary upon the face of the waters
  Unto the confines of light and darkness.
  The pillars of heaven tremble
  And are astonished at his rebuke.
  He stirreth up the sea with his power,
  And by his understanding he smiteth through Rahab.     {209}
  By his spirit the heavens are garnished;
  His hand hath pierced the swift serpent.

  Lo, these are but the outskirts of his ways:
  And how small a whisper do we hear of him!
  But the thunder of his power who can understand?

  As God liveth, who hath taken away my right;
  And the Almighty, who hath vexed my soul;
  (For my life is yet whole in me,
  And the spirit of God is in my nostrils;)
  Surely my lips shall not speak unrighteousness,
  Neither shall my tongue utter deceit.
  God forbid that I should justify you:
  Till I die I will not put away mine integrity from me.
  My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go:
  My heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.


ZOPHAR.

  This is the portion of a wicked man with God,
  And the heritage of oppressors, which they receive from the Almighty.
  Though he heap up silver as the dust,
  And prepare raiment as the clay;
  He may prepare it, but the just shall put it on,
  And the innocent shall divide the silver.
  He openeth his eyes, and he is not.
  Terrors overtake him like waters;
  A tempest stealeth him away in the night.
  The east wind carrieth him away, and he departeth;
  And it sweepeth him out of his place.

{210}

JOB.

  Oh that I were as in the months of old,
  As in the days when God watched over me;
  When his lamp shined upon my head,
  And by his light I walked through darkness;
  As I was in the ripeness of my days,
  When the secret of God was upon my tent;
  When the Almighty was yet with me,
  And my children were about me;
  When I went forth to the gate unto the city,
  When I prepared my seat in the street,
  The young men saw me and hid themselves,
  And the aged rose up and stood;
  The princes refrained talking,
  And laid their hand on their mouth;
  The voice of the nobles was hushed,
  And their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth.

  For when the ear heard me, then it blessed me;
  And when the eye saw me, it gave witness unto me:
  Because I delivered the poor that cried,
  The fatherless also, that had none to help him.
  The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me:
  And I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy.
  I put on righteousness, and it clothed me:
  My justice was as a robe and a diadem.
  I was eyes to the blind,
  And feet was I to the lame.
  I was a father to the needy:
  And the cause of him that I knew not I searched out.    {211}
  But now they that are younger than I have me in derision,
  Upon my right hand rise the rabble;
  They thrust aside my feet,
  And they cast up against me their ways of destruction.

  And now my soul is poured out within me;
  Days of affliction have taken hold upon me.
  In the night season my bones are pierced in me,
  And the pains that gnaw me take no rest.
  He hath cast me into the mire,
  And I am become like dust and ashes.
  I cry unto thee, and thou dost not answer me:
  I stand up, and thou lookest at me.
  Thou liftest me up to the wind, thou causest me to ride upon it;
  And thou dissolvest me in the storm.

  If I did despise the cause of my manservant or of my maidservant,
  When they contended with me:
  What then shall I do when God riseth up?
  And when he visiteth, what shall I answer him?

  If I have withheld the poor from their desire,
  Or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail;
  Or have eaten my morsel alone,
  And the fatherless hath not eaten thereof;

  If I have seen any perish for want of clothing,
  Or that the needy had no covering;

  If I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless,
  Because I saw my help in the gate:                    {212}

  Then let my shoulder fall from the shoulder blade,
  And mine arm be broken from the bone.

  If I have made gold my hope,
  And have said to the fine gold,
  Thou art my confidence;
  If I rejoiced because my wealth was great,
  And because mine hand had gotten much;

  If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me,
  Or lifted up myself when evil found him;

  If the men of my tent said not,
  Who can find one that hath not been satisfied with his food?
  The stranger did not lodge in the street;
  But I opened my doors to the traveller.

  Oh that I had one to hear me!
  (Lo, here is my signature, let the Almighty answer me;)
  And that I had the indictment which mine adversary hath written!
  Surely I would carry it upon my shoulder;
  I would bind it unto me as a crown.
  I would declare unto him the number of my steps;
  As a prince would I go near unto him.

  If my land cry out against me,
  And the furrows thereof weep together;
  If I have eaten the fruits thereof without money,
  Or have caused the owners thereof to lose their life:   {213}
  Let thistles grow instead of wheat,
  And cockle instead of barley.


IN THE THIRD CYCLE OF SPEECHES

The three friends still try to show Job that he must have sinned.
_Eliphaz_ charges him directly with the sins that a rich man in his
position could most easily commit. _Bildad_ only repeats in feebler
phrase former statements about man's impurity in the pure sight of
God. _Zophar_ either does not appear at all, or maintains his former
position with no new argument. _Job_ still wishes he might find God to
plead his cause, and, at the end, affirms formally his innocence of
the sins with which Eliphaz had charged him.

The argument has ended. Neither side has moved the other a single step
from the position taken at the beginning. The question of why Job
suffers is still unanswered. If it is ever to be answered, some other
solution than that of the three friends must be offered.


IV

So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he was righteous in
his own eyes. Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel
the Buzite, of the family of Ram: against Job was his wrath kindled,
because he justified himself rather than God. Also against his three
friends was his wrath kindled, because they had found no answer, and
yet had condemned Job. Now Elihu had waited to speak unto Job, because
they were older than he. And when Elihu saw that there was no answer
in the mouth of these three men, his wrath was kindled.


ELIHU.

(He speaks to the friends.)

  I am young, and ye are very old;   {214}
  Wherefore I held back, and durst not shew you mine opinion.
  I said, "Days should speak,
  And multitude of years should teach wisdom."
  But there is a spirit in man,
  And the breath of the Almighty giveth them understanding.
  It is not the great alone that are wise,
  Nor the aged that understand judgment.
  Therefore I said, "Hearken to me;
  I also will shew mine opinion."
  Behold, I waited for your words,
  I listened for your reasons,
  Whilst ye searched out what to say.
  Yea, I attended unto you,
  And, behold, there was none that convinced Job,
  Or that answered his words, among you.

(He speaks to Job.)

  Howbeit, Job, I pray thee, hear my speech
  And hearken to all my words.
  Behold now, I have opened my mouth,
  My tongue hath spoken in my mouth.
  My words shall utter the uprightness of my heart:
  And that which my lips know they shall speak sincerely.
  The spirit of God hath made me,
  And the breath of the Almighty giveth me life.
  If thou canst, answer thou me;
  Set thy words in order before me, stand forth.    {215}
  Behold, I am toward God even as thou art:
  I also am formed out of the clay.
  Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid,
  Neither shall my pressure be heavy upon thee.
  Surely thou hast spoken in mine hearing,
  And I have heard the voice of thy words, saying,
  "I am clean, without transgression;
  I am innocent, neither is there iniquity in me:
  Behold, he findeth occasions against me,
  He counteth me for his enemy;
  He putteth my feet in the stocks,
  He marketh all my paths."

  Behold, I will answer thee, in this thou art not just;
  For God is greater than man.
  Why dost thou strive against him?
  For he giveth not account of any of his matters.
  For God speaketh once,
  Yea twice, though man regardeth it not.
  In a dream, in a vision of the night,
  When deep sleep falleth upon men,
  In slumberings upon the bed;
  Then he openeth the ears of men,
  And sealeth their instruction,
  That he may withdraw man from his purpose,
  And hide pride from man;
  He keepeth back his soul from the pit,
  And his life from perishing by the sword.
  To shew unto man what is right for him;
  Then he is gracious unto him, and saith,    {216}
  "Deliver him from going down to the pit,
  I have found a ransom."
  His flesh shall be fresher than a child's;
  He returneth to the days of his youth:
  He prayeth unto God, and he is favourable unto him;
  So that he seeth his face with joy:
  And he restoreth unto man his righteousness.
  He singeth before men, and saith,
  "I have sinned, and perverted that which was right,
  And it profited me not:
  He hath redeemed my soul from going into the pit,
  And my life shall behold the light."
  Lo, all these things doth God work,
  Twice, yea thrice, with a man,
  To bring back his soul from the pit,
  That he may be enlightened with the light of the living.

  Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me:
  Hold thy peace, and I will speak.
  If thou hast any thing to say, answer me:
  Speak, for I desire to justify thee.
  If not, hearken thou unto me:
  Hold thy peace, and I will teach thee wisdom.

(He speaks again to the friends.)

  Hear my words, ye wise men;
  And give ear unto me, ye that have knowledge.
  For the ear trieth words,
  As the palate tasteth meat.
  Let us choose for us that which is right:   {217}
  Let us know among ourselves what is good.
  For Job hath said, "I am righteous,
  And God hath taken away my right."

  Therefore hearken unto me, ye men of understanding:
  Far be it from God, that he should do wickedness;
  And from the Almighty, that he should commit iniquity.
  For the work of a man shall he render unto him,
  And cause every man to find according to his ways.
  Yea, of a surety, God will not do wickedly,
  Neither will the Almighty pervert judgment.

  Is it fit to say to a king, "Thou art vile?"
  Or to nobles, "Ye are wicked?"
  How much less to him that respecteth not the persons of princes,
  Nor regardeth the rich more than the poor?
  For they all are the work of his hands.
  In a moment they die, even at midnight;
  For his eyes are upon the ways of a man,
  And he seeth all his goings.
  There is no darkness, nor shadow of death,
  Where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves.

  Therefore speak what thou knowest.
  Men of understanding will say unto me,
  Yea, every wise man that heareth me:
  "Job speaketh without knowledge,
  And his words are without wisdom.
  Would that Job were tried unto the end,
  Because of his answering like wicked men.   {218}
  For he addeth rebellion unto his sin,
  He clappeth his hands among us,
  And multiplieth his words against God."

(He speaks again to Job.)

  Thinkest thou this to be thy right,
  Or sayest thou, "My righteousness is more than God's,"
  That thou sayest, "What advantage will it be unto thee?"
  And, "What profit shall I have, more than if I had sinned?"
  I will answer thee,
  And thy companions with thee.

  Look unto the heavens, and see;
  And behold the skies, which are higher than thou.
  If thou hast sinned, what doest thou against him?
  And if thy transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto him?
  If thou be righteous, what givest thou him?
  Or what receiveth he of thine hand?

  There they cry, but none giveth answer,
  Because of the pride of evil men.
  Surely God will not hear vanity,
  Neither will the Almighty regard it.
  How much less when thou sayest thou beholdest him not,
  The cause is before him, and thou waitest for him!
  But now, because he hath not visited in his anger,
  Neither doth he greatly regard arrogance;
  Therefore doth Job open his mouth in vanity;
  He multiplieth words without knowledge.        {219}
  Behold, God is mighty, and despiseth not any:
  He is mighty in strength of understanding.
  He preserveth not the life of the wicked:
  But giveth to the afflicted their right.
  He withdraweth not his eyes from the righteous:
  But with kings upon the throne
  He setteth them for ever, and they are exalted.
  And if they be bound in fetters,
  And be taken in the cords of affliction;
  Then he sheweth them their work,
  And their transgressions, that they have behaved themselves proudly.
  He openeth also their ear to instruction.
  Behold, God is great, and we know him not;
  The number of his years is unsearchable.
  For he draweth up the drops of water,
  Which distil in rain from his vapour:
  Which the skies pour down
  And drop upon man abundantly.
  Yea, can any understand the spreadings of the clouds,
  The thunderings of his pavilion?
  Behold, he spreadeth his light around him;
  And he covereth the bottom of the sea.
  For by these he judgeth the peoples;
  He giveth meat in abundance.
  He covereth his hands with the lightning;
  And giveth it a charge that it strike the mark.
  The noise thereof telleth concerning him,
  The cattle also concerning the storm that cometh up.
  At this also my heart trembleth,                      {220}
  And is moved out of its place.

  Hearken ye unto the noise of his voice,
  And the sound that goeth out of his mouth.
  He sendeth it forth under the whole heaven,
  And his lightning unto the ends of the earth.
  After it a voice roareth;
  He thundereth with the voice of his majesty:
  And he stayeth them not when his voice is heard.
  God thundereth marvellously with his voice;
  Great things doeth he, which we cannot comprehend.
  For he saith to the snow, "Fall thou on the earth";
  Likewise to the shower of rain,
  And to the showers of his mighty rain.
  He sealeth up the hand of every man;
  That all men whom he hath made may know it.
  Then the beasts go into coverts,
  And remain in their dens.
  Out of the chamber of the south cometh the storm:
  And cold out of the north.
  By the breath of God ice is given:
  And the breadth of the waters is straitened.
  Yea, he ladeth the thick cloud with moisture;
  He spreadeth abroad the cloud of his lightning:
  And it is turned round about by his guidance,
  That they may do whatsoever he commandeth them
  Upon the face of the habitable world:
  Whether it be for correction, or for his land,
  Or for mercy, that he cause it to come.

  Hearken unto this, O Job:                             {221}
  Stand still, and consider the wondrous works of God.
  Dost thou know how God layeth his charge upon them,
  And causeth the lightning of his cloud to shine?
  Dost thou know the balancings of the clouds,
  The wondrous works of him which is perfect in knowledge?
  How thy garments are warm,
  When the earth is still by reason of the south wind?
  Canst thou with him spread out the sky,
  Which is strong as a molten mirror?

  Teach us what we shall say unto him;
  For we cannot order our speech by reason of darkness.
  Shall it be told him that I would speak?
  Or should a man wish that he were swallowed up?
  And now men see not the light which is bright in the skies:
  But the wind passeth, and cleanseth them.
  Out of the north cometh golden splendour:
  God hath upon him terrible majesty.
  Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out; he is excellent in power:
  And in judgment and plenteous justice he will not afflict.
  Men do therefore fear him:
  He regardeth not any that are wise of heart.


(_Elihu_ offers his solution to the question, Why does Job suffer? He
is young, conceited, and wordy, but sincere in his belief that he has
wisdom which his elders and betters have not found. It is difficult to
see what that wisdom is. Most of what he says has been better said
before. If he adds anything, it is the thought that God sometimes
sends suffering, not only to punish for past sin, but to keep man from
future sin.)

{222}

V

THE LORD.

(He speaks to Job out of the whirlwind.)

  Who is this that darkeneth counsel
  By words without knowledge?

  Gird up now thy loins like a man;
  For I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.
  Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?
  Declare, if thou hast understanding.
  Who determined the measures thereof, if thou knowest?
  Or who stretched the line upon it?
  Whereupon were the foundations thereof fastened?
  Or who laid the corner stone thereof;
  When the morning stars sang together,
  And all the sons of God shouted for joy?
  Or who shut up the sea with doors,
  When it brake forth,
  When I made the cloud the garment thereof,
  And thick darkness a swaddlingband for it,
  And prescribed for it my decree,
  And set bars and doors,
  And said, "Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further;
  And here shall thy proud waves be stayed"?

  Hast thou commanded the morning since thy days began,
  And caused the dayspring to know its place;               {223}
  That it might take hold of the ends of the earth,
  And the wicked be shaken out of it?
  It is changed as clay under the seal;
  And all things stand forth as a garment:
  And from the wicked their light is withholden,
  And the high arm is broken.

  Hast thou entered into the springs of the sea?
  Or hast thou walked in the recesses of the deep?
  Have the gates of death been revealed unto thee?
  Or hast thou seen the gates of the shadow of death?
  Hast thou comprehended the breadth of the earth?
  Declare, if thou knowest it all.
  Where is the way to the dwelling of light,
  And as for darkness, where is the place thereof;
  That thou shouldest take it to the bound thereof,
  And that thou shouldest discern the paths to the house thereof?
  Doubtless, thou knowest, for thou wast then born,
  And the number of thy days is great!

  Hast thou entered the treasuries of the snow,
  Or hast thou seen the treasuries of the hail,
  Which I have reserved against the time of trouble,
  Against the day of battle and war?
  By what way is the light parted,
  Or the east wind scattered upon the earth?
  Who hath cleft a channel for the waterflood,
  Or a way for the lightning of the thunder;
  To cause it to rain on a land where no man is;   {224}
  On the wilderness, wherein there is no man;
  To satisfy the waste and desolate ground;
  And to cause the tender grass to spring forth?

  Canst thou bind the cluster of the Pleiades,
  Or loose the bands of Orion?
  Canst thou lead forth the signs of the Zodiac in their season?
  Or canst thou guide the Bear with her train?
  Knowest thou the ordinances of the heavens?
  Canst thou establish the dominion thereof in the earth?
  Canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds,
  That abundance of waters may cover thee?
  Canst thou send forth lightnings, that they may go,
  And say unto thee, "Here we are"?

  Who hath put wisdom in the inward parts?
  Or who hath given understanding to the mind?
  Who can number the clouds by wisdom?
  Or who can pour out the bottles of heaven,
  When the dust runneth into a mass,
  And the clods cleave fast together?

  Wilt thou hunt the prey for the lioness?
  Or satisfy the appetite of the young lions,
  When they couch in their dens,
  And abide in the covert to lie in wait?
  Who provideth for the raven his food,
  When his young ones cry unto God,
  And wander for lack of meat?               {225}
  Who hath sent out the wild ass free?
  Or who hath loosed the bands of the wild ass?
  Whose house I have made the wilderness,
  And the salt land his dwelling place ..
  He scorneth the tumult of the city,
  Neither heareth he the shoutings of the driver.
  The range of the mountains is his pasture,
  And he searcheth after every green thing.

  Will the wild-ox be content to serve thee?
  Or will he abide by thy crib?
  Canst thou bind the wild-ox with his band in the furrow?
  Or will he harrow the valleys after thee?
  Wilt thou trust him, because his strength is great?
  Or wilt thou leave to him thy labour?
  Wilt thou confide in him, that he will bring home thy seed,
  And gather the corn of thy threshing-floor?

  The wing of the ostrich rejoiceth;
  But are her pinions and feathers kindly?
  For she leaveth her eggs on the earth,
  And warmeth them in the dust,
  And forgetteth that the foot may crush them,
  Or that the wild beast may trample them.
  She is hardened against her young ones, as if they were not hers:
  Though her labour be in vain, she is without fear;
  Because God hath deprived her of wisdom,
  Neither hath he imparted to her understanding.   {226}
  What time she lifteth up herself on high,
  She scorneth the horse and his rider.

  Hast thou given the horse his might?
  Hast thou clothed his neck with the quivering mane?
  Hast thou made him to leap as a locust?
  The glory of his snorting is terrible.
  He paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in his strength:
  He goeth out to meet the armed men.
  He mocketh at fear, and is not dismayed;
  Neither turneth he back from the sword.
  The quiver rattleth against him,
  The flashing spear and the javelin.
  He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage;
  Neither believeth he that it is the voice of the trumpet
  As oft as the trumpet soundeth he saith, "Aha!"
  And he smelleth the battle afar off,
  The thunder of the captains, and the shouting.

  Doth the hawk soar by thy wisdom,
  And stretch her wings toward the south?
  Doth the eagle mount up at thy command,
  And make her nest on high?
  She dwelleth on the rock, and hath her lodging there,
  Upon the crag of the rock, and the strong hold.
  From thence she spieth out the prey;
  Her eyes behold it afar off.
  Her young ones also suck up blood:
  And where the slain are, there is she.


{227}

JOB.

  Behold, I am of small account; what shall I answer thee?
  I lay mine hand upon my mouth.
  Once have I spoken, and I will not answer;
  Yea twice, but I will proceed no further.


THE LORD.

(Out of the whirlwind.)

  Gird up thy loins now like a man:
  I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.
  Wilt thou even disannul my judgment?
  Wilt thou condemn me, that thou mayest be justified?
  Or hast thou an arm like God?
  And canst thou thunder with a voice like him?
  Deck thyself now with excellency and dignity;
  And array thyself with honour and majesty.
  Pour forth the overflowings of thine anger:
  And look upon everyone that is proud, and abase him.
  Look on everyone that is proud, and bring him low;
  And tread down the wicked where they stand.
  Hide them in the dust together;
  Bind their faces in the hidden place.
  Then will I also confess of thee
  That thine own right hand can save thee.

  Behold now behemoth, which I made with thee;
  He eateth grass as an ox.
  Lo now, his strength is in his loins,
  And his force is in the muscles of his belly.    {228}
  He moveth his tail like a cedar:
  The sinews of his thighs are knit together.
  His bones are as tubes of brass;
  His limbs are like bars of iron.
  He is the chief of the ways of God:
  He only that made him can make his sword to approach unto him.
  Surely the mountains bring him forth food;
  Where all the beasts of the field do play.
  He lieth under the lotus trees,
  In the covert of the reed, and the fen.
  The lotus trees cover him with their shadow;
  The willows of the brook compass him about.
  Behold, if a river overflow, he trembleth not:
  He is confident, though Jordan swell even to his mouth.
  Shall any take him when he is on the watch,
  Or pierce through his nose with a snare?

  Canst thou draw out leviathan with a fish hook?
  Or press down his tongue with a cord?
  Canst thou put a rope into his nose?
  Or pierce his jaw through with a hook?
  Will he make many supplications unto thee?
  Or will he speak soft words unto thee?
  Will he make covenant with thee,
  That thou shouldest take him for a servant for ever?
  Wilt thou play with him as with a bird?
  Or wilt thou bind him for thy maidens?   {229}
  Shall the bands of fishermen make traffic of him?
  Shall they part him among the merchants?
  Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons,
  Or his head with fish spears?
  Lay thine hand upon him;
  Remember the battle, and do so no more.
  Behold, the hope of him is in vain:
  Shall not one be cast down even at the sight of him?
  None is so fierce that he dare stir him up:
  Who then is he that can stand before me?
  Who hath first given unto me, that I should repay him?
  Whatsoever is under the whole heaven in mine.
  I will not keep silence concerning his limbs,
  Nor his mighty strength, nor his comely proportion.
  Who can strip off his outer garment?
  Who shall come within his double bridle?
  Who can open the doors of his face?
  Round about his teeth is terror.
  His strong scales are his pride,
  Shut up together as with a close seal.
  One is so near to another,
  That no air can come between them.
  They are joined one to another;
  They stick together, that they cannot be sundered.
  His nostrils flash forth light,
  And his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning.
  Out of his mouth go burning torches,
  And sparks of fire leap forth.
  Out of his nostrils a smoke goeth,          {230}
  As of a boiling pot and burning rushes.
  His breath kindleth coals,
  And a flame goeth forth from his mouth.
  In his neck abideth strength,
  And terror danceth before him.
  The flakes of his flesh are joined together:
  They are firm upon him; they cannot be moved.
  His heart is as firm as a stone;
  Yea, firm as the nether millstone.
  When he raiseth himself up, the mighty are afraid;
  By reason of consternation they are beside themselves.
  If one lay at him with the sword, it cannot avail;
  Nor the spear, the dart, nor the pointed shaft.
  He counteth iron as straw,
  And brass as rotten wood.
  The arrow cannot make him flee:
  Slingstones are turned with him into stubble.
  Clubs are counted as stubble:
  He laugheth at the rushing of the javelin.
  His underparts are like sharp potsherds:
  He spreadeth as it were a threshing wain upon the mire.
  He maketh the deep to boil like a pot:
  He maketh the sea like ointment.
  He maketh a path to shine after him;
  One would think the deep to be hoary.
  Upon earth there is not his like,
  That is made without fear.
  He beholdeth every thing that is high:
  He is king over all the sons of pride.

{231}

JOB.

(He replies to the Lord.)

  I know that thou canst do all things,
  And that no purpose of thine can be restrained.
  Who is this that hideth counsel without knowledge?
  Therefore have I uttered that which I understood not,
  Things too wonderful for me, which I knew not.
  Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak;
  I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.
  I had heard of thee by the hearing of the ear;
  But now mine eye seeth thee,
  Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent
  In dust and ashes.


(Jehovah speaks from the storm. Job has questioned why he suffered.
Can he expect the question to be answered? Let him look to nature
about him. Does he understand the daily doings of nature? Does he know
how the world was created, or how the rain and the snow come? Can he
guide the stars? Does he understand the strange instincts of the
animals? Can he control even one of the great works of God? How then
will he think to comprehend the dealings of God in his own life?

God does not try to answer the question of why Job suffers. He tries
to raise Job to such a position of trust in him that he will not ask
the question. The solution of the question lies, not in the knowledge
of their answers, but in a trust of God which does not demand an
answer, for it sums up all answers in one--that God is wise and good.
This is not unreasoning; for God reasons from his works that Job can
see to the deep things of life that he cannot see. If Job sees God's
wisdom in the one, he may trust his wisdom in the other.

So the problem of why Job suffers is at last solved; only the solution
is not one of knowledge, but of trust, and Job finds more than a
solution; he finds God. "Now mine eye seeth Thee.")

{232}

EPILOGUE.

And it was so, that after the Lord had spoken these words unto Job,
the Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, "My wrath is kindled against
thee, and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of me the
thing that is right, as my servant Job hath. Now therefore, take unto
you seven bullocks and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer
up for yourself a burnt offering; and my servant Job shall pray for
you; for him will I accept, that I deal not with you after your folly;
for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant
Job hath." So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar
the Naamathite went, and did according as the Lord commanded them: and
the Lord accepted Job. And the Lord turned the captivity of Job, when
he prayed for his friends: and the Lord gave Job twice as much as he
had before. Then came there unto him all his brethren, and all his
sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, and
did eat bread with him in his house: and they bemoaned him, and
comforted him concerning all the evil that the Lord had brought upon
him: every man also gave him a piece of money, and everyone a ring of
gold. So the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his
beginning: and he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand
camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she-asses. He had
also seven sons and three daughters. And he called the name of the
first, Jemimah; and the name of the second, Keziah; and the name of
the third, Keren-happuch. And in all the land were no women found so
fair as the daughters of Job: and their father gave them inheritance
among their brethren. And after this Job lived an hundred and forty
years, and saw his sons, and his sons' sons, even four generations. So
Job died, being old and full of days.

{233}

SELECTIONS FROM THE SONG OF SONGS

{234}

The "Song of Songs," sometimes called "Solomon's Song," and
"Canticles," is a collection of Hebrew wedding songs. These songs in
form and spirit approach nearer to what we call lyric poetry than
anything else in the literature of the Bible. In their exquisite
freshness and grace they may well be compared with the lyrical poetry
of the Elizabethan period in England.


{235}

HIS BANNER OVER ME WAS LOVE

  As a lily among thorns,
  So is my love among the daughters.
  As the apple tree among the trees of the wood,
  So is my beloved among the sons.
  I sat down under his shadow with great delight,
  And his fruit was sweet to my taste.
  He brought me to the banqueting house,
  And his banner over me was love.


{236}

THE WINTER IS PAST, THE RAIN IS OVER AND GONE

  My beloved spake, and said unto me,
  Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away.
  For, lo, the winter is past,
  The rain is over and gone;
  The flowers appear on the earth;
  The time of the singing of birds is come,
  And the voice of the turtledove is heard in our land;
  The fig tree ripeneth her green figs,
  And the vines are in blossom,
  They give forth their fragrance.
  Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away.
  O my dove, that art in the clefts of the rock,
    in the covert of the steep place,
  Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice;
  For sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.
  Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vineyards;
  For our vineyards are in blossom.
  My beloved is mine, and I am his:
  He feedeth his flock among the lilies.
  Until the day be cool, and the shadows flee away,
  Turn, my beloved, and be thou like a roe or a young hart
  Upon the mountains of Bether.


{237}

IN THE GARDEN OF LOVE

  Come with me from Lebanon, my bride,
  With me from Lebanon:
  Look from the top of Amana,
  From the top of Senir and Hermon,
  From the lions' dens,
  From the mountains of the leopards.
  Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my bride;
  Thou hast ravished my heart with a glance of thine eyes,
  With one chain of thy neck.
  How fair is thy love, my sister, my bride!
  How much better is thy love than wine!
  And the smell of thine ointments than all manner of spices!
  Thy lips, O my bride, drop as the honeycomb:
  Honey and milk are under thy tongue;
  And the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.
  A garden shut up is my sister, my bride;
  A spring shut up, a fountain sealed.
  Thy shoots are an orchard of pomegranates, with precious fruits;
  Henna with spikenard plants,
  Spikenard and saffron,
  Calamus and cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense;
  Myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices.
  Thou art a fountain of gardens,
  A well of living waters,
  And flowing streams from Lebanon.
  Awake, O north wind; and come, thou south;
  Blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out.
  Let my beloved come in to his garden,
  And eat his precious fruits.


{238}

WHITHER IS THY BELOVED GONE?

  Whither is thy beloved gone,
  O thou fairest among women?
  Whither hath thy beloved turned him,
  That we may seek him with thee?

  My beloved is gone down to his garden, to the beds of spices,
  To feed in the gardens, and to gather lilies.
  I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine:
  He feedeth his flock among the lilies.
  I am my beloved's,
  And his desire is toward me.
  Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field;
  Let us lodge in the villages.
  Let us get up early to the vineyards;
  Let us see whether the vine hath budded, and its blossom be open,
  And the pomegranates be in flower:
  There will I give thee my love.
  The mandrakes give forth fragrance,
  And at our doors are all manner of precious fruits, new and old,
  Which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved.


{239}

LOVE IS STRONG AS DEATH

  Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm:
  For love is strong as death;
  Jealousy is cruel as the grave:
  The flashes thereof are flashes of fire,
  A very flame of the Lord.
  Many waters cannot quench love,
  Neither can the floods drown it:
  If a man would give all the substance of his house for love,
  He would utterly be contemned.

{240}

{241}

SELECTIONS FROM ECCLESIASTES


{242}

ECCLESIASTES

This is, in some respects, the most curious book in the Bible. It has
puzzled many people. Like Proverbs, it is put together without very
much order, but that does not make the greatest puzzle of the book.
The question has been, "What does the author intend to teach?" The
book seems to take a very dark view of life. It almost seems as though
the author thought nothing was worth living for. Over and over he says
that all is vanity; that is, emptiness, nothingness. He questions
whether there is a life after death. It seems to the careless reader
that this book is only gloomy, dark, and hopeless. But that is a
superficial view. If one reads with more care, one finds another
strain in the book. It is good for a man to enjoy his labor. This is
the gift of God. Let a man eat and drink and enjoy his labor. This is
his portion, or wages, from God. Such thoughts as these occur again
and again in the book. One begins to see that all is not darkness. On
the contrary, there is, so far as it goes, a very excellent way of
living put forward in the book. The author's question is, What are the
wages of life? What ought one to think of as making life worth living?
His answer is, The work of life itself, with the ordinary pleasures
that come with it, are the wages. It is these things that make life
worth living. Now this author does not see all the truth. He does not
even sum up the whole of life. It is a great lack that in his
pictures, in the first few chapters, of the things that may be
expected to yield pleasure, he says nothing about the unselfish life.
The life he describes is all getting, getting, getting, and never
giving. Now the life that simply spends itself in trying to get things
and never tries to help others is sure not to be a very happy life.
"Vanity of vanities" is its very proper conclusion. This picture of
life is too narrow. It needs to be enlarged by the rich and beautiful
New Testament ideal of the life of unselfish love.


{243}

TO EVERYTHING THERE IS A SEASON

  To everything there is a season,
  And a time to every purpose under the heaven:
  A time to be born,
  And a time to die;
  A time to plant,
  And a time to pluck up that which is planted;
  A time to kill,
  And a time to heal;
  A time to break down,
  And a time to build up;
  A time to weep,
  And a time to laugh;
  A time to mourn,
  And a time to dance;
  A time to cast away stones,
  And a time to gather stones together;
  A time to embrace,
  And a time to refrain from embracing;
  A time to seek,
  And a time to lose;
  A time to keep,
  And a time to cast away;
  A time to rend,
  And a time to sew;          {244}
  A time to keep silence,
  And a time to speak;
  A time to love,
  And a time to hate;
  A time for war,
  And a time for peace.


{245}

REMEMBER ALSO THY CREATOR

  Remember also thy Creator in the days of thy youth:
  Or ever the evil days come,
  And the years draw nigh,
  When thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them.
  Or ever the sun, and the light,
  And the moon and the stars,
  Be darkened
  And the clouds return after the rain.

  In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble,
  And the strong men shall bow themselves,
  And the grinders cease because they are few,
  And those that look out of the windows be darkened,
  And the doors be shut in the street.
  When the sound of the grinding is low,
  And one shall rise up at the voice of a bird,
  And all the daughters of music shall be brought low:
  Yea, they shall be afraid of that which is high,
  And terror shall be in the way;
  And the almond tree shall blossom,
  And the grasshopper shall be a burden,
  And desire shall fail:
  Because man goeth to his long home.
  And the mourners go about the streets:      {246}
  Or ever the silver cord be loosed,
  Or the golden bowl broken,
  Or the pitcher broken at the fountain
  Or the wheel broken at the cistern:
  And the dust return to the earth, as it was;
  And the spirit return unto God who gave it.


{247}

SELECTIONS FROM THE PROVERBS


{248}

PROVERBS

Proverbs is a collection of sayings of wise men, coming from many
sources and gathered by many men. It is a little library of smaller
books. The poetry is more uniform than any other in the Bible. The
subjects, on the contrary, are the most various. All sides of life are
represented. But chiefly the proverbs are concerned with showing the
wisdom of living a good, honest, industrious life, and the foolishness
of being lazy, immoral, greedy for money, and evil in thought and
conduct. A great deal is said about the fool. He is the one who is
shortsighted and careless of consequences; who talks slander and so
hurts his friends; who forgets that the laws of God punish evil doing,
and so hurts himself. The idea is that the wicked man acts as though
he had not common sense.


{249}

THE PRAISES OF WISDOM


WISDOM CRIETH ALOUD IN THE STREET

  Wisdom crieth aloud in the street;
  She uttereth her voice in the broad places;
  She crieth in the chief place of meeting;
  At the entering in of the gates,
  In the city, she uttereth her words:

  "How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity?
  And scorners delight in scorning,
  And fools hate knowledge?
  Turn you at my reproof:
  Behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you,
  I will make known my words unto you.
  Because I have called, and ye refused;
  I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded;
  But ye have set at nought all my counsel,
  And would none of my reproof:
  I also will laugh in the day of your calamity;
  I will mock when your fear cometh;
  When your fear cometh as a storm,
  And your calamity cometh on as a whirlwind;
  When distress and anguish come upon you.
  Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer;    {250}
  They shall seek me diligently, but they shall not find me:
  For that they hated knowledge,
  And did not choose the fear of the Lord:
  They would not have my counsel;
  They despised all my reproof:
  Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way,
  And be filled with their own devices.
  For the backsliding of the simple shall slay them,
  And the prosperity of fools shall destroy them.
  But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell securely,
  And shall be quiet without fear of evil."


WISDOM IS MORE PRECIOUS THAN RUBIES

  My son, forget not my law;
  But let thine heart keep my commandments:
  For length of days, and years of life,
  And peace, shall they add to thee.
  Let not mercy and truth forsake thee:
  Bind them about thy neck;
  Write them upon the table of thine heart:
  So shalt thou find favour and good understanding
  In the sight of God and man.
  Trust in the Lord with all thine heart,
  And lean not upon thine own understanding:
  In all thy ways acknowledge him,
  And he shall direct thy paths.
  Be not wise in thine own eyes;
  Fear the Lord, and depart from evil;
  It shall be health to thy navel,          {251}
  And marrow to thy bones.
  Honour the Lord with thy substance,
  And with the firstfruits of all thine increase:
  So shall thy barns be filled with plenty
  And thy vats shall overflow with new wine.

  My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord;
  Neither be weary of his reproof:
  For whom the Lord loveth he reproveth;
  Even as a father the son in whom he delighteth.
  Happy is the man that findeth wisdom,
  And the man that getteth understanding.
  For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver,
  And the gain thereof than fine gold.
  She is more precious than rubies:
  And none of the things thou canst desire are to be compared unto her.
  Length of days is in her right hand;
  In her left hand are riches and honour.
  Her ways are ways of pleasantness,
  And all her paths are peace.
  She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her:
  And happy is everyone that retaineth her.
  The Lord by wisdom founded the earth;
  By understanding he established the heavens.
  By his knowledge the depths were broken up,
  And the skies drop down the dew.


{252}

THE GLORY OF WISDOM

  Doth not wisdom cry,
  And understanding put forth her voice?
  In the top of high places by the way,
  Where the paths meet, she standeth;
  Beside the gates, at the entry of the city,
  At the coming in at the doors, she crieth aloud:

  Unto you, O men, I call;
  And my voice is to the sons of men.
  O ye simple, understand subtilty;
  And, ye fools, be ye of an understanding heart.
  Hear, for I will speak excellent things;
  And the opening of my lips shall be right things.
  For my mouth shall utter truth;
  And wickedness is an abomination to my lips.
  All the words of my mouth are in righteousness;
  There is nothing crooked or perverse in them.
  They are all plain to him that understandeth,
  And right to them that find knowledge.
  Receive my instruction, and not silver;
  And knowledge rather than choice gold.
  For wisdom is better than rubies;
  And all the things that may be desired are not to be compared unto her.

  I, Wisdom, have made subtilty my dwelling,
  And find out knowledge and discretion.
  The fear of the Lord is to hate evil:
  Pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way,     {253}
  And the froward mouth, do I hate.
  Counsel is mine, and sound knowledge:
  I am understanding; I have might.
  By me kings reign,
  And princes decree justice.
  By me princes rule,
  And nobles, even all the judges of the earth.
  I love them that love me;
  And those that seek me diligently shall find me.
  Riches and honour are with me;
  Yea, durable riches and righteousness.
  My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold;
  And my revenue than choice silver.
  I walk in the way of righteousness,
  In the midst of the paths of judgment:
  That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance,
  And that I may fill their treasuries.

  The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way,
  Before his works of old.
  I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning,
  Or ever the earth was.
  When there were no depths, I was brought forth;
  When there were no fountains abounding with water.
  Before the mountains were settled,
  Before the hills was I brought forth:
  While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields,
  Nor the highest part of the dust of the world.
  When he established the heavens, I was there:
  When he set a circle upon the face of the deep:         {254}
  When he made firm the skies above:
  When the fountains of the deep became strong:
  When he gave to the sea its bound,
  That the waters should not transgress his commandment:
  When he marked out the foundations of the earth;
  Then I was by him, as a master workman:
  And I was daily his delight,
  Rejoicing always before him;
  Rejoicing in his habitable earth;
  And my delight was with the sons of men.
  Now therefore, my sons, hearken unto me:
  For blessed are they that keep my ways.
  Hear instruction, and be wise,
  And refuse it not.
  Blessed is the man that heareth me,
  Watching daily at my gates,
  Waiting at the posts of my doors.
  For whoso findeth me findeth life,
  And shall obtain favour of the Lord.
  But he that sinneth against me wrongeth his own soul:
  All they that hate me love death.


{255}

ENTER NOT INTO THE PATH OF THE WICKED

  Enter not into the path of the wicked,
  And walk not in the way of evil men.
  Avoid it, pass not by it;
  Turn from it, and pass on.

  Take fast hold of instruction; let her not go:
  Keep her; for she is thy life.

  The way of the wicked is as darkness:
  They know not at what they stumble.
  But the path of the righteous is as the light of dawn,
  That shineth more and more unto the perfect day.

  Go to the ant, thou sluggard,
  Consider her ways, and be wise:
  Which having no chief, overseer, or ruler,
  Provideth her meat in the summer,
  And gathereth her food in the harvest.


{256}

PRAISE OF THE WISE AND VIRTUOUS WOMAN

  A virtuous woman who can find?
  For her price is far above rubies.
  The heart of her husband trusteth in her,
  And he shall have no lack of gain.
  She doeth him good and not evil
  All the days of her life.

  She seeketh wool and flax,
  And worketh willingly with her hands.
  She is like the merchant-ships;
  She bringeth her food from afar.
  She riseth also while it is yet night,
  And giveth meat to her household,
  And their task to her maidens.
  She considereth a field, and buyeth it:
  With the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard.
  She perceiveth that her merchandise is profitable:
  Her lamp goeth not out by night.
  She layeth her hands to the distaff,
  And her hands hold the spindle.
  She spreadeth out her hand to the poor;
  Yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy.
  She is not afraid of the snow for her household;
  For all her household are clothed with scarlet.         {257}
  She maketh for herself carpets of tapestry;
  Her clothing is fine linen and purple.
  Her husband is known in the gates,
  When he sitteth among the elders of the land.
  She maketh linen garments and selleth them;
  And delivereth girdles unto the merchant.
  Strength and dignity are her clothing;
  And she laugheth at the time to come.
  She openeth her mouth with wisdom;
  And the law of kindness is on her tongue.
  She looketh well to the ways of her household,
  And eateth not the bread of idleness.
  Her children rise up, and call her blessed;
  Her husband also, and he praiseth her, saying:
  "Many daughters have done virtuously,
  But thou excellest them all."

  Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain:
  But a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised.
  Give her of the fruit of her hands;
  And let her works praise her in the gates.


{258}

{259}

SELECTIONS FROM THE PROPHETS

{260}

The Roll of the Prophets

  Isaiah.
  Jeremiah.
  Daniel.
  Ezekiel.
  Amos.
  Hosea.
  Micah.
  Obadiah.
  Joel.
  Jonah.
  Zephaniah.
  Nahum.
  Habakkuk.
  Haggai.
  Zechariah.
  Malachi.


{261}{262}


[Illustration]
  "THE PROPHETS"

  From the frieze of "The Prophets," by Sargent, in the Public Library
  at Boston.

  The prophets here represented are Jeremiah, Jonah, Isaiah, Habakkuk.
[End illustration]


{263}

THE PROPHETS

There are two groups of prophetic books in the Old Testament: the
longer books of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, and Ezekiel, in one group,
and what are known as the books of the "Twelve Minor Prophets," in
another group. These books, especially those of the "Minor Prophets."
are often neglected by readers of the Bible. "Minor Prophets" is a
very unfortunate name for that group of great souls whose messages
have come down to us from the ages. The word came into use because
these books; smaller in size than some others, were grouped together
in the Bible. The writers themselves were not minor or inferior in any
sense of the word. The word "prophet" is also, in itself, somewhat
misleading. The men who are called prophets did not simply predict
future events. They were really what we would call reformers. They
cried out against the evils of the times in which they lived, and
tried to turn the nation back to God when it had sinned.

It must be admitted that it is not very easy, especially for young
people, to read these books, and yet they are intensely interesting if
one can only realize that these words were spoken by living men, each
blazing with indignation against wrong, men of heroic character, who
were ready, if necessary, to look in the face of death, in their
speaking of the truth.

Little or nothing can be told of the personal history of many of these
men. Striking passages have been chosen from each of the prophets to
show the character of the message which they spoke.


{264}

ISAIAH

THE GREATEST PROPHET OF THE OLD TESTAMENT

(David and Solomon had long been dead. The kingdom of Judah was not so
strong as the old kingdom over which they had ruled. It was constantly
quarreling with the kingdom at the North, which had been separated by
rebellion. It was often in danger of being overcome by the greater
kingdoms about it. The kings were not always wise rulers. Many of the
people did not care to serve Jehovah alone. They wanted to serve other
gods as well. The rich were often cruel to the poor. Good men saw
these things with sorrow. They knew that God must punish such a
nation. One of these good men was Isaiah the Prophet, a citizen of
Jerusalem, and a friend of the kings of Judah. When he was a young man
he had a vision of the holiness of God and the sin of the people. This
vision made him a prophet, for it called him to the task of showing to
the people the holiness of God, which he himself had seen, and to the
necessity of turning away from sin.

This is how he tells of the vision which he saw:)--


I

THE CALL OF ISAIAH

In the year that King Uzziah died I saw the Lord sitting upon a
throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled {265} the temple.
Above him stood the seraphim: each one had six wings; with twain he
covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain
he did fly. And one cried unto another, and said,--

  "Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts:
  the whole earth is full of his Glory."

And the foundations of the thresholds were moved at the voice of him
who cried, and the house was filled with smoke. Then said I, "Woe is
me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell
in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the
King, the Lord of hosts."

Then flew one of the seraphim unto me, having a live coal in his hand,
which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar: and he touched
my mouth with it, and said, "Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and thine
iniquity is taken away, and thy sin forgiven."

And I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, "Whom shall I send, and who
will go for us?" Then I said, "Here am I; send me."

And he said, "Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand
not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of this
people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they
see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with
their heart, and turn again, and be healed."

Then said I, "Lord, how long?"

{266}

And he answered, "Until cities be waste without inhabitant, and houses
without man, and the land become utterly waste, and the Lord have
removed men far away, and the forsaken places be many in the midst of
the land."


II

ISAIAH'S FIRST PUBLIC SERVICE

(Soon after, two kings from the North threatened to make war against
Judah. The king of Judah was frightened. Isaiah tried to encourage
him, and persuade him to trust God, but in vain. The king was a
coward, and dared neither fight nor trust God, but instead he sent to
the far-away land of Assyria for help.

This is the way in which Isaiah tried to encourage the timid king:)--


And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of
Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son
of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up to Jerusalem to war against it;
but could not prevail against it. And it was told the house of David,
saying, "Syria is confederate with Ephraim."

And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of
the forest are moved with the wind.

Then said the Lord unto Isaiah, "Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou, and
Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool, in
the high way of the fuller's field; and say unto him, Take heed, and
be quiet; fear not, neither let thine heart be faint, because of these
two tails of smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin and
Syria, and of the son of Remaliah. Because Syria hath {267} counselled
evil against thee, Ephraim also, and the son of Remaliah, saying, Let
us go up against Judah, and vex it, and let us make a breach therein
for us, and set up a king in the midst of it, even the son of Tabeel:
thus saith the Lord God, It shall not stand, neither shall it come to
pass. For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is
Rezin: and the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is
Remaliah's son. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be
established."

(But the effort of the prophet was wholly without effect.)

So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, saying, "I
am thy servant and thy son: come up, and save me out of the hand of
the king of Syria and out of the hand of the king of Israel, which
rise up against me."

And Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of the
Lord, and in the treasures of the king's house, and sent it for a
present to the king of Assyria. And the king of Assyria hearkened unto
him: and the king of Assyria went up against Damascus, and took it,
and carried the people of it captive to Kir, and slew Rezin.

(Many years passed away. The prophet tried to make his people better,
but often without success. He tried to get the rulers to trust in
Jehovah rather than in armies and the aid of foreign kings. Sometimes
he succeeded, but more often he failed. The land was still subject to
Assyria, and had paid heavy tribute ever since Ahaz had hired the king
of Assyria to help him against the Northern kings. Other lands were
also under the yoke of Assyria, and all of them wanted to win their
freedom. At last the king of Babylon sent messengers to these other
countries to see if he could not get {268} their kings to join in
revolt against Assyria. But Isaiah did not favor this alliance, for
this also was trusting, not to Jehovah, but to armies and foreign
kings.)

At that time Merodach-baladan the son of Baladan, king of Babylon,
sent letters and a present to Hezekiah: for he heard that he had been
sick, and was recovered. And Hezekiah was glad of them, and shewed
them the house of his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and
the spices, and the precious oil, and all the house of his armour, and
all that was found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house,
nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not. Then came
Isaiah the prophet unto King Hezekiah, and said unto him, "What said
these men? and from whence came they unto thee?"

And Hezekiah said, "They are come from a far country unto me, even
from Babylon."

Then said he, "What have they seen in thine house?"

And Hezekiah answered, "All that is in mine house have they seen:
there is nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed them."

Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, "Hear the word of the Lord of hosts.
Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that which
thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to
Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the Lord. And thy sons shall
they take away; they shall be servants in the palace of the king of
Babylon."

Then said Hezekiah unto Isaiah, "Good is the word of the Lord which
thou hast spoken."

{269}{270}

[Illustration]
  ON THE ROAD FROM JERUSALEM TO JERICHO.
  From a photograph in the possession of Rev. Louis F. Giroux of the
  American International College, Springfield, Mass., and used by his
  kind permission.
[End illustration]


{271}

He said moreover, "For there shall be peace and truth in my days."

(This king of Babylon was soon after defeated by the king of Assyria
and driven out of Babylon. For some time he hid himself among the
swamps in the southern part of his kingdom, but later was captured and
killed.)


III

DELIVERANCE FROM THE ASSYRIANS

(About ten years after the king of Babylon had sent his messengers to
Hezekiah there was a revolt against Assyria in Palestine. Hezekiah, in
spite of the opposition of Isaiah, was deep in the plot. When
Sennacherib, the king of Assyria, heard of the revolt, he sent his
armies to Palestine to punish the kings who had dared to defy him.
Judah and the other small kingdoms were not able to meet the Assyrian
armies. The whole land was in terror, and Hezekiah, the king, who had
been so eager for war, was glad enough, now that it had actually come,
to seek the wise counsel of the prophet.)

Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, that
Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the fortified cities
of Judah and took them. And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from
Lachish to Jerusalem to King Hezekiah with a great army. And he stood
by the conduit of the upper pool in the high way of the fuller's
field. Then came forth to him Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over
the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the
recorder. And Rabshakeh said unto them, "Say ye now to Hezekiah, 'Thus
saith the great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this
wherein thou trustest? I say, thy counsel and {272} strength for the
war are but vain words: now on whom dost thou trust, that thou hast
rebelled against me? Behold, thou trustest upon the staff of this
bruised reed, even upon Egypt; whereon if a man lean, it will go into
his hand, and pierce it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that trust
on him. But if thou say to me, We trust in the Lord our God: is not
that he, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away,
and hath said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this
altar? Now therefore, I pray thee, give pledges to my master the king
of Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able
on thy part to set riders upon them. How then canst thou turn away the
face of one captain of the least of my master's servants, and put thy
trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen? And am I now come up
without the Lord against this land to destroy it? The Lord said unto
me, Go up against this land, and destroy it.'"

Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah unto Rabshakeh, "Speak, I pray
thee, unto thy servants in the Syrian language; for we understand it:
and speak not to us in the Jews' language in the ears of the people
that are on the wall."

But Rabshakeh said, "Hath my master sent me to thy master, and to
thee, to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men that sit
upon the wall?"

Then Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a loud voice in the Jews'
language, and said, "Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of
Assyria. Thus saith the king, 'Let {273} not Hezekiah deceive you; for
he shall not be able to deliver you: neither let Hezekiah make you
trust in the Lord, saying, The Lord will surely deliver us; this city
shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.' Hearken not
to Hezekiah: for thus saith the king of Assyria, 'Make your peace with
me, and come out to me; and eat ye every one of his vine, and everyone
of his fig tree, and drink ye everyone the waters of his own cistern:
until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of
corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards. Beware lest Hezekiah
persuade you, saying, The Lord will deliver us. Hath any of the gods
of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the king of
Assyria? Who are they among all the gods of these countries, that have
delivered their country out of my hand, that the Lord should deliver
Jerusalem out of my hand?'"

But they held their peace, and answered him not a word: for the king's
commandment was, "Answer him not."

Then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, that was over the household, and
Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder, to Hezekiah
with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabshakeh.

And it came to pass, when King Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his
clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house
of the Lord. And he sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and
Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with
sackcloth, unto Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz. And they said unto
him, "Thus saith Hezekiah, 'This day is a day of trouble, {274} and of
rebuke, and of confusion. It may be the Lord thy God will hear the
words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master hath sent to
defy the living God, and will rebuke the words which the Lord thy God
hath heard: wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is
left.'"

So the servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah. And Isaiah said unto
them, "Thus shall ye say to your master, 'Thus saith the Lord, Be not
afraid of the words that thou hast heard, wherewith the servants of
the king of Assyria have blasphemed me. Behold, I will put a spirit in
him, and he shall hear a rumour, and shall return unto his own land;
and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.'"

So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against
Libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish. And he
heard concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, "He is come out to fight
against thee." And when he heard it, he sent messengers to Hezekiah,
saying, "Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, 'Let
not thy God in whom thou trustest deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem
shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria. Behold, thou
hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands by
destroying them utterly: and shalt thou be delivered?'"

And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers, and
read it: and Hezekiah went up unto the house of the Lord, and spread
it before the Lord. And Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord, saying, "O Lord
of hosts, the God of Israel, that sittest upon the cherubim, thou art
{275} the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth; thou
hast made heaven and earth. Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear; open
thine eyes, O Lord, and see: and hear all the words of Sennacherib,
which hath sent to defy the living God. Of a truth, Lord, the kings of
Assyria have laid waste all the countries and their land, and have
cast their gods into the fire: for they were no gods, but the work of
men's hands, wood and stone; therefore they have destroyed them. Now
therefore, O Lord our God, save us from his hand, that all the
kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the Lord, even thou
only."

Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto Hezekiah, saying, "Thus saith
the Lord, the God of Israel, 'Whereas thou hast prayed to me against
Sennacherib king of Assyria, this is the word which the Lord hath
spoken concerning him: The daughter of Zion hath despised thee and
laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head
at thee. Whom hast thou defied and blasphemed? and against whom hast
thou exalted thy voice and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against
the Holy One of Israel. By thy servants hast thou defied the Lord, and
hast said, With the multitude of my chariots am I come up to the
height of the mountains, to the innermost parts of Lebanon; and I will
cut down the tall cedars thereof, and the choice fir trees thereof:
and I will enter into his farthest height, the forest of his fruitful
field. Hast thou not heard how I have done it long ago, and formed it
of ancient times? now have I brought it to pass, that thou shouldest
lay waste fortified cities into ruinous heaps. Therefore their {276}
inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed and confounded;
they were as the grass of the field, and as the green herb, and as a
field of corn before it be grown up. But I know thy sitting down, and
thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy raging against me. Because
of thy raging against me, and because thine arrogancy is come up into
mine ears, therefore will I put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in
thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.'"


"Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the king of Assyria, 'He
shall not come unto this city, nor shoot an arrow there, neither shall
he come before it with shield, nor cast up siege works against it. By
the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and he shall not
come unto this city, saith the Lord. For I will defend this city to
save it, for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake.'"

And the angel of the Lord went forth, and smote in the camp of the
Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when men
arose early in the morning, behold, these were all dead. So
Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went back and dwelt at
Nineveh. And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of
Nisroch his god, two of his sons smote him with the sword: and they
escaped into the land of Ararat. And Esarhaddon his son reigned in his
stead.

[Footnote: Other stories of the reigns of Hezekiah and the kings of
Judah and Israel may be found in Volume III. ]


{277}

[Footnote: The following are selections from the great poems of
Isaiah. For majesty of utterance, for lofty and inspired thought,
these are unmatched in literature.]


GOD IS MY SALVATION

  I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord,
  For though thou wast angry with me,
  Thine anger is turned away,
  And thou comfortest me.

  Behold God is my salvation;
  I will trust, and will not be afraid:
  For the Lord Jehovah is my strength and song;
  And he is become my salvation.

  Therefore with joy shall ye draw water
  Out of the wells of salvation.

  Give thanks unto the Lord,
  Call upon his name,
  Declare his doings among the peoples,
  Make mention that his name is exalted.

  Sing unto the Lord for he hath done excellent things:
  Let this be known in all the earth.
  Cry aloud, and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion:
  For great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.


{278}

THE COMING MESSIAH

  For unto us a child is born,
  Unto us a son is given;
  And the government shall be upon his shoulder;
  And his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor,
  Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace.

  Of the increase of his government
  And of peace there shall be no end
  Upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom;
  To establish it with judgment,
  And with righteousness, from henceforward even for ever.
  The zeal of the Lord of hosts shall perform this.


{279}

A SONG OF TRIUMPH

  Sing unto the Lord a new song,
  And his praise from the end of the earth;
  Ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein,
  The isles, and the inhabitants thereof.
  Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice,
  The villages that Kedar doth inhabit;
  Let the inhabitants of Sela sing,
  Let them shout from the top of the mountains.
  Let them give glory unto the Lord,
  And declare his praise in the islands.

  The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man;
  He shall stir up zeal like a man of war:
  He shall cry, yea, he shall shout aloud;
  He shall do mightily against his enemies.


{280}

PARABLE OF THE VINEYARD

  Let me sing of my wellbeloved a song of my beloved touching his vineyard.
  My wellbeloved had a vineyard
  In a very fruitful hill:
  And he made a trench about it,
  And gathered out the stones thereof,
  And planted it with the choicest vine,
  And built a tower in the midst of it,
  And also hewed out a winepress therein:
  And he looked that it should bring forth grapes--
  And it brought forth wild grapes.


And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, judge, I pray
you, betwixt me and my vineyard.

What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in
it? wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes,
brought it forth wild grapes? And now come, I will tell you what I
will do to my vineyard: I will take away the hedge thereof, and it
shall be eaten up; I will break down the fence thereof, and it shall
be trodden down: and I will lay it waste; it shall not be pruned nor
hoed; but there shall come up briers and thorns: I will also command
the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. For the vineyard of the
Lord of hosts is the {281} house of Israel, and the men of Judah his
pleasant plant: and he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for
righteousness, but behold a cry.


THE CONDEMNATION UPON UNFRUITFULNESS

Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field, till
there be no room, and ye be made to dwell alone in the midst of the
land! In mine ears saith the Lord of hosts, "Of a truth many houses
shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant. For ten
acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and a homer of seed shall
yield but an ephah."

Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow
strong drink; that tarry late into the night, till wine inflame them!
And the harp and the lute, the tabret and the pipe, and wine are in
their feasts: but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither have
they considered the operation of his hands. Therefore my people are
gone into captivity, for lack of knowledge: and their honourable men
are famished, and their multitude are parched with thirst. Therefore
hell hath enlarged her desire, and opened her mouth without measure:
and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that
rejoiceth among them, descend into it. And the mean man is bowed down
and the great man is humbled, and the eyes of the lofty are humbled:
but the Lord of hosts is exalted in judgment, and God the Holy One is
sanctified in righteousness. {282} Then shall the lambs feed as in
their pasture, and the waste places of the fat ones shall wanderers
eat.

Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it
were with a cart rope: that say, "Let him make speed, let him hasten
his work, that we may see it: and let the counsel of the Holy One of
Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it!"

Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness
for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter!

Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their
own sight!

Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to
mingle strong drink: which justify the wicked for a reward, and take
away the righteousness of the righteous from him! Therefore as the
tongue of fire devoureth the stubble, and as the dry grass sinketh
down in the flame, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their
blossom shall go up as dust: because they have rejected the law of the
Lord of hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel.


{283}

[Footnote: The prophet threatens Judah with invasion by the dreaded
Assyrian army.]

THE DOOM OF THE UNFRUITFUL NATION

  For all this his anger is not turned away,
  But his hand is stretched forth still.

  And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from afar,
  And he will hiss for them from the end of the earth:
  And, behold, they shall come with speed swiftly;
  None shall be weary nor stumble among them;
  None shall slumber nor sleep;
  Neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed,
  Nor the latchet of their shoes be broken:
  Whose arrows are sharp,
  And all their bows bent;
  Their horses' hoofs shall be counted like flint,
  And their wheels like a whirlwind:
  Their roaring shall be like a lion,
  They shall roar like young lions:
  Yea, they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey,
  And carry it away safe, and there shall be none to deliver.

  And they shall roar against them in that day like the roaring of the sea;
  And if one look unto the land, behold, darkness and distress,
  And the light is darkened in the clouds thereof.


{284}

COMFORT YE MY PEOPLE

  Comfort ye, comfort ye my people,
  Saith your God.
  Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem,
  And cry unto her,
  That her warfare is accomplished,
  That her iniquity is pardoned;
  That she hath received of the Lord's hand
  Double for all her sin.

  Prepare ye in the wilderness the way of the Lord,
  Make straight in the desert a highway for our God.
  Every valley shall be exalted,
  And every mountain and hill shall be made low:
  And the crooked shall be made straight,
  And the rough places plain:
  And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed,
  And all flesh shall see it together:
  For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.

  The voice of one saying, "Cry."
  And one said, "What shall I cry?"
  All flesh is grass,
  And all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field:
  The grass withereth,
  The flower fadeth,                                  {285}
  Because the breath of the Lord bloweth upon it:
  Surely the people is grass.
  The grass withereth,
  The flower fadeth:
  But the word of our God shall stand forever.

  O thou that tellest good tidings to Zion,
  Get thee up into the high mountain;
  O thou that tellest good tidings to Jerusalem,
  Lift up thy voice with strength;
  Lift it up, be not afraid;
  Say unto the cities of Judah, "Behold your God."

  Behold, the Lord God will come as a mighty one,
  And his arm shall rule for him:
  Behold his reward is with him,
  And his recompense before him.
  He shall feed his flock like a shepherd,
  He shall gather the lambs in his arms,
  And carry them in his bosom,
  And shall gently lead those that give suck.


{286}

AWAKE, O ZION!

  Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion;
  Put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city;
  For henceforth there shall no more come into thee
    the uncircumcised and the unclean.

  Shake thyself from the dust;
  Arise, sit thee down, O Jerusalem:
  Loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.

  How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him
  That bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace,
  That bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation;
  That saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth.

  The voice of the watchmen! they lift up the voice,
  Together do they sing,
  For they shall see, eye to eye,
  When the Lord returneth to Zion.

  Break forth into joy, sing together,
  Ye waste places of Jerusalem:
  For the Lord hath comforted his people,
  He hath redeemed Jerusalem.            {287}

  The Lord hath made bare his holy arm
  In the eyes of the nations;
  And all the ends of the earth
  Shall see the salvation of our God.

  Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence,
  Touch no unclean thing:
  Go ye out of the midst of her;
  Be ye clean ye that bear the vessels of the Lord.

  For ye shall not go out in haste,
  Neither shall ye go by flight;
  For the Lord will go before you,
  And the God of Israel will be your rearguard.


{288}

THE TRIUMPH OF THE MAN OF SORROWS

  Who hath believed that which we have heard?
  And to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?

  For he grew up before him as a tender plant,
  And as a root out of a dry ground:
  He hath no form nor comeliness, that we should look upon him;
  Nor beauty that we should desire him.

  He was despised and rejected of men;
  A man of sorrows and acquainted with grief:
  And as one from whom men hide their face he was despised,
  And we esteemed him not.

  Surely he hath borne our griefs,
  And carried our sorrows:
  Yet we did esteem him stricken,
  Smitten of God and afflicted.

  But he was wounded for our transgressions,
  He was bruised for our iniquities:
  The chastisement of our peace was upon him,
  And with his stripes we are healed.

  All we like sheep have gone astray;
  We have turned everyone to his own way;
  And the Lord hath laid on him
  The iniquity of us all.             {289}

  He was oppressed,
  Yet he humbled himself,
  And opened not his mouth;
  As a lamb is led to the slaughter,
  And as a sheep before her shearers is dumb;
  Yea, he opened not his mouth.

  By oppression and judgment he was taken away;
  And his life who shall recount?
  For he was cut off out of the land of the living;
  For the transgressions of my people was he stricken.

  And they made his grave with the wicked,
  And with the rich in his death;
  Although he had done no violence,
  Neither was any deceit in his mouth.

  Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him;
  He hath put him to grief:
  When his soul shall make an offering for sin,
  He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days,
  And the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand:
  He shall see, and be satisfied with the travail of his soul.

  By his knowledge shall my righteous servant make many righteous:
  And he shall bear their iniquities.
  Therefore will I divide with him a portion of the great,
  And he shall divide the spoil with the strong:
  Because he poured out his soul unto death,
  And was numbered with the transgressors:
  Yet he bare the sin of many,
  And made intercession for the transgressors.


{290}

BEAUTIFUL ZION

  O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted,
  Behold, I will set thy stones in fair colors,
  And lay thy foundations with sapphires.

  And I will make thy pinnacles of rubies,
  And thy gates of carbuncles,
  And all thy borders of precious stones.

  And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord;
  And great shall be the peace of thy children:
  In righteousness shalt thou be established.

  Thou shalt be far from oppression, for thou shalt not fear;
  And from terror, for it shall not come nigh thee.

  Behold I have created the smith
  That bloweth the fire of coals,
  And bringeth forth a weapon for its work;
  And I have created the waster to destroy.
  No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper;
  And every tongue that shall rise against thee
    in judgment thou shalt condemn.
  This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord,
  And their righteousness which is of me, saith the Lord.


{291}

HO, EVERY ONE THAT THIRSTETH

  Ho, everyone that thirsteth, come ye to the waters,
  And he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat;
  Yea, come, buy wine and milk,
  Without money and without price.

  Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread?
  And your labor for that which satisfieth not?
  Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good,
  And let your soul delight itself in fatness.

  Incline your ear and come unto me;
  Hear, and your soul shall live:
  And I will make an everlasting covenant with you,
  Even the sure mercies of David.

  Behold, I have given him for a witness to the peoples,
  And a leader and commander to the peoples.
  Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not,
  And a nation that knew not thee shall run unto thee,
  Because of the Lord thy God,
  And for the Holy One of Israel;
  For he hath glorified thee.

  Seek ye the Lord while he may be found,
  Call ye upon him while he is near:
  Let the wicked forsake his way,
  And the unrighteous man his thoughts:     {292}

  And let him return unto the Lord,
  And he will have mercy upon him;
  And to our God,
  For he will abundantly pardon.

  For my thoughts are not your thoughts,
  Neither are your ways my ways,
  Saith the Lord.
  For as the heavens are higher than the earth,
  So are my ways higher than your ways,
  And my thoughts than your thoughts.

  For as the rain cometh down and the snow from heaven,
  And returneth not thither, but watereth the earth,
  And maketh it bring forth and bud, and giveth seed to the
    sower and bread to the eater;
  So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth:
  It shall not return unto me void,
  But it shall accomplish that which I please,
  And it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.

  For ye shall go out with joy,
  And be led forth with peace:
  The mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing,
  And all the trees of the fields shall clap their hands.
  Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree,
  And instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree:
  And it shall be to the Lord for a name,
  For an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off.


{293}

ARISE, SHINE

  Arise, shine; for thy light is come,
  And the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.
  For behold, darkness shall cover the earth,
  And gross darkness the peoples:
  But the Lord shall arise upon thee,
  And his glory shall be seen upon thee.

  And nations shall come to thy light,
  And kings to the brightness of thy rising.
  Lift up thine eyes round about, and see:
  They all gather themselves together, they come to thee:
  Thy sons shall come from far,
  And thy daughters shall be carried in the arms.

  Then thou shalt see and be lightened,
  And thine heart shall tremble and be enlarged;
  Because the abundance of the sea shall be turned unto thee,
  The wealth of the nations shall come unto thee.

  The multitude of camels shall cover thee,
  The dromedaries of Midian and Ephah;
  They all shall come from Sheba, they shall bring gold and frankincense,
  And shall proclaim the praises of the Lord.               {294}

  All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered unto thee,
  The rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee;
  They shall come up with acceptance on mine altar,
  And I will beautify the house of my glory.

  Who are these that fly as a cloud,
  And as doves to their windows?
  Surely the isles shall wait for me,
  And the ships of Tarshish first,
  To bring thy sons from far,
  Their silver and their gold with them,
  For the name of the Lord thy God,
  And for the Holy One of Israel, because he hath glorified thee.
  And strangers shall build up thy walls,
  And their kings shall minister unto thee:
  For in my wrath I smote thee,
  But in my favour have I had mercy on thee.

  Thy gates shall be open continually,
  They shall not be shut day nor night;
  That men may bring unto thee the wealth of the nations,
  And their kings led with them:
  For that nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish;
  Yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted.

  The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee,
  The fir tree, the pine, and the box tree together;
  To beautify the place of my sanctuary,
  And I will make the place of my feet glorious.          {295}

  And the sons of them that afflict thee
  Shall come bending unto thee;
  And all they that despised thee
  Shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet.

  And they shall call thee the City of the Lord,
  The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.
  Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated,
  So that no man passed through thee,
  I will make thee an eternal excellency,
  A joy of many generations.

  For brass I will bring gold,
  And for iron I will bring silver,
  And for wood brass,
  And for stones iron.

  I will also make thy officers peace,
  And thine exactors righteousness;
  Violence shall no more be heard in thy land,
  Desolation nor destruction within thy borders;
  And thou shalt call thy walls Salvation,
  And thy gates Praise.

  The sun shall be no more thy light by day,
  Neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee:
  But the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light,
  And thy God thy glory.                                {296}

  Thy sun shall no more go down,
  Neither shall thy moon withdraw itself:
  For the Lord shall be thine everlasting light,
  And the days of thy mourning shall be ended.

  Thy people also shall be all righteous,
  They shall inherit the land for ever;
  The branch of my planting,
  The work of my hands,
  That I may be glorified.
  The little one shall become a thousand,
  And the small one a strong nation:
  I the Lord will hasten it in its time.


{297}

JEREMIAH

(The life of Jeremiah was a very sad one. He lived in those days just
before the captivity when the nation with its splendid history was
drifting to certain doom, as a ship drifts upon the rocks. The people
were sunk in corruption; they had no ambition and no hope. Jeremiah
could not save the nation from the fate which the selfishness and
wickedness of the people had brought upon it, but he could cry out
with all the strength of his strong soul against the evil. Politically
he saw that submission to Egypt or to Babylon was inevitable, and he
favored Babylon, because the northern kingdom was much stronger than
the southern. The time of the activity of Jeremiah as a prophet was
about forty years, from the thirteenth year of the reign of Josiah
until after the beginning of the captivity. When the people of Judah
were carried into captivity Jeremiah was allowed to remain behind. He
hoped that the little remnant of people which was left in the land by
the conquerors might be the seed of a new and better nation, but in
this he was bitterly disappointed. The governor of the colony was
assassinated, and Jeremiah was dragged off to Egypt by the frightened
people. It is said that the prophet met his death by stoning, at the
hands of his own countrymen. Jeremiah has been compared to Milton and
to Savonarola. His life was one of those which seem to fail in their
immediate purpose, but which have very great influence upon the
progress of humanity.)


{298}

I

THE CALL OF JEREMIAH

(Jeremiah was not as eager as was Isaiah when God's call first came to
him. He was reluctant and slow to obey.)


The word of God came to him saying, "I have appointed thee a prophet
unto the nations."

Then said I, "Ah, Lord God, behold, I cannot speak: for I am a child."

But the Lord said unto me, "Say not, I am a child: for to whomsoever I
shall send thee thou shalt go, and whatsoever I shall command thee
thou shalt speak. Be not afraid because of them: for I am with thee to
deliver thee."

Then the Lord put forth his hand, and touched my mouth; and the Lord
said unto me, "Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth: see, I have
this day set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to pluck up
and to break down, and to destroy and to overthrow; to build, and to
plant."

Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, "Jeremiah, what
seest thou?"

And I said, "I see a rod of an almond tree."

Then said the Lord unto me, "Thou hast well seen: for I watch over my
word to perform it."

And the word of the Lord came unto me the second time, saying, "What
seest thou?"

And I said, "I see a boiling caldron; and the face thereof is from the
north."


{299}{300}

[Illustration]
  A STREET IN JERUSALEM, WITH THE HOUSES BUILT OVER THE STREET.
[End illustration]


{301}

Then the Lord said unto me, "Out of the north evil shall break forth
upon all the inhabitants of the land. For, lo, I will call all the
families of the kingdoms of the north, saith the Lord; and they shall
come, and they shall set everyone his throne at the entering of the
gates of Jerusalem, and against all the walls thereof round about, and
against all the cities of Judah. And I will utter my judgments against
them touching all their wickedness; because they have forsaken me, and
have burned incense unto other gods, and worshipped the works of their
own hands. Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto
them all that I command thee: be not dismayed at them, lest I dismay
thee before them. For, behold, I have made thee this day a fortified
city, and an iron pillar, and brasen walls, against the whole land,
against the kings of Judah, against the princes thereof, against the
priests thereof, and against the people of the land. And they shall
fight against thee; but they shall not prevail against thee: for I am
with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee."


II

THE POTTER AND HIS CLAY

(The people of the East, where the prophets lived and spoke,
understood teaching which was put before them in the form of pictures
and images and symbols better than any other way. So the prophets
would often use figures of speech and do striking things to attract
the attention of the people. One day Jeremiah went to the workshop of
the potter, and found him at work with {302} his wheel. This is the
way in which he used what he saw to teach the people of God's power
over them):--

The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, "Arise, and go
down to the potter's house, and there I will cause thee to hear my
words."

Then I went down to the potter's house, and, behold, he wrought his
work on the wheels. And when the vessel that he made of the clay was
marred in the hand of the potter, he made it again another vessel, as
seemed good to the potter to make it.

Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying, "O house of Israel,
cannot I do with you as this potter? saith the Lord. Behold, as the
clay in the potter's hand, so are ye in mine hand, O house of Israel.
At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a
kingdom, to pluck up and to break down and to destroy it; if that
nation, concerning which I have spoken, turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. And at what instant
I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build
and to plant it; if it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice,
then I will repent of the good, wherewith I said I would benefit them.
Now therefore go, speak to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the Lord: 'Behold, I frame evil against
you, and devise a device against you: return ye now everyone from his
evil way, and amend your ways and your doings.'"

But they say, "There is no hope: for we will walk after {303} our own
devices, and we will do everyone after the stubbornness of his evil
heart."

Therefore thus saith the Lord, "Shall the snow of Lebanon fail from
the rock of the field? or shall the cold waters that flow down from
afar be dried up? For my people hath forgotten me, they have burned
incense to false gods; and they have caused them to stumble in their
ways, in the ancient paths, to walk in bypaths, in a way not cast up;
to make their land an astonishment, and a perpetual hissing; everyone
that passeth thereby shall be astonished, and shake his head. I will
scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy; I will look upon
their back, and not their face, in the day of their calamity."


(At another time he took an earthen vessel which the potter had made
and broke it in the sight of the people.)


Thus said the Lord, "Go, and buy a potter's earthen vessel, and take
of the elders of the people, and of the elders of the priests; and go
forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is by the entry of
the gate Harsith, and proclaim there the words that I shall tell thee:
and say, 'Hear ye the word of the Lord, O kings of Judah, and
inhabitants of Jerusalem; thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of
Israel, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, at which whosoever
heareth, his ears shall tingle. Because they have forsaken me, and
have estranged this place, and have burned incense in it unto other
gods, whom they knew not, they and their fathers and the kings of
Judah; and have filled his place with the blood of innocents; and have
{304} built the high places of Baal, to burn their sons in the fire
for burnt offerings unto Baal; which I commanded not, nor spake it,
neither came it into my mind: therefore, behold, the days come, saith
the Lord, that this place shall no more be called Topheth, nor The
valley of the son of Hinnom, but The valley of Slaughter. And I will
make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this place; and I will
cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies, and by the hand
of them that seek their life: and their carcases will I give to be
food for the birds of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth. And
I will make this city an astonishment, and an hissing; everyone that
passeth thereby shall be astonished and hiss because of all the
plagues thereof. And I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons
and the flesh of their daughters, and they shall eat everyone the
flesh of his friend, in the siege and in the distress, wherewith their
enemies, and they that seek their life, shall distress them.'

"Then shalt thou break the vessel in the sight of the men that go with
thee, and shalt say unto them, 'Thus saith the Lord of hosts: Even so
will I break this people and this city, as one breaketh a potter's
vessel, that cannot be made whole again: and they shall bury in
Topheth, till there lie no place to bury. Thus will I do unto this
place, saith the Lord, and to the inhabitants thereof, even making this
city as Topheth: and the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses of the
kings of Judah, which are defiled, shall be as the place of Topheth,
even all the houses upon whose roofs they have burned incense unto all
the host of {305} heaven, and have poured out drink offerings unto
other gods.'"

Then came Jeremiah from Topheth, whither the Lord had sent him to
prophesy; and he stood in the court of the Lord's house, and said to
all the people: "Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel,
'Behold, I will bring upon this city and upon all her towns all the
evil that I have pronounced against it; because they have made their
heart hard, that they might not hear my words.'"


III

THE KING'S ANGER

(Jeremiah had his prophecies written down by his clerk. But when the
king read from the scroll on which they were written, he was so angry
that he cut up the scroll, and burned it. This did not prevent the
prophecies from being known, for Jeremiah had them written upon a new
scroll.)


And it came to pass in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah,
king of Judah, that this word came unto Jeremiah from the Lord,
saying, "Take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the words
that I have spoken unto thee against Israel, and against Judah, and
against all the nations, from the day I spake unto thee, from the days
of Josiah, even unto this day. It may be that the house of Judah will
hear all the evil which I purpose to do unto them; that they may
return every man from his evil way; that I may forgive their iniquity
and their sin."

Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of Neriah; and {306} Baruch wrote
from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the Lord, which he had
spoken unto him, upon a roll of a book.

And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, "I cannot go into the house of
the Lord: therefore go thou, and read in the roll, which thou hast
written from my mouth, the words of the Lord in the ears of the people
in the Lord's house upon the fast day: and also thou shalt read them
in the ears of all Judah that come out of their cities. It may be they
will present their supplication before the Lord, and will return
everyone from his evil way: for great is the anger and the fury that
the Lord hath pronounced against this people."

And Baruch the son of Neriah did according to all that Jeremiah the
prophet commanded him, reading in the book the words of the Lord in
the Lord's house.

Now it came to pass in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah,
king of Judah, in the ninth month, that all the people in Jerusalem,
and all the people that came from the cities of Judah unto Jerusalem,
proclaimed a fast before the Lord. Then read Baruch in the book the
words of Jeremiah in the house of the Lord, in the ears of all the
people. And when Micaiah had heard out of the book all the words of
the Lord, he went down into the king's house, into the scribe's
chamber: and, lo, all the princes sat there. Then Micaiah declared
unto them all the words that he had heard, when Baruch read the book
in the ears of the people.

Therefore all the princes sent Jehudi unto Baruch, {307} saying, "Take
in thine hand the roll wherein thou hast read in the ears of the
people, and come."

So Baruch the son of Neriah took the roll in his hand, and came unto
them. And they said unto him, "Sit down now, and read it to us." So
Baruch read it to them.

Now it came to pass, when they had heard all the words, they turned in
fear one toward another, and said unto Baruch, "We will surely tell
the king of all these words."

And they asked Baruch, saying, "Tell us now, How didst thou write all
these words at his mouth?"

Then Baruch answered them, "He pronounced all these words unto me with
his mouth, and I wrote them with ink in the book."

Then said the princes unto Baruch, "Go, hide thee, thou and Jeremiah;
and let no man know where ye are."

And they went in to the king into the court; but they had laid up the
roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe; and they told all the
words in the ears of the king. So the king sent Jehudi to fetch the
roll: and he took it out of the chamber of Elishama the scribe. And
Jehudi read it to the king, and to all the princes which stood beside
the king. Now the king sat in the winter house in the ninth month: and
there was a fire in the brasier burning before him. And it came to
pass, when Jehudi had read three or four sections, that the king cut
it with his penknife, and cast it into the fire that was in the
brasier, until all the roll was consumed in the fire that was in the
brasier. And they were not afraid, nor rent their garments, neither
the king, {308} nor any of his servants that heard all these words.
Moreover Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had made intercession to
the king that he would not burn the roll: but he would not hear them.
And the king commanded his officers to take Baruch the scribe and
Jeremiah the prophet: but the Lord hid them.

Then the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, after the king had burned
the roll, and the words which Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah,
saying, "Take thee again another roll, and write in it all the former
words that were in the first roll, which Jehoiakim the king of Judah
hath burned.

"And concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah thou shalt say, 'Thus saith
the Lord: Thou hast burned this roll, saying, Why hast thou written
therein, saying, The king of Babylon shall certainly come and destroy
this land, and shall cause to cease from thence man and beast?

"'Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah: He
shall have none to sit upon the throne of David: and his dead body
shall be cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the
frost. And I will punish him and his family and his servants for their
iniquity; and I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah, all the evil that I have
pronounced against them, and they hearkened not.'"

Then took Jeremiah another roll, and gave it to Baruch the scribe, the
son of Neriah; who wrote therein from the mouth of Jeremiah all the
words of the book which Jehoiakim king of Judah had burned in the
fire: and there were added besides unto them many like words.


{309}

IV

JEREMIAH IN PRISON

(Jeremiah continued to rebuke the people for the evil of their lives,
and especially to insist that they could find no hope in an alliance
with the faithless nation of Egypt. This so enraged some of the
princes that the prophet was put into prison, and then into the
foulest dungeon of the prison. How he suffered for truth-telling, and
how he escaped, is told in the following story):--


And Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned as king, instead of Coniah the
son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon made king in the
land of Judah. But neither he, nor his servants, nor the people of the
land, hearkened unto the words of the Lord, which he spake by the
prophet Jeremiah.

And Zedekiah the king sent his officer to the prophet Jeremiah,
saying, "Pray now unto the Lord our God for us."

Now Jeremiah came in and went out among the people: for they had not
yet put him into prison. And Pharaoh's army was come forth out of
Egypt: and when the Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem heard tidings of
them, they went away from Jerusalem.

Then came the word of the Lord unto the prophet Jeremiah, saying,
"Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel: 'Thus shall ye say to the
king of Judah, that sent you unto me to inquire of me; Behold,
Pharaoh's army, which is come forth to help you, shall return to Egypt
into their own land. And the Chaldeans shall come again, and fight
{310} against this city; and they shall take it, and burn it with
fire.' Thus saith the Lord: 'Deceive not yourselves, saying, The
Chaldeans shall surely depart from us: for they shall not depart. For
though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans that fight
against you, and there remained but wounded men among them, yet should
they rise up every man in his tent, and burn this city with fire.'"

And it came to pass that when the army of the Chaldeans went away from
Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh's army, then Jeremiah went forth out of
Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin, to look after his property.
And when he was in the gate of the city, a captain of the guard was
there; and he laid hold of Jeremiah the prophet, saying, "Thou art
deserting to the Chaldeans."

Then said Jeremiah, "It is false; I am not deserting to the
Chaldeans;" but he hearkened not to him: so the officer laid hold of
Jeremiah, and brought him to the princes.

And the princes were wroth with Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him
in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe; for they had made that
the prison.

When Jeremiah was come into the dungeon house, and into the cells, and
Jeremiah had remained there many days; then Zedekiah the king sent,
and brought him: and the king asked him secretly in his house, and
said, "Is there any word from the Lord?"

And Jeremiah said, "There is. Thou shalt be delivered into the hand of
the king of Babylon."

Moreover Jeremiah said unto King Zedekiah, "Wherein have I sinned
against thee, or against thy servants, or {311} against this people,
that ye have put me in prison? Where now are your prophets which
prophesied unto you, saying, 'The king of Babylon shall not come
against you, nor against this land'? And now hear, I pray thee, O my
lord the king: let my supplication, I pray thee, be accepted before
thee; that thou cause me not to return to the house of Jonathan the
scribe, lest I die there."

Then Zedekiah the king commanded, and they committed Jeremiah into the
court of the guard, and they gave him daily a loaf of bread from the
bakers, until all the bread in the city was gone. Thus Jeremiah
remained in the court of the guard.

And the king's officers heard the words that Jeremiah spake unto all
the people, saying, "Thus saith the Lord, 'He that abideth in this
city shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: but
he that goeth forth to the Chaldeans shall live.' Thus saith the Lord,
'This city shall surely be given into the hand of the army of the king
of Babylon, and he shall take it.'"

Then the princes said unto the king, "Let this man, we pray thee, be
put to death; forasmuch as he weakeneth the hands of the men of war
that remain in this city, and the hands of all the people, in speaking
such words unto them: for this man seeketh not the welfare of this
people, but their hurt."

And Zedekiah the king said, "Behold, he is in your hand: for the king
cannot do anything against you."

Then took they Jeremiah, and cast him into the dungeon that was in the
court of the guard: and they let down {312} Jeremiah with cords. And
in the dungeon there was no water, but mire: and Jeremiah sank in the
mire.

Now when Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, which was in the king's house,
heard that they had put Jeremiah in the dungeon, he went forth out of
the king's house, and spake to the king, saying, "My lord the king,
these men have done evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the
prophet, whom they have cast into the dungeon; and he is likely to die
in the place where he is, because of the famine: for there is no more
bread in the city."

Then the king commanded Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, saying, "Take from
hence thirty men with thee, and take up Jeremiah the prophet out of
the dungeon, before he die."

So Ebed-melech took the men with him, and went into the house of the
king under the storehouse, and took thence old clothes and old rags,
and let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah.

And Ebed-melech the Ethiopian said unto Jeremiah, "Put now these old
clothes and rags under thine arms under the cords." And Jeremiah did
so. So they drew up Jeremiah with the cords, and took him up out of
the dungeon: and Jeremiah remained in the court of the guard.

Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took Jeremiah the prophet unto him
into the third entry that is in the house of the Lord: and the king
said unto Jeremiah, "I will ask thee a thing; hide nothing from me."

Then Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah, "If I declare it unto thee wilt thou
not surely put me to death? and if I give thee counsel, thou wilt not
hearken unto me."

{313}

So Zedekiah the king sware secretly unto Jeremiah, saying, "As the
Lord liveth, that made us, I will not put thee to death, neither will
I give thee into the hand of these men that seek thy life."

Then said Jeremiah unto Zedekiah, "Thus saith the Lord, the God of
hosts, the God of Israel: 'If thou wilt go forth unto the king of
Babylon's princes, then thy soul shall live, and this city shall not
be burned with fire; and thou shalt live, and thine house: but if thou
wilt not go forth to the king of Babylon's princes, then shall this
city be given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it
with fire, and thou shalt not escape out of their hand.'"

And Zedekiah the king said unto Jeremiah, "I am afraid of the Jews
that deserted to the Chaldeans, lest the Chaldeans deliver me into
their hand, and they mock me."

But Jeremiah said, "They shall not deliver thee. Obey, I beseech thee,
the voice of the Lord, in that which I speak unto thee: so it shall be
well with thee, and thy soul shall live. But if thou refuse to go
forth, this is the word that the Lord hath shewed me: Behold, all the
women that are left in the king of Judah's house shall be brought
forth to the king of Babylon's princes: and thou shalt cause this city
to be burned with fire."

Then said Zedekiah unto Jeremiah, "Let no man know of these words, and
thou shalt not die."

So Jeremiah abode in the court of the guard until the day that
Jerusalem was taken.


{314}

V

CONFUSION IN THE LAND

(Jerusalem is taken and Jeremiah is kindly treated by the victors. The
people who remain in the land, now a royal colony, take courage, but
the assassination of the governor throws everything into confusion.)


And it came to pass when Jerusalem was taken, in the ninth year of
Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, came Nebuchadnezzar king
of Babylon and all his army against Jerusalem, and besieged it; in the
eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the ninth day of the
month, a breach was made in the walls of the city. Then all the
princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in the middle gate.

And it came to pass that when Zedekiah the king of Judah and all the
men of war saw them, then they fled, and went forth out of the city by
night, by the way of the king's garden, by the gate between the two
walls. But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after them, and overtook
Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho: and when they had taken him, they
brought him up to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land
of Hamath, and he gave judgment upon him.

Then the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah before
his eyes: also the king of Babylon slew all the nobles of Judah.
Moreover he put out Zedekiah's eyes, and bound him in fetters, to
carry him to Babylon.

{315}{316}

[Illustration]
  ANATHOTH, THE HOME OF JEREMIAH.
  From a photograph taken by Prof. D. G. Lyon, and used by his kind
  permission.
[End illustration]


{317}

And the Chaldeans burned the king's house, and the houses of the
people, with fire, and broke down the walls of Jerusalem.

Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive into
Babylon the remainder of the people that stayed in the city, the
deserters also, that came to him, and the remainder of the people that
stayed.

But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the
people, which had nothing, in the land of Judah, and gave them
vineyards and fields at the same time.

Now Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon gave charge concerning Jeremiah to
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, saying, "Take him, and look well
to him, and do him no harm; but do unto him even as he shall say unto
thee."

So the king's princes sent, and took Jeremiah out of the court of the
guard, and committed him to Gedaliah the royal governor, commanding
that he should carry him home: so he dwelt among the people.

Now the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah, while he was shut up in
the court of the guard, saying, "Go, and speak to Ebed-melech the
Ethiopian, saying, 'Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel:
Behold, I will bring my words upon this city for evil, and not for
good; and they shall be accomplished before thee in that day. But I
will deliver thee in that day, saith the Lord: and thou shalt not be
given into the hand of the men of whom thou art afraid. For I will
surely save thee, and thou {318} shalt not fall by the sword, but thy
life shall be for a prey unto thee: because thou hast put thy trust in
me, saith the Lord.'"

The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, after Nebuzaradan the
captain of the guard had let him go from Ramah, when he had taken him
bound in chains among all the captives of Jerusalem and Judah, which
were carried away captive unto Babylon. And the captain of the guard
took Jeremiah, and said unto him, "The Lord thy God pronounced this
evil upon this place: and the Lord hath brought it, and done according
as he spake; because ye have sinned against the Lord, and have not
obeyed his voice, therefore this thing is come upon you. And now,
behold, I loose thee this day from the chains which are upon thine
hand. If it seem good unto thee to come with me into Babylon, come,
and I will look well unto thee; but if it seem ill unto thee to come
to Babylon, forbear. All the land is before thee; whither it seemeth
good and convenient for thee to go, thither go."

Again he said: "Go back to Gedaliah, whom the king of Babylon has made
governor over the cities of Judah, and dwell with him among the
people: or go wheresoever it seemeth convenient unto thee to go."

So the captain of the guard gave him victuals and a present, and let
him go. Then went Jeremiah to Gedaliah the royal governor to Mizpah,
and dwelt with him among the people that were left in the land.

Now when all the captains of the forces which were in the fields, even
they and their men, heard that the {319} king of Babylon had made
Gedaliah governor in the land, and had committed unto him men, and
women, and children, and of the poorest of the land, of them that were
not carried away captive to Babylon; then they came to Gedaliah to
Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan
the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of
Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah the son of the Maacathite, they
and their men.

And Gedaliah spoke earnestly unto them and to their men, saying, "Fear
not to serve the Chaldeans: dwell in the land, and serve the king of
Babylon, and it shall be well with you. As for me, behold, I will
dwell at Mizpah, to stand before the Chaldeans, which shall come unto
us: but ye, gather ye wine and summer fruits and oil, and put them in
your vessels, and dwell in your cities that ye have taken."

Likewise when all the Jews that were in Moab, and among the children
of Ammon, and in Edom, and that were in all the countries, heard that
the king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah, and that he had set
over them Gedaliah, they returned out of all places whither they were
driven and came to the land of Judah and gathered much wine and summer
fruits.

Then Jonathan the son of Kareah and all the captains of the forces
that were in the fields came to Gedaliah at Mizpah and said to him,
"Dost thou know that Baalis of the Ammonites hath sent Ishmael the son
of Nethaniah to take thy life?"

{320}

But Gedaliah the royal governor believed them not. Then Johanan the
son of Kareah spoke to Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, saying, "Let me
go, I pray thee, and I will slay Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and no
man shall know it: wherefore should he take thy life, that all the
Jews which are gathered unto thee should be scattered, and the remnant
of Judah perish?"

But Gedaliah the royal governor said to Johanan the son of Kareah,
"Thou shalt not do this thing: for thou speakest falsely of Ishmael."

Now it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael, one of the
chief officers of the king, and ten men with him, came to Gedaliah the
royal governor at Mizpah; and there they ate bread together in Mizpah.

Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and the ten men that were
with him, and smote Gedaliah the royal governor, and slew him, whom
the king of Babylon had made governor over the land.

Ishmael also slew all the Jews that were with him, even with Gedaliah,
at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans that were found there, even the men of
war. And it came to pass the second day after he had slain Gedaliah,
and no man knew it, that there came certain from Shechem, from Shiloh,
and from Samaria, even fourscore men, having their beards shaven and
their clothes rent, and having cut themselves, with oblations and
frankincense in their hand, to bring them to the house of the Lord.
And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went forth from Mizpah weeping as he
went and it came to pass as he met them he said to them, "Come to
Gedaliah."

{321}

When they came into the city Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew them,
and cast them into the midst of the pit, he, and the men that were
with him.

But ten men were found among them that said unto Ishmael, "Slay us
not: for we have stores hidden in the field, of wheat, and of barley,
and of oil, and of honey." So he forbare, and slew them not among
their brethren.

Now the pit wherein Ishmael cast all the dead bodies of the men whom
he had slain, by the side of Gedaliah, (the same was that which Asa
the king had made for fear of Baasha king of Israel,) Ishmael the son
of Nethaniah filled with them that were slain.

Then Ishmael carried away captive all the residue of the people that
were in Mizpah, even the king's daughters, and all the people that
remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had
committed to Gedaliah the royal governor: Ishmael carried them away
captive, and departed to go over to the children of Ammon.

But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces
that were with him, heard of all the evil that Ishmael had done, they
took all the men, and went to fight with Ishmael, and found him by the
great waters that are in Gibeon.

Now it came to pass that when all the people which were with Ishmael
saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that
were with him, then they were glad. So all the people that Ishmael had
carried away captive from Mizpah deserted and returned, and went to
Johanan the son of Kareah.

{322}

But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with eight men,
and went to the children of Ammon.

Then took Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
forces that were with him, all the remnant of the people whom he had
recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after he had
slain Gedaliah the royal governor, even the men of war, and the women,
and the children, and the eunuchs, whom he had brought again from
Gibeon: and they departed, and dwelt in Geruth Chimham, which is by
Beth-lehem, to go to enter into Egypt, because of the Chaldeans: for
they were afraid of them, because Ishmael had slain Gedaliah the royal
governor, whom the king of Babylon made governor over the land.


VI

THE FLIGHT TO EGYPT

(The remnant of the people wish to take refuge in Egypt. They consult
Jeremiah, who tells them that they must not desert the land.)


Then all the captains of the forces, and Johanan the son of Kareah,
and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the least
even unto the greatest, came near, and said unto Jeremiah the prophet,
"Let, we pray thee, our supplication be accepted before thee, and pray
for us unto the Lord thy God, even for all this remnant; for we are
left but a few of many, as thine eyes do {323} behold us: that the
Lord thy God may shew us the way wherein we should walk, and the thing
that we should do."

Then Jeremiah the prophet said unto them, "I have heard you; behold, I
will pray unto the Lord your God according to your words; and it shall
come to pass that whatsoever thing the Lord shall answer you, I will
declare it unto you; I will keep nothing back from you."

Then they said to Jeremiah, "The Lord be a true and faithful witness
amongst us, if we do not even according to all the word wherewith the
Lord thy God shall send thee to us. Whether it be good, or whether it
be evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord our God, to whom we send
thee; that it may be well with us, when we obey the voice of the Lord
our God."

And it came to pass after ten days, that the word of the Lord came
unto Jeremiah. Then called he Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the
captains of the forces which were with him, and all the people from
the least even to the greatest, and said unto them, "Thus saith the
Lord, the God of Israel, unto whom ye sent me to present your
supplication before him: 'If ye will still abide in this land, then
will I build you up, and not pull you down, and I will plant you, and
not pluck you up: for I repent me of the evil that I have done unto
you. Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be
not afraid of him, saith the Lord: for I am with you to save you, and
to deliver you from his hand. And I will grant you mercy, that he may
have mercy {324} upon you, and cause you to return to your own land.'
But if ye say, 'We will not dwell in this land'; so that ye obey not
the voice of the Lord your God; saying, 'No; but we will go into the
land of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the
trumpet, nor have hunger of bread; and there will we dwell:' now
therefore hear ye the word of the Lord, O remnant of Judah: thus saith
the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, 'If ye wholly set your faces to
enter into Egypt, and go to sojourn there; then it shall come to pass,
that the sword, which ye fear, shall overtake you there in the land of
Egypt, and the famine, whereof ye are afraid, shall follow hard after
you there in Egypt; and there ye shall die.

"'So shall it be with all the men that set their faces to go into
Egypt to sojourn there; they shall die by the sword, by the famine,
and by the pestilence: and none of them shall remain or escape from
the evil that I will bring upon them.'

"For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; 'As mine anger
and my fury hath been poured forth upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
so shall my fury be poured forth upon you, when ye shall enter into
Egypt: and ye shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a
curse, and a reproach; and ye shall see this place no more.'

"The Lord hath spoken concerning you, O remnant of Judah, 'Go ye not
into Egypt': know certainly that I have testified unto you this day.

"For ye have dealt deceitfully against your own souls; {325} for ye
sent me unto the Lord your God, saying, 'Pray for us unto the Lord our
God; and according unto all that the Lord our God shall say, so
declare unto us, and we will do it:' and I have this day declared it
to you; but ye have not obeyed the voice of the Lord your God in any
thing for the which he hath sent me unto you. Now therefore know
certainly that ye shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence, in the place whither ye desire to go to sojourn there."


(The people refuse to heed the warning of Jeremiah. They all journey
to Egypt, taking the prophet with them.)


And it came to pass that when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking
unto all the people all the words of the Lord their God, wherewith the
Lord their God had sent him to them, even all these words, then spoke
Azariah the son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and all
the proud men, saying to Jeremiah, "Thou speakest falsely: the Lord
our God hath not sent thee to say, 'Ye shall not go into Egypt to
sojourn there': but Baruch the son of Neriah setteth thee on against
us, to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, that they may put us
to death, and carry us away captives to Babylon."

So Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, and
all the people, obeyed not the voice of the Lord, to dwell in the land
of Judah. But Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
forces, took all the remnant of Judah, that were returned from all the
nations whither they had been driven to sojourn in {326} the land of
Judah; the men, and the women, and the children, and the king's
daughters, and every person that Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard
had left with Gedaliah the royal governor, and Jeremiah the prophet,
and Baruch the son of Neriah; and they came into the land of Egypt;
for they obeyed not the voice of the Lord: and they came even to
Tahpanhes.

Then came the word of the Lord unto Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying,
"Take great stones in thine hand, and hide them in mortar in the
brickwork, which is at the entry of Pharaoh's house in Tahpanhes, in
the sight of the men of Judah; and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord
of hosts, the God of Israel: 'Behold, I will send and take
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will set his
throne upon these stones that I have hid; and he shall spread his
royal pavilion over them. And he shall come, and shall smite the land
of Egypt; such as are for death shall be given to death, and such as
are for captivity to captivity, and such as are for the sword to the
sword.

"'And I will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt; and he
shall burn them, and carry them away captives: and he shall array
himself with the land of Egypt, as a shepherd putteth on his garment;
and he shall go forth from thence in peace. He shall also break the
pillars of Bethshemesh, that is in the land of Egypt; and the houses
of the gods of Egypt shall he burn with fire.'"

The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the {327} Jews which
dwelt in the land of Egypt, which dwelt at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes,
and at Noph, and in the country of Pathros, saying, "Thus saith the
Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: 'Ye have seen all the evil that I
have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all the cities of Judah; and,
behold, this day they are a desolation, and no man dwelleth therein;
because of their wickedness which they have committed to provoke me to
anger, in that they went to burn incense, and to serve other gods,
whom they knew not, neither they, nor ye, nor your fathers.'

"Howbeit I sent unto you all my servants the prophets, rising up early
and sending them, saying, 'Oh, do not this abominable thing that I
hate.' But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to turn from
their wickedness, to burn no incense unto other gods. Wherefore my
fury and mine anger was poured forth, and was kindled in the cities of
Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem; and they are wasted and
desolate, as it is this day.

"Therefore now thus saith the Lord, the God of hosts, the God of
Israel: 'Wherefore commit ye this great evil against your own souls,
to cut off from you man and woman, infant and suckling, out of the
midst of Judah, to leave you none remaining; in that ye provoke me
unto anger with the works of your hands, burning incense unto other
gods in the land of Egypt, whither ye be gone to sojourn; that ye may
be cut off, and that ye may be a curse and a reproach among all the
nations of the earth? Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your
fathers, and the wickedness of the kings of Judah, and the wickedness
{328} of their wives, and your own wickedness, and the wickedness of
your wives, which they committed in the land of Judah, and in the
streets of Jerusalem?

"They are not humbled even unto this day, neither have they feared,
nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that I set before you and
before your fathers.

"Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: 'Behold, I
will set my face against you for evil, even to cut off all Judah. And
I will take the remnant of Judah, that have set their faces to go into
the land of Egypt to sojourn there, and they shall all be consumed; in
the land of Egypt shall they fall; they shall be consumed by the sword
and by the famine; they shall die, from the least even unto the
greatest, by the sword and by the famine: and they shall be an
execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach.

"'For I will punish them that dwell in the land of Egypt, as I have
punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence: so that none of the remnant of Judah, which are gone into
the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall escape or remain, that they
should return into the land of Judah, to the which they have a desire
to return to dwell there: for none shall return save such as shall
escape.'"

Then all the men which knew that their wives burned incense unto other
gods, and all the women that stood by, a great assembly, even all the
people that dwelt in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, answered Jeremiah,
saying, "As for the word that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of
the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee. But {329} we will certainly
perform every word that is gone forth out of our mouth, to burn
incense unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto
her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our kings and our princes,
in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem: for then had
we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil. But since we
left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink
offerings unto her, we have wanted all things, and have been consumed
by the sword and by the famine. And when we burned incense to the
queen of heaven, and poured out drink offerings unto her, did we make
her cakes to worship her, and pour out drink offerings unto her,
without our husbands?"

Then Jeremiah said unto all the people, to the men, and to the women,
even to all the people which had given him that answer, saying, "The
incense that ye burned in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of
Jerusalem, ye and your fathers, your kings and your princes, and the
people of the land, did not the Lord remember them, and came it not
into his mind? so that the Lord could no longer bear, because of the
evil of your doings, and because of the abominations which ye have
committed; therefore is your land become a desolation, and an
astonishment, and a curse, without inhabitant, as it is this day.
Because ye have burned incense, and because ye have sinned against the
Lord, and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord, nor walked in his
law, nor in his statutes, nor in his testimonies; therefore this evil
is happened unto you, as it is this day."

{330}

Moreover Jeremiah said unto all the people, and to all the women,
"Bear the word of the Lord, all Judah that are in the land of Egypt:
thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saying: 'Ye and your
wives have both spoken with your mouths, and with your hands have
fulfilled it, saying, We will surely perform our vows that we have
vowed, to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink
offerings unto her: establish then your vows, and perform your vows.'

"Therefore hear ye the word of the Lord, all Judah that dwell in the
land of Egypt: 'Behold, I have sworn by my great name, saith the Lord,
that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah
in all the land of Egypt, saying, As the Lord God liveth. Behold, I
watch over them for evil, and not for good: and all the men of Judah
that are in the land of Egypt shall be consumed by the sword and by
the famine, until there be an end of them. And they that escape the
sword shall return out of the land of Egypt into the land of Judah,
few in number; and all the remnant of Judah, that are gone into the
land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall know whose word shall stand,
mine, or theirs.

"'And this shall be the sign unto you, saith the Lord, that I will
punish you in this place, that ye may know that my words shall surely
stand against you for evil': thus saith the Lord: Behold, I will give
Pharaoh Hophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into
the hand of them that seek his life; as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah
into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, his enemy, and that
sought his life.'"

{331}

The word that Jeremiah the prophet spoke unto Baruch the son of
Neriah, when he wrote these words in a book at the mouth of Jeremiah,
in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah,
saying, "Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, unto thee, O Baruch:
'Thou didst say, Woe is me now! for the Lord hath added sorrow to my
pain; I am weary with my groaning, and I find no rest. Thus shalt thou
say unto him, Thus saith the Lord: Behold, that which I have built
will I break down, and that which I have planted I will pluck up; and
this in the whole land.

"'And seekest thou great things for thyself? seek them not: for,
behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, saith the Lord: but thy life
will I give unto thee for a prey in all places whither thou goest.'"


VII

THE LAST PROPHECIES OF JEREMIAH

(The last prophecies of Jeremiah in which he predicts the doom of
Babylon.)


The word of the Lord which came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the
nations.


_The Doom of Babylon_

The word that the Lord spoke concerning Babylon, concerning the land
of the Chaldeans, by Jeremiah the prophet.

{332}

"Declare ye among the nations and publish, and set up a standard;
publish, and conceal not: say, 'Babylon is taken, Bel is put to shame,
Merodach is dismayed; her images are put to shame, her idols are
dismayed.'

"'For out of the north there cometh up a nation against her, which
shall make her land desolate, and none shall dwell therein: they are
fled, they are gone, both man and beast. In those days, and in that
time,' saith the Lord, 'the children of Israel shall come, they and
the children of Judah together; they shall go on their way weeping,
and shall seek the Lord their God. They shall inquire concerning Zion
with their faces thitherward, saying, Come ye, and join yourselves to
the Lord in an everlasting covenant that shall not be forgotten.

"'My people hath been lost sheep: their shepherds have caused them to
go astray, they have turned them away on the mountains: they have gone
from mountain to hill, they have forgotten their resting place. All
that found them have devoured them: and their adversaries said, We
offend not, because they have sinned against the Lord, the habitation
of justice, even the Lord, the hope of their fathers.

"'Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and go forth out of the land of
the Chaldeans, and be as the he-goats before the flocks. For, lo, I
will stir up and cause to come up against Babylon an assembly of great
nations from the north country: and they shall set themselves in array
against her; from thence she shall be taken: {333} their arrows shall
be as of an expert mighty man; none shall return in vain. And Chaldea
shall be a spoil: all that spoil her shall be satisfied,' saith the
Lord.

"'Because ye are glad, because ye rejoice, O ye that plunder mine
heritage, because ye are wanton as an heifer that treadeth out the
corn, and neigh as strong horses; your mother shall be sore ashamed;
she that bare you shall be confounded: behold, she shall be the
hindermost of the nations, a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert.
Because of the wrath of the Lord it shall not be inhabited, but it
shall be wholly desolate: everyone that goeth by Babylon shall be
astonished, and hiss at all her plagues. Set yourselves in array
against Babylon round about, all ye that bend the bow; shoot at her,
spare no arrows: for she hath sinned against the Lord. Shout against
her round about; she hath submitted herself; her bulwarks are fallen,
her walls are thrown down: for it is the vengeance of the Lord; take
vengeance upon her; as she hath done, do unto her. Cut off the sower
from Babylon, and him that handleth the sickle in the time of harvest:
for fear of the oppressing sword they shall turn everyone to his
people, and they shall flee everyone to his own land.'

"Israel is a scattered sheep; the lions have driven him away: first
the king of Assyria hath devoured him; and last this Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon hath broken his bones. Therefore thus saith the Lord
of hosts, the God of Israel: 'Behold, I will punish the king of
Babylon and his land, as I have punished the king of Assyria. {334}
And I will bring Israel again to his pasture, and he shall feed on
Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon the hills of
Ephraim and in Gilead. In those days, and in that time,' saith the
Lord, 'the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be
none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will
pardon them whom I leave as a remnant.

"'Go up against the land of Merathaim, even against it, and against
the inhabitants of Pekod: slay and utterly destroy after them,' saith
the Lord, 'and do according to all that I have commanded thee. A sound
of battle is in the land, and of great destruction. How is the hammer
of the whole earth cut asunder and broken! how is Babylon become a
desolation among the nations! I have laid a snare for thee, and thou
art also taken, O Babylon, and thou wast not aware: thou art found,
and also caught, because thou hast striven against the Lord.'

"The Lord hath opened his armoury, and hath brought forth the weapons
of his indignation: for the Lord, the Lord of hosts, hath a work to do
in the land of the Chaldeans. Come against her from the utmost border,
open her storehouses: cast her up as heaps, and destroy her utterly:
let nothing of her be left. Slay all her bullocks; let them go down to
the slaughter: woe unto them! for their day is come, the time of their
visitation. The voice of them that flee and escape out of the land of
Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of the Lord our God, the
vengeance of his temple.

"Call together the archers against Babylon, all them {335} that bend
the bow; camp against her round about; let none thereof escape:
recompense her according to her work; according to all that she hath
done, do unto her: for she hath been proud against the Lord, against
the Holy One of Israel. 'Therefore shall her young men fall in her
streets, and all her men of war shall be brought to silence in that
day,' saith he Lord. "Behold, I am against thee, O thou proud one,'
saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts: 'for thy day is come, the time that
I will visit thee. And the proud one shall stumble and fall, and none
shall raise him up: and I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it
shall devour all that are round about him.'

"Thus saith the Lord of hosts: 'The children of Israel and the
children of Judah are oppressed together: and all that took them
captives hold them fast; they refuse to let them go. Their redeemer is
strong; the Lord of hosts is his name: he shall thoroughly plead their
cause, that he may give rest to the earth, and disquiet the
inhabitants of Babylon. A sword is upon the Chaldeans,' saith the
Lord, 'and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and
upon her wise men. A sword is upon the boasters, and they shall dote:
a sword is upon her mighty men, and they shall be dismayed.

"'A sword is upon their horses, and upon their chariots, and upon all
the mingled people that are in the midst of her, and they shall become
as women: a sword is upon her treasures, and they shall be robbed.

"'A drought is upon her waters, and they shall be {336} dried up: for
it is a land of graven images, and they are mad upon idols. Therefore
the wild beasts of the desert with the wolves shall dwell there, and
the ostriches shall dwell therein: and it shall be no more inhabited
for ever; neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation.'

"'As when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour cities
thereof,' saith the Lord; 'so shall no man dwell there, neither shall
any son of man sojourn therein. Behold, a people cometh from the
north; and a great nation, and many kings shall be stirred up from the
uttermost parts of the earth. They lay hold on bow and spear; they are
cruel, and have no mercy; their voice roareth like the sea, and they
ride upon horses; every one set in array, as a man to the battle,
against thee, O daughter of Babylon. The king of Babylon hath heard
the fame of them, and his hands wax feeble: anguish hath taken hold of
him, and pangs as of a woman in travail. Behold, he shall come up like
a lion from the pride of Jordan against the strong habitation: but I
will suddenly make them run away from her; and whoso is chosen, him
will I appoint over her: for who is like me? and who will appoint me a
time? and who is the shepherd that will stand before me?'

"Therefore hear ye the counsel of the Lord, that he hath taken against
Babylon; and his purposes, that he hath purposed against the land of
the Chaldeans: Surely they shall drag them away, even the little ones
of the flock; surely he shall make their habitation desolate {337}
with them. At the noise of the taking of Babylon the earth trembleth,
and the cry is heard among the nations.

"Thus saith the Lord: 'Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, and
against them that dwell in Leb-kamai, a destroying wind. And I will
send unto Babylon strangers, that shall fan her; and they shall empty
her land: for in the day of trouble they shall be against her round
about. Let not the archer bend his bow, and let him not lift himself
up in his coat of mail: and spare ye not her young men; destroy ye
utterly all her host. And they shall fall down slain in the land of
the Chaldeans, and thrust through in her streets.'

"For Israel is not forsaken, nor Judah, of his God, of the Lord of
hosts; though their land is full of guilt against the Holy One of
Israel. Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and save every man his life;
be not cut off in her iniquity: for it is the time of the Lord's
vengeance; he will render unto her a recompense. Babylon hath been a
golden cup in the Lord's hand, that made all the earth drunken: the
nations have drunk of her wine; therefore the nations are mad. Babylon
is suddenly fallen and destroyed: howl for her; take balm for her
pain, if so be she may be healed. We would have healed Babylon, but
she is not healed: forsake her, and let us go every one into his own
country: for her judgment reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even
to the skies.

"The Lord hath brought forth our righteousness: come, and let us
declare in Zion the work of the Lord our God. Make sharp the arrows;
hold firm the shields: {338} the Lord hath stirred up the spirit of
the kings of the Medes; because his device is against Babylon, to
destroy it: for it is the vengeance of the Lord, the vengeance of his
temple. Set up a standard against the walls of Babylon, make the watch
strong, set the watchmen, prepare the ambushes: for the Lord hath both
devised and done that which he spake concerning the inhabitants of
Babylon. O thou that dwellest upon many waters, abundant in treasures,
thine end is come, the measure of thy covetousness. The Lord of hosts
hath sworn by himself, saying, 'Surely I will fill thee with men, as
with the cankerworm; and they shall lift up a shout against thee.'

"He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the world by
his wisdom, and by his understanding hath he stretched out the
heavens: when he uttereth his voice, there is a tumult of waters in
the heavens, and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the
earth; he maketh lightnings for the rain, and bringeth forth the wind
out of his treasuries. Every man is become brutish and is without
knowledge; every goldsmith is put to shame by his graven image: for
his molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them. They
are vanity, a work of delusion: in the time of their visitation they
shall perish. The portion of Jacob is not like these; for he is the
former of all things; and Israel is the tribe of his inheritance: the
Lord of hosts is his name.

"'Thou art my battle axe and weapons of war: and with thee will I
break in pieces the nations; and with thee will I destroy kingdoms;
and with thee will I break {339} in pieces the horse and his rider;
and with thee will I break in pieces the chariot and him that rideth
therein; and with thee will I break in pieces man and woman; and with
thee will I break in pieces the old man and the youth; and with thee
will I break in pieces the young man and the maid; and with thee will
I break in pieces the shepherd and his flock; and with thee will I
break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke of oxen; and with thee
will I break in pieces governors and deputies. And I will render unto
Babylon and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they
have done in Zion in your sight,' saith the Lord.

"'Behold, I am against thee, O destroying mountain,' saith the Lord,
'which destroyest all the earth: and I will stretch out mine hand upon
thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a burnt
mountain. And they shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a
stone for foundations; but thou shalt be desolate for ever,' saith the
Lord.

"'Set ye up a standard in the land, blow the trumpet among the
nations, prepare the nations against her, call together against her
the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz: appoint a marshal against
her; cause the horses to come up as the rough cankerworm. Prepare
against her the nations, the kings of the Medes, the governors
thereof, and all the deputies thereof, and all the land of his
dominion. And the land trembleth and is in pain: for the purposes of
the Lord against Babylon do stand, to make the land of Babylon a
desolation, {340} without inhabitant. The mighty men of Babylon have
forborne to fight, they remain in their strong holds; their might hath
failed; they are become as women: her dwelling places are set on fire;
her bars are broken. One post shall run to meet another, and one
messenger to meet another, to shew the king of Babylon that his city
is taken on every quarter: and the passages are surprised, and the
reeds they have burned with fire, and the men of war are affrighted.

"For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: 'The daughter of
Babylon is like a threshing-floor at the time when it is trodden; yet
a little while, and the time of harvest shall come for her.
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me, he hath crushed
me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up like a
dragon, he hath filled his maw with my delicates; he hath cast me
out.'

"The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, shall the
inhabitant of Zion say; and, My blood be upon the inhabitants of
Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say.

"Therefore thus saith the Lord: 'Behold, I will plead thy cause, and
take vengeance for thee; and I will dry up her sea, and make her
fountain dry. And Babylon shall become heaps, a dwelling place for
jackals, an astonishment, and an hissing, without inhabitant. They
shall roar together like young lions; they shall growl as lions'
whelps. When they are heated, I will make their feast, and I will make
them drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and
not wake,' saith the Lord.

{341}

"'I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, like rams with
he-goats. How is Sheshach taken! and the praise of the whole earth
surprised! how is Babylon become a desolation among the nations! The
sea is come up upon Babylon: she is covered with the multitude of the
waves thereof. Her cities are become a desolation, a dry land, and a
desert, a land wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth any son of man
pass thereby. And I will do judgment upon Bel in Babylon, and I will
bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath swallowed up; and the
nations shall not flow together any more unto him: yea, the wall of
Babylon shall fall.'

"My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and save yourselves every
man from the fierce anger of the Lord. And let not your heart faint,
neither fear ye for the rumour that shall be heard in the land; for a
rumour shall come one year, and after that in another year shall come
a rumour, and violence in the land, ruler against ruler.

"'Therefore, behold, the days come, that I will do judgment upon the
graven images of Babylon, and her whole land shall be ashamed; and all
her slain shall fall in the midst of her. Then the heaven and the
earth, and all that is therein, shall sing for joy over Babylon; for
the spoilers shall come unto her from the north,' saith the Lord.

"As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon
shall fall the slain of all the land. Ye that have escaped the sword,
go ye, stand not still; {342} remember the Lord from afar, and let
Jerusalem come into your mind. We are ashamed, because we have heard
reproach; confusion hath covered our faces: for strangers are come
into the sanctuaries of the Lord's house.

"'Wherefore, behold, the days come,' saith the Lord, 'that I will do
judgment upon her graven images; and through all her land the wounded
shall groan. Though Babylon should mount up to heaven, and though she
should fortify the height of her strength, yet from me shall spoilers
come unto her,' saith the Lord.

"The sound of a cry from Babylon, and of great destruction from the
land of the Chaldeans! for the Lord spoileth Babylon, and destroyeth
out of her the great voice; and their waves roar like many waters, the
noise of their voice is uttered: for the spoiler is come upon her,
even upon Babylon, and her mighty men are taken, their bows are broken
in pieces: for the Lord is a God of recompenses, he shall surely
requite. 'And I will make drunk her princes and her wise men, her
governors and her deputies, and her mighty men; and they shall sleep a
perpetual sleep, and not wake,' saith the King, whose name is the Lord
of hosts. Thus saith the Lord of hosts: 'The broad walls of Babylon
shall be utterly overthrown, and her high gates shall be burned with
fire; and the peoples shall labour for vanity, and the nations for the
fire; and they shall be weary.'"

The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah the son of
Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, when {343} he went with Zedekiah the king
of Judah to Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. Now Seraiah was
chief chamberlain. And Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that
should come upon Babylon, even all these words that are written
concerning Babylon. And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, "When thou comest to
Babylon, then see that thou read all these words, and say, 'O Lord,
thou hast spoken concerning this place, to cut it off, that none shall
dwell therein, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be desolate
for ever.' And it shall be, when thou hast made an end of reading this
book, that thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst
of Euphrates: and thou shalt say, 'Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall
not rise again because of the evil that I will bring upon her: and
they shall be weary.'"


{344}

EZEKIEL

(The book of Ezekiel differs from every other book of prophecy in the
fact that none of it was written in Palestine. It was written in
Babylonia, whither Ezekiel had been taken captive while still a youth.
The captives knew what was going on in Jerusalem. When the city was
first taken, at the occasion when Ezekiel was made captive, the
Babylonians were content to carry off ten thousand of the best of the
people, with great treasure. The writer of Kings says that "none
remained, save the poorest of the people of the land." Over this poor
remnant of a wrecked state the Babylonian government set up a king.
For nine years he remained loyal to Babylon. Then, with the foolish
hope that Egypt would help him when war came, he revolted against the
power of Babylon. Soon Babylonian armies appeared before Jerusalem,
and, two years after, the city fell. More captives were deported, the
city was burned, the walls broken down, no king set up, but only a
governor, and the kingdom of Israel, over which only one family had
ruled since the time of David, nearly five hundred years before, was
forever at an end. The fall of Jerusalem was in 586 B. C.

With every device of vision and picture and pleading Ezekiel tried to
keep the captives true to their country and their God. It is good to
know that he succeeded in his attempt. The Jews in Babylonia kept
their faith, and, in later years, it was from them that these
prophetic books went, together with a strong influence for religious
reform, back to Palestine.)


I

A LAMENTATION FOR THE PRINCES OF ISRAEL


Moreover, take thou up a lamentation for the princes
of Israel, and say, "What was thy mother?

"A lioness: she couched among lions, in the midst of the {345} young
lions she nourished her whelps. And she brought up one of her whelps;
he became a young lion: and he learned to catch the prey, he devoured
men. The nations also heard of him; he was taken in their pit: and
they brought him with hooks unto the land of Egypt. Now when she saw
that she had waited, and her hope was lost, then she took another of
her whelps, and made him a young lion. And he went up and down among
the lions, he became a young lion: and he learned to catch the prey,
he devoured men. And he knew their palaces, and laid waste their
cities; and the land was desolate, and the fulness thereof, because of
the noise of his roaring. Then the nations set against him on every
side from the provinces: and they spread their net over him; he was
taken in their pit. And they put him in a cage with hooks, and brought
him to the king of Babylon; they brought him into strong holds, that
his voice should no more be heard upon the mountains of Israel.

"Thy mother was like a vine, in thy blood, planted by the waters: she
was fruitful and full of branches by reason of many waters. And she
had strong rods for the sceptres of them that bare rule, and their
stature was exalted among the thick boughs, and they were seen in
their height with the multitude of their branches. But she was plucked
up in fury, she was cast down to the ground, and the east wind dried
up her fruit: her strong rods were broken off and withered; the fire
consumed them. And now she is planted in the wilderness, in a dry and
thirsty land. And fire is gone out of the rods of her branches, it
hath {346} devoured her fruit, so that there is in her no strong rod
to be a sceptre to rule. This is a lamentation, and shall be for a
lamentation."


II

THE DOOM OF TYRE

(The description of Tyre is particularly valuable, because it gives
such a vivid picture of the commercial activity of a great city in
ancient times.)


And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first day of the
month, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, "Son of man,
because that Tyre hath said against Jerusalem, 'Aha, she is broken
that was the gate of the peoples; she is turned unto me: I shall be
replenished, now that she is laid waste:' therefore thus saith the
Lord God: Behold, I am against thee, O Tyre, and will cause many
nations to come up against thee, as the sea causeth his waves to come
up. And they shall destroy the walls of Tyre, and break down her
towers: I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her a bare
rock. She shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of
the sea; for I have spoken it, saith the Lord God: and she shall
become a spoil to the nations. And her daughters which are in the
field shall be slain with the sword: and they shall know that I am the
Lord." For thus saith the Lord God: "Behold, I will bring upon Tyre
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, king of kings, from the north, with
horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and a company, and much
people. He shall slay with the sword thy daughters in the {347} field:
and he shall make forts against thee, and cast up a mount against
thee, and raise up the buckler against thee. And he shall set his
battering engines against thy walls, and with his axes he shall break
down thy towers. By reason of the abundance of his horses their dust
shall cover thee: thy walls shall shake at the noise of the horsemen,
and of the wagons, and of the chariots, when he shall enter into thy
gates, as men enter into a city wherein is made a breach. With the
hoofs of his horses shall he tread down all thy streets: he shall slay
thy people with the sword, and the pillars of thy strength shall go
down to the ground. And they shall make a spoil of thy riches, and
make a prey of thy merchandise: and they shall break down thy walls,
and destroy thy pleasant houses: and they shall lay thy stones and thy
timber and thy dust in the midst of the waters. And I will cause the
noise of thy songs to cease; and the sound of thy harps shall be no
more heard. And I will make thee a bare rock: thou shalt be a place
for the spreading of nets; thou shalt be built no more: for I the Lord
have spoken it, saith the Lord God."

Thus saith the Lord God to Tyre: "Shall not the isles shake at the
sound of thy fall, when the wounded groan, when the slaughter is made
in the midst of thee? Then all the princes of the sea shall come down
from their thrones, and lay aside their robes, and strip off their
broidered garments: they shall clothe themselves with trembling; they
shall sit upon the ground, and shall tremble every moment, and be
astonished at thee. And they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and
say to thee, 'How art thou {348} destroyed, that wast inhabited of
seafaring men, the renowned city, which wast strong in the sea, she
and her inhabitants, which caused their terror to be on all that haunt
it!' Now shall the isles tremble in the day of thy fall; yea, the
isles that are in the sea shall be dismayed at thy departure."

For thus saith the Lord God: "When I shall make thee a desolate city,
like the cities that are not inhabited; when I shall bring up the deep
upon thee, and the great waters shall cover thee; then will I bring
thee down with them that descend into the pit, to the people of old
time, and will make thee to dwell in the nether parts of the earth, in
the places that are desolate of old, with them that go down to the
pit, that thou be not inhabited; and I will set glory in the land of
the living: I will make thee a terror, and thou shalt be no more:
though thou be sought for, yet shalt thou never be found again," saith
the Lord God.


(The prophet here draws a striking picture of Eastern commerce. He
pictures Tyre as a ship, trading in the commodities of all the nations
of the world, but wrecked at last and destroyed by the storm.)


The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, And thou, son of man,
take up a lamentation for Tyre; and say unto Tyre, O thou that
dwellest at the entry of the sea, which art the merchant of the
peoples unto many isles, thus saith the Lord God: Thou, O Tyre, hast
said, "I am perfect in beauty."

Thy borders are in the heart of the seas, thy builders have perfected
thy beauty. They have made all thy planks of fir trees from Senir:
they have taken cedars from Lebanon to make a mast for thee.

{349}

Of the oaks of Bashan have they made thine oars; they have made thy
benches of ivory inlaid in boxwood, from the isles of Kittim.

Of fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was thy sail, that it
might be to thee for an ensign; blue and purple from the isles of
Elishah was thine awning.

The inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were thy rowers: thy wise men, O
Tyre, were in thee, they were thy pilots.

The ancients of Gebal and the wise men thereof were in thee thy
calkers: all the ships of the sea with their mariners were in thee to
occupy thy merchandise.

Persia and Lud and Put were in thine army, thy men of war: they hung
the shield and helmet in thee; they set forth thy comeliness.

The men of Arvad with thine army were upon thy walls round about, and
the Gammadim were in thy towers: they hung their shields upon thy
walls round about; they have perfected thy beauty.

Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of all kinds of
riches; with silver, iron, tin and lead, they traded for thy wares.

Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy traffickers: they traded the
persons of men and vessels of brass for thy merchandise.

They of the house of Togarmah traded for thy wares with horses and
war-horses and mules.

The men of Dedan were thy traffickers: many isles were the mart of
thine hand: they brought thee in exchange horns of ivory and ebony.

{350}

Syria was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of thy handiworks:
they traded for thy wares with emeralds, purple, and broidered work,
and fine linen, and coral, and rubies.

Judah, and the land of Israel, they were thy traffickers: they traded
for thy merchandise wheat of Minnith, and pannag, and honey, and oil,
and balm.

[Footnote: Pannag--Perhaps a kind of confection.]

Damascus was thy merchant for the multitude of thy handiworks, by
reason of the multitude of all kinds of riches; with the wine of
Helbon, and white wool.

Vedan and Javan traded with yarn for thy wares: bright iron, cassia,
and calamus, were among thy merchandise.

Dedan was thy trafficker in precious cloths for riding. Arabia, and
all the princes of Kedar, they were the merchants of thy hand; in
lambs, and rams, and goats, in these were they thy merchants.

The traffickers of Sheba and Raamah, they were thy traffickers: they
traded for thy wares with chief of all spices, and with all precious
stones, and gold.

Haran and Canneh and Eden, the traffickers of Sheba, Asshur and
Chilmad, were thy traffickers. These were thy traffickers in choice
wares, in wrappings of blue and broidered work, and in chests of rich
apparel, bound with cords and made of cedar, among thy merchandise.

The ships of Tarshish were thy caravans for thy merchandise: and thou
wast replenished, and made very glorious in the heart of the seas.

{351}

Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters: the east wind hath
broken thee in the heart of the seas.

Thy riches, and thy wares, thy merchandise, thy mariners, and thy
pilots, thy calkers, and the occupiers of thy merchandise, and all thy
men of war, that are in thee, with all thy company which is in the
midst of thee, shall fall into the heart of the seas in the day of thy
ruin.

At the sound of the cry of thy pilots the suburbs shall shake. And all
that handle the oar, the mariners, and all the pilots of the sea,
shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the land, and
shall cause their voice to be heard over thee, and shall cry bitterly,
and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they shall wallow themselves
in the ashes: and they shall make themselves bald for thee, and gird
them with sackcloth, and they shall weep for thee in bitterness of
soul with bitter mourning.

And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and
lament over thee, saying, "Who is there like Tyre, like her that is
brought to silence in the midst of the sea?" When thy wares went forth
out of the seas, thou filledst many peoples; thou didst enrich the
kings of the earth with the multitude of thy riches and of thy
merchandise.

In the time that thou wast broken by the seas in the depths of the
waters, thy merchandise and all thy company did fall in the midst of
thee.

All the inhabitants of the isles are astonished at thee, and their
kings are horribly afraid, they are troubled in their countenance.

{352}

The merchants among the peoples hiss at thee; thou art become a
terror, and thou shalt never be any more.


III

THE VALLEY OF DRY BONES

(This is a strong picture of the reviving power of God's
spirit in a repentant nation.)


The hand of the Lord was upon me, and he carried me out in the spirit
of the Lord, and set me down in the midst of the valley; and it was
full of bones; and he caused me to pass by them round about: and
behold, there were very many in the open valley; and lo, they were
very dry.

And he said unto me, "Son of man, can these bones live?" And I
answered, "O Lord God, thou knowest."

Again he said unto me, "Prophesy over these bones, and say unto them,
'O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord.'"

Thus saith the Lord God unto these bones: "Behold, I will cause breath
to enter into you, and ye shall live. And I will lay sinews upon you,
and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put
breath in you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that I am the
Lord."

So I prophesied as I was commanded: and as I prophesied, there was a
noise, and behold an earthquake, and the bones came together, bone to
his bone. And I beheld, and lo, there were sinews upon them, and flesh
came up, and skin covered them above: but there was no breath in {353}
them. Then said he unto me, "Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of
man, and say to the wind, 'Thus saith the Lord God: Come from the four
winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live.'"

So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into them, and
they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great army.

Then he said unto me, "Son of man, these bones are the whole house of
Israel: behold, they say, 'Our bones are dried up, and our hope is
lost; we are clean cut off.'

"Therefore prophesy, and say unto them, 'Thus saith the Lord God:
Behold, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your
graves, O my people; and I will bring you into the land of Israel. And
ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your graves, and
caused you to come up out of your graves, O my people. And I will put
my spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I will place you in your own
land: and ye shall know that I the Lord have spoken it, and performed
it, saith the Lord.'"


{354}

AMOS

(Amos, one of the earliest of the prophets, was a poor herdsman of the
village of Tekoa, which was about twelve miles southeast of Jerusalem,
on the edge of the great wilderness or pasture land, which stretches
from the crest of the hills to the Dead Sea. The call of God came to
him to leave his herds and speak against the immorality, the
oppression of the poor, the injustice of the people in the northern
kingdom of Israel. He appeared at one of the great feasts and spoke
his message boldly. The priest of Bethel, where the feast was held,
was very angry with him, and tried to frighten him by sending to the
king the report that he was a traitor. This is)


I

THE MESSAGE OF AMOS AT THE FEAST

This the Lord Jehovah caused me to see: behold, he formed locusts at
the beginning of the coming up of the spring crops, and behold, it was
after the king's mowings. It came to pass when they had made an end of
devouring the verdure of the earth, that I said,

"O Lord Jehovah, pardon, I pray Thee! How shall Jacob rise again? He
is so small!"

Jehovah repented for this. "It shall not be," saith Jehovah.

This the Lord Jehovah caused me to see: and behold, the Lord Jehovah
was calling fire into the contest; and it devoured the Great Deep,
yea, it was about to devour the land.

{355}

"O Lord Jehovah, pardon, I pray thee! How shall Jacob rise again? He
is so small!"

Jehovah repented for this. "It also shall not come to pass," saith the
Lord Jehovah.

This he showed me, and behold the Lord has taken his station upon a
city wall, a wall built with a plumbline.

And Jehovah said to me, "What art thou seeing?" And I said, "A
plumbline." And the Lord said, "Behold, I am setting a plumbline in
the midst of my people Israel. I will not again pass them over. The
high places of Israel shall be desolate and the sanctuaries of Isaac
laid waste; and I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the
sword."


II

AMOS DEFIES THE PRIEST

("As Savonarola at the Duomo in Florence, as Luther at the Diet of
Worms, as our Lord Himself at the feast in Jerusalem, so was Amos at
the feast in Bethel."--_Smith_.)


Then Amaziah the priest of Bethel sent to Jeroboam king of Israel,
saying, "Amos hath conspired against thee in the midst of the house of
Israel. The land is not able to hold his words." For thus hath Amos
said, "By the sword shall Jeroboam die, and Israel going shall go into
captivity from off his own land."

And Amaziah Said unto Amos, "Visionary, be gone! Get thee off to the
land of Judah; and eat thy bread there, and there play the prophet.
But at Bethel thou shalt not {356} again prophesy. The king's
sanctuary it is, and the house of the kingdom."

But Amos answered and said unto Amaziah, "No prophet I, nor prophet's
son. But a herdsman I, and a dresser of sycamores; and Jehovah took me
from behind the flock and Jehovah said unto me, 'Go, prophesy unto my
people Israel.'

"Now therefore hearken to the word of Jehovah, thou that sayest,
prophesy not against Israel, nor let drop thy words against the house
of Israel; therefore thus saith Jehovah. Thy wife in the city shall
become an outcast; and thy sons and thy daughters by the sword--shall
fall; and thy land--by the measuring rope shall be divided; and thou
in an unclean land shalt die. And Israel shall be driven from his land
into captivity."


III

THE DOOM OF A CORRUPT CIVILIZATION

Hear this word which Jehovah hath spoken against you, O children of
Israel, against the whole family which I brought up from the land of
Egypt. "You only have I known of all the families of the earth,
therefore will I visit upon you all your iniquities." Can two walk
together except they have an appointment? Doth a lion roar in the
jungle and have no prey? Doth a young lion let forth his voice from
his den if he hath taken nothing?

Doth a little bird fall on the snare earthwards and there be no noose
about her? Doth the snare itself rise up from the ground, except it be
capturing something?


{357}{358}

[Illustration]
  CONVENT OF MAR-SARBA IN THE HILL COUNTRY OF JUDEA.

  It is on the edge of this "wilderness of Judea" that the towns of
  Bethlehem, and Tekoa, the home of Amos, are situated, and in this
  region both David and Amos pastured their sheep.
[End illustration]

{359}

Is the alarm trumpet blown in a city and do the people not tremble?
Shall calamity happen in a city and Jehovah not have done it? Yea, the
Lord Jehovah doeth nothing but he has revealed his purpose to his
servants the prophets. The lion has roared, who shall not fear?
Jehovah hath spoken, who can but prophesy?

Make proclamation over the palaces in Ashdod, and over the palaces in
the land of Egypt, and say, "Gather upon the Mount of Samaria and see!
Confusions manifold in the midst of her; violence to her very core!"
Yea they know not how to do uprightness, saith Jehovah, who store up
wrong and violence in their palaces. Therefore saith the Lord, "Siege
and investment of the land! And they shall bring down thy fortresses
and plundered shall be thy palaces." Thus saith Jehovah: "As the
shepherd saveth from the mouth of the lion, a pair of shin bones or a
bit of an ear, so shall the children of Israel be saved--they who sit
in Samaria in the corner of the divan and on a Damascus couch."

"Hear ye, and testify against the house of Jacob"--saith the Lord God
of Hosts. "For on the days when I visit the crimes of Israel upon him,
I shall there make visitation upon the altars of Bethel, and the horns
of the altar shall be cut off and fall to the ground. And I will smite
the winter house, and the summer house, and the ivory houses shall
perish, yea, swept away shall be houses many"-- oracle of Jehovah.

Hear this word, women of Israel, kine of Bashan that are in the mount
of Samaria, that oppress the poor, that crush the needy, that say to
their lords, "Bring, and let us {360} drink." Sworn hath the Lord
Jehovah by his holiness, lo! days are coming when there shall be a
taking away of you with hooks, and of the last of you with fish-hooks.
Yea, by the breaches (in the wall of the stormed city) shall ye go
out, everyone headlong, and ye shall fling yourselves out on the
mountains as a refuge.


IV

FALSE WORSHIP. THE CHASTISEMENT OF THE LORD

Come away to Bethel and transgress!

At Gilgal exaggerate your transgressions!

And bring every morning your sacrifices.

Every three days your tithes!

And send up the savour of leavened bread as a thank-offering.

And call out your charities--make them to be heard!

For so ye loved to do, a children of Israel--saith the Lord.

But I on my side withheld from you the winter rain, while it was still
three months to the harvest, and I let it rain repeatedly on one city,
and upon one city I did not let it rain: one piece was rained upon,
and the piece that was not rained upon withered: and two or three
cities kept struggling to one city for water, and were not
satisfied--yet ye did not return to me--saith the Lord.

I smote you with blasting and with mildew: many of your gardens and
your vineyards and your figs and your olives the locust devoured--yet
ye did not return to me--saith the Lord.

{361}

I overturned among you, like God's own overturning of Sodom and
Gomorrah, till ye became as a brand plucked from the burning--yet ye
did not return to me--saith the Lord.

Therefore, thus shall I do to thee, O Israel: because I am going to do
this to thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. For, lo, he that
formeth the mountains, and createth the wind, and declareth to man
what his thought is, that maketh the morning, darkness, and marcheth
on the high places of the earth, the Lord God of Hosts his name.


V

THE OPPRESSION OF THE POOR

Seek ye Jehovah and live, lest he break forth like fire, O house of
Joseph, and it consume and there be none to quench at Bethel. He that
made the Pleiades and Orion, that turneth the deep shadow into
morning, and day he darkeneth to night, that calleth for the waters of
the sea and poureth them out on the face of the earth--Jehovah, his
name. He it is that flasheth out ruin on strength, and bringeth down
destruction on the fortified.

They that turn justice to wormwood, and abase righteousness to the
earth! They hate him that reproveth in the gate and him that speaketh
sincerely they abhor. Wherefore, because ye trample on the weak, and
take from him a present of corn, ye shall have houses built of hewn
stone, but ye shall not dwell in them: vineyards for pleasure have ye
planted, but ye shall not drink of their wine. For I know how many are
your crimes and how forceful your sins--ye that browbeat the
righteous, take bribes and {362} turn aside the poor in the gate.
Therefore the prudent in such a time is dumb, for an evil time it is.

Seek good and not evil, that ye may live, and Jehovah God of Hosts be
with you as ye say he is. Hate evil and love good: and in the gate set
justice on her feet again --it may be that Jehovah God of Hosts may
have pity on the remnant of Joseph.

Therefore thus saith Jehovah, God of Hosts, Lord: On all the open
ways, lamentation, and in all streets they shall be saying, "Ah woe!
Ah woe!" And in all vineyards, lamentation, and they shall call the
ploughman to wailing, and to lamentation them that are skilful in
dirges, for I shall pass through their midst, saith Jehovah.

Woe unto you that long for the day of the Lord!

Wherefore would ye have the day of the Lord? It is darkness, and not
light. As when a man fleeth from the face of a lion and a bear falls
upon him: and he comes unto the house and leans his hand upon the wall
and a serpent bites him. Is it not darkness, the day of Jehovah, and
not light? storm-darkness, and not a ray of light upon it?

I hate, I loathe your feasts, and I will not smell the savour of your
gatherings to sacrifice. Though ye bring to me your burnt-offering,
and your meal-offerings, I will not be pleased, or your
thank-offerings of fatted calves, I will not look at them. Let cease
from me the noise of thy songs: to the playing of thy viols I will not
listen. But let justice roll on like water, and righteousness like an
unfailing stream.

[Footnote: This translation is in the main that of George Adam Smith
in the "Expositor's Bible."]


{363}

HOSEA

(Hosea belonged to the same generation as Amos, and meets the same
social sins and oppressions of the poor by the rich. He emphasizes the
religious side of the difficulties. Sin is treachery against God, and
peculiarly mean treachery; for God loves his people. Hosea's emphasis
on the love of God is almost the beginning of the greatest idea about
God that man ever conceived. It grew out of a very sad part of his own
life. His wife had left him, and yet he could not forget her. He still
loved her, and could not cease loving her. This experience showed him
what God must be like. God loved Israel. When Israel sinned, God was
hurt and saddened. Could God cease to love Israel? Never! If he, a
man, still loved his wife, could Jehovah, being God, love less? Must
not his love be greater than man's? So it comes about that Hosea gives
a very vivid and wonderful picture of the sad and terrible results of
sin, and of the tender, compassionate love of God. The book is more
disconnected than many of the prophecies. It is a series of
independent sections, nearly all of which express, in different
language, much the same ideas of Israel's sin and God's love.)


I

SOWING THE WIND; REAPING THE WHIRLWIND

When I would heal Israel, then is the iniquity of Ephraim discovered,
and the wickedness of Samaria; for they commit falsehood: and the
thief entereth in, and the troop of robbers spoileth without. And they
consider not {364} in their hearts that I remember all their
wickedness: now have their own doings beset them about; they are
before my face. They make the king glad with their wickedness, and the
princes with their lies. They are all hot as an oven, and devour their
judges; all their kings are fallen: there is none among them that
calleth unto me. Ephraim, he mixeth himself among the peoples; Ephraim
is a cake not turned. Strangers have devoured his strength, and he
knoweth it not: yea, gray hairs are here and there upon him, and he
knoweth it not. And the pride of Israel doth testify to his face: yet
they have not returned unto the Lord their God, nor sought him for all
this. And Ephraim is like a silly dove, without understanding: they
call unto Egypt, they go to Assyria. When they shall go, I will spread
my net upon them; I will bring them down as the birds of the heaven: I
will chastise them, as their congregation hath heard. Woe unto them!
for they have wandered from me; destruction unto them! for they have
trespassed against me: though I would redeem them, yet they have
spoken lies against me. And they have not cried unto me with their
heart, but they howl upon their beds: they assemble themselves for
corn and wine, they rebel against me. Though I have taught and
strengthened their arms, yet do they devise mischief against me. They
return, but not to him that is on high; they are like a deceitful bow:
their princes shall fall by the sword for the rage of their tongue:
this shall be their derision in the land of Egypt.

Set the trumpet to thy mouth. As an eagle he cometh {365} against the
house of the Lord, because they have transgressed my covenant, and
trespassed against my law. They shall cry unto me, "My God, we,
Israel, know thee." Israel hath cast off that which is good: the enemy
shall pursue him. They have set up kings, but not by me; they have
made princes, and I knew it not: of their silver and their gold have
they made them idols, that they may be cut off. He hath cast off thy
calf, O Samaria; mine anger is kindled against them: how long will it
be ere they attain to innocency? For from Israel is even this; the
workman made it, and it is no God: yea, the calf of Samaria shall be
broken in pieces. For they sow the wind, and they shall reap the
whirlwind.


II

THE LONGING OF GOD FOR HIS CHILDREN

Come, and let us return unto the Lord: for he hath torn, and he will
heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up. After two days will
he revive us: on the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live
before him. And let us follow on to know the Lord; his going forth is
sure as the morning: and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the
latter rain that watereth the earth.

When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of
Egypt. The more the prophet called them, the more they went from them:
they sacrificed unto the Baalim, and burned incense to graven images.
Yet I {366} taught Ephraim to walk; I took them on my arms; but they
knew not that I healed them. I drew them with cords of a man, with
bands of love. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver
thee, Israel? mine heart is turned within me, my compassions are
kindled together. I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I
will not return to destroy Ephraim: for I am God, and not man; the
Holy One in the midst of thee: and I will not come in wrath. They
shall walk after the Lord, who shall roar like a lion: for he shall
roar, and the children shall come trembling from the west. They shall
come trembling as a bird out of Egypt, and as a dove out of the land
of Assyria: and I will make them to dwell in their houses, saith the
Lord. I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem
them from death: O death, where are thy plagues? O grave, where is thy
destruction? I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely:
for mine anger is turned away from him. I will be as the dew unto
Israel: he shall blossom as the lily, and cast forth his roots as
Lebanon. His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the
olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon.


{367}

MICAH

(It is supposed that Micah lived in the time of Isaiah, the prophet.
His message resembles that of Amos in its stern denunciation of the
wrong-doing of the rich. He himself belonged to the poorer classes and
speaks from a full heart when he describes the misery of the poor and
the oppression of the rich. Like Isaiah, Amos, and Hosea, he is a
social reformer.)

Woe to them that devise iniquity and work evil upon their beds! when
the morning is light, they practise it, because it is in the power of
their hand. And they covet fields, and seize them; and houses, and
take them away: and they oppress a man and his house, even a man and
his heritage. The voice of the Lord crieth unto the city, and the man
of wisdom will see thy name: hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed
it. "Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the
wicked, and the scant measure that is abominable? Shall I be pure with
wicked balances, and with deceitful weights? For the rich men thereof
are full of violence, and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies,
and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth. Therefore I also have
smitten thee with a grievous wound; I have made thee desolate because
of thy sins. Thou shalt eat, but not be satisfied; and thy humiliation
shall be in the midst of thee: and thou shalt store up, but shalt not
keep it; and that which thou carriest away will I give up to the
sword. Thou shalt sow, but shalt not {368} reap: thou shalt tread the
olives, but shalt not anoint thee with oil; and the vintage, but shalt
not drink the wine."

Woe is me! for I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as
the grape gleanings of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat; my
soul desireth the firstripe fig. The godly man is perished out of the
earth, and there is none upright among men: they all lie in wait for
blood; they hunt every man his brother with a net. Their hands are
upon that which is evil to do it diligently; the prince asketh, and
the judge is ready for a reward; and the great man, he uttereth the
mischief of his soul: thus they weave it together. The best of them is
as a brier: the most upright is worse than a thorn hedge: the day of
thy watchmen, even thy visitation, is come; now shall be their
perplexity. Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a
guide. For the son dishonoureth the father, the daughter riseth up
against her mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law; a
man's enemies are the men of his own house. But as for me, I will look
unto the Lord; I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God will
hear me. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall
arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.

Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high
God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a
year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten
thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my
transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

{369}

He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God?

But in the latter days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the
Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it
shall be exalted above the hills; and peoples shall flow unto it. And
many nations shall go and say, "Come ye, and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he
will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of
Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem."
And he shall judge between many peoples, and shall reprove strong
nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares,
and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword
against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. But they shall
sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall
make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it.
For all the peoples will walk everyone in the name of his god, and we
will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever.

But thou, Beth-lehem Ephrathah, which art little to be among the
thousands of Judah, out of thee shall one come forth unto me that is
to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth are from of old, from
everlasting.


{370}

OBADIAH

(This is the shortest of the books of prophecy in the Old Testament.
It denounces the evil of the people of Edom, who, when Jerusalem was
taken by the Babylonians, took delight in its distresses and, pursuing
the fugitives in the mountains, captured them and returned them to the
Babylonian army. Nothing definite is known of the prophet.)


The vision of Obadiah.

Thus saith the Lord God concerning Edom: "We have heard tidings from
the Lord, and an ambassador is sent among the nations, saying, Arise
ye, and let us rise up against her in battle. Behold, I have made thee
small among the nations: thou art greatly despised. The pride of thine
heart hath deceived thee, O thou that dwellest in the clefts of the
rock, whose habitation is high; that saith in his heart, 'Who shall
bring me down to the ground?' Though thou mount on high as the eagle,
and though thy nest be set among the stars, I will bring thee down
from thence, saith the Lord. If thieves came to thee, if robbers by
night, would they not steal till they had enough? if grapegatherers
came to thee, would they not leave some gleaning grapes?

How are the things of Esau searched out! how are his hidden treasures
sought up! All the men of thy confederacy have brought thee on thy
way, even to the border: the men that were at peace with thee have
deceived thee, and prevailed against thee; they that eat thy bread lay
a snare under thee: there is none understanding in him.


{371}{372}

[Illustration]
  "THE PROPHETS"

  From the frieze of "The Prophets," by Sargent, in the Boston Public
  Library.

  The prophets here represented are Micah, Haggai, Malachi, and
  Zechariah.
[End illustration]

{373}

Shall I not in that day, saith the Lord, destroy the wise men out of
Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau? And thy mighty men,
O Teman, shall be dismayed, to the end that everyone may be cut off
from the mount of Esau by slaughter. For the violence done to thy
brother Jacob shame shall cover thee, and thou shalt be cut off for
ever. In the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that
strangers carried away his substance, and foreigners entered into his
gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them.
But look not thou on the day of thy brother in the day of his
disaster, and rejoice not over the children of Judah in the day of
their destruction; neither speak proudly in the day of distress. Enter
not into the gate of my people in the day of their calamity; yea, look
not thou on their affliction in the day of their calamity, neither lay
ye hands on their substance in the day of their calamity. And stand
thou not in the mountain passes, to cut off those of his that escape;
and deliver not up those of his that remain in the day of distress.
For the day of the Lord is near upon all the nations: as thou hast
done, it shall be done unto thee; thy dealing shall return upon thine
own head. But in mount Zion there shall be those that escape, and it
shall be holy; and the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions.
And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a
flame, and the house of Esau for stubble, and they shall burn among
them, and devour them, and there shall not be any remaining to the
house of Esau; for the Lord hath spoken it.


{374}

JOEL

(At some time, we are not told just when, a terrible plague of locusts
came upon the land. A prophet, whose name was Joel, took this occasion
to tell the people of their sins, and of the judgments which God would
bring upon them.)

I

THE PROPHET LAMENTS FOR HIS LAND

  Hear this, ye old men,
  And give ear, all ye inhabitants of the land.
  Hath this been in your days,
  Or in the days of your fathers?
  Tell ye your children of it,
  And let your children tell their children,
  And their children another generation.
  That which the palmerworm hath left
  Hath the cankerworm eaten;
  And that which the cankerworm hath left
  Hath the caterpillar eaten.

  Be ashamed, O ye husbandmen,
  Howl, O ye vinedressers,
  For the wheat, and for the barley;
  For the harvest of the field is perished.
  The vine is withered,                        {375}
  And the fig tree languisheth;
  The pomegranate tree,
  The palm tree also, and the apple tree,
  Even all the trees of the field are withered:
  For joy is withered away from the sons of men.

  Sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly,
  Gather the old men
  And all the inhabitants of the land
  Unto the house of the Lord your God,
  And cry unto the Lord.

  Alas for the day!
  For the day of the Lord is at hand.
  And as the destruction from the Almighty shall it come.
  Is not the food cut off before our eyes,
  Yea, joy and gladness from the house of our God?
  The seeds rot under their clods:
  The garners are laid desolate,
  The barns are broken down;
  For the corn is withered.
  How do the beasts groan.
  The herds of cattle are perplexed,
  Because they have no pasture;
  Yea, the flocks of sheep are made desolate.

  O Lord, to thee do I cry:
  For the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness
  And the flame hath burned all the trees of the field.
  Yea, the beasts of the field pant unto thee:                {376}
  For the water brooks are dried up,
  And the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness.


II

THE WARNING TO THE PEOPLE

  Blow ye the trumpet in Zion,
  And sound an alarm in my holy mountain;
  Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble.
  For the Day of the Lord cometh, for it is nigh at hand;
  A day of darkness and gloom,
  A day of clouds and thick darkness,
  As the dawn spread upon the mountains;
  A great people and a strong.
  There hath not ever been the like,
  Neither shall there be any more after them,
  Even to the years of many generations.
  A fire devoureth before them;
  And behind them a flame burneth:
  The land is as the garden of Eden before them,
  And behind them a desolate wilderness;
  Yea, and none hath escaped them.
  The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses;
  And as horsemen, so do they run.
  Like the noise of chariots on the tops of the mountains do they leap,
  Like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble;
  As a strong people set in battle array.
  At their presence the peoples are in anguish;
  All faces are waxed pale;                            {377}
  They run like mighty men;
  They climb upon the wall like men of war;
  And they march everyone on his ways.
  And they break not their ranks;
  They march everyone in his path;
  They burst through the weapons of the enemy;
  And turn not from their course.
  They leap upon the city;
  They run upon the walls;
  They climb upon the houses;
  They enter in at the windows like a thief.
  The earth quaketh before them;
  The heavens tremble:
  The sun and the moon are darkened,
  And the stars withdraw their shining.
  And the Lord uttereth his voice before his army;
  For his camp is very great;
  For he is strong and executeth his word:
  For the Day of the Lord is great and very terrible;
  And who can abide it?


III

THE LORD WILL PARDON

(If the people turn from evil and repent, and worship him in the true
spirit, the Lord will not send this terrible army of vengeance upon
them.)


  Yet even now, saith the Lord,
  Turn ye unto me with all your heart,
  And with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning:    {378}
  Rend your heart and not your garments,
  And turn unto the Lord your God:
  For he is gracious and full of compassion,
  Slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy,
  And repenteth him of the evil.


IV

A PROPHECY OF PLENTY

(The plea of the prophet was effective. The people repented, and their
prophet promised that the Lord would not only forgive his people, but
would bless them with abundance.)

  Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil,
  And ye shall be satisfied therewith:
  And I will no more make you a reproach among the nations:
  But I will remove far off from you the northern army,
  And will drive him into a land barren and desolate,
  His vanguard into the eastern sea,
  And his rearguard into the western sea.
  Fear not, O land, be glad and rejoice.
  For the Lord hath done great things.
  Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field:
  For the pastures of the wilderness do spring,
  For the tree beareth her fruit,
    the fig tree and the vine do yield their strength.
  Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God:
  For he giveth you the former rain in just measure,   {379}
  And he causeth to come down for you the rain,
  The former rain and the latter rain, in the first month.
  And the floors shall be full of wheat,
  And the vats shall overflow with wine and oil.
  And I will restore to you the years that the locust hath eaten,
  The cankerworm, and the caterpillar, and the palmerworm,
  My great army which I sent among you.
  And ye shall eat in plenty and be satisfied,
  And ye shall praise the name of the Lord your God,
  That hath dealt wondrously with you:
  And my people shall never be ashamed.
  And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel,
  And that I am the Lord your God, and there is none else:
  And my people shall never be ashamed.

  And it shall come to pass afterward,
  That I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh;
  And your sons and daughters shall prophesy,
  Your old men shall dream dreams,
  Your young men shall see visions:
  And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days
  Will I pour out my spirit.


{380}

ZEPHANIAH

(Zephaniah is another of the prophets who tell of the destruction
which will come upon the people in the terrible "day of the Lord."
Then his prophecy, like the others, breaks into joyous strains at the
close, as he tells of the blessings which will be showered upon the
nation when it repents.)


I

THE DAY OF WRATH

  The Day of the Lord is near:
  It is near and hasteth greatly.
  Even the voice of the Day of the Lord;
  The mighty man crieth there bitterly.
  That Day is a day of wrath,
  A day of trouble and distress,
  A day of waste and desolation,
  A day of darkness and gloominess,
  A day of clouds and thick darkness,
  A day of trumpet and alarm
  Against the fortified cities,
  And against the high battlements.

  Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together,
  O nation that hath no shame;
  Before the decree bring forth,
  Before the day pass as the chaff,
  Before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you.
  Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth,


{381}{382}

[Illustration]
  "THE PROPHETS"

  From the frieze of "The Prophets," by Sargent, in the Boston Public
  Library.

 The prophets here represented are Zephaniah, Joel, Obadiah, and
 Hosea.
[End illustration]

{383}

  Which have wrought his judgment;
  Seek righteousness,
  Seek meekness:
  It may be ye shall be hid
  In the Day of the Lord's anger.

  This is the joyous city,
  That dwelt carelessly,
  That said in her heart, "I am,
  And there is none else beside me:"
  How is she become a desolation,
  A place for beasts to lie down in!
  Everyone that passeth by her shall hiss, and wag his head,
  Woe to her that is rebellious and polluted,
  To the oppressing city.
  She obeyed not the voice;
  She received not correction;
  She trusted not in the Lord;
  She drew not near to her God.
  Her princes in the midst of her are roaring lions;
  Her judges are evening wolves;
  They leave nothing till the morrow.
  Her prophets are light and treacherous persons:
  Her priests have profaned the sanctuary,
  They have done violence to the law.

  The Lord in the midst of her is righteous;
  He will not do iniquity;
  Every morning doth he bring his judgment to light,
  He faileth not;
  But the unjust knoweth no shame.


{384}

IV

SING, O DAUGHTER OF ZION

  Sing, O daughter of Zion; shout, O Israel;
  Be glad and rejoice with the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem.
  The Lord hath taken away thy judgments,
  He hath cast out thine enemy:
  The king of Israel, even the Lord, is in the midst of thee:
  Thou shalt not fear evil any more.
  In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, "Fear thou not:
  O Zion, let not thine hands be slack.
  The Lord thy God is in the midst of thee,
  A mighty one who will save:
  He will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love,
  He will joy over thee with singing."


{385}

NAHUM

(Nineveh was the capital city of the great empire of Assyria. It was,
to the Hebrews, the expression of all the power and cruelty and
bloodthirstiness of that mighty and oppressive empire. The story of
the barbaric savagery of this empire almost passes belief. The
monuments of Assyria are its own strongest accusing witnesses. They
show pictures of captives of war whose eyes are being put out, who are
being skinned alive, who are suffering all the tortures that a savage
imagination can invent. Any such torture might come to any Hebrew
taken in war. Is it any wonder that the people not only dreaded, but
bitterly hated this city? Is it strange that they thought Jehovah
would certainly overthrow it? Nahum, in a poetic prophecy of great
vigor and vividness, pictures the overthrow, and exults in the fall of
the great, rich, cruel city. That fall came, at the hands of the Medes
and Babylonians, in about 608 B. C. Since that time, Nineveh has
remained in ruins, and is to-day buried under the sand hills of the
desert.)


I

THE GOODNESS AND THE GREATNESS OF THE LORD

The Lord is a jealous God and avengeth; the Lord avengeth and is full
of wrath; the Lord taketh vengeance on his adversaries, and he
reserveth wrath for his enemies. The Lord is slow to anger, and great
in power, and will by no means clear the guilty: the Lord hath his way
in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of
{386} his feet. He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and drieth up
all the rivers: Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of
Lebanon languisheth. The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt;
and the earth is upheaved at his presence, yea, the world, and all
that dwell therein. Who can stand before his indignation? and who can
abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like
fire, and the rocks are broken asunder by him. The Lord is good, a
strong hold in the day of trouble; and he knoweth them that put their
trust in him. But with an overrunning flood he will make a full end of
the place thereof, and will pursue his enemies into darkness. What do
ye imagine against the Lord? he will make a full end: affliction shall
not rise up the second time. For though they be like tangled thorns,
and be drenched as it were in their drink, they shall be devoured
utterly as dry stubble. There is one gone forth out of thee, that
imagineth evil against the Lord, that counselleth wickedness.

Thus saith the Lord: Though they be in full strength, and likewise
many, even so shall they be cut down, and he shall pass away.

Though I have afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more.

And now will I break his yoke from off thee, and will burst thy bonds
in sunder.

And the Lord hath given commandment concerning thee, that no more of
thy name be sown: out of the house of thy gods will I cut off the
graven image and the molten image; I will make thy grave; for thou art
vile.

{387}

Behold, upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good tidings,

That publisheth peace!


II

THE DOOM OF NINEVEH

(In describing the doom of Nineveh, the writer draws one of the most
vivid pictures of war that was ever written.)

  The Hammer is come up to thy face!
  Hold the rampart! Keep watch on the way!
  Brace the loins! Pull thyself firmly together!
  The shields of the heroes are red,
  The warriors are in scarlet;
  Like fire is the shining of his chariots in the day of his muster,
  And the horsemen are prancing.
  Through the markets rage chariots,
  They tear across the squares;
  The look of them is like torches,
  Like lightnings they dart to and fro.
  And now they flee. "Stand, stand!" but there is none to rally.
  Plunder silver, plunder gold!
  Infinite treasures, mass of all precious things!
  Void and devoid and desolate is she.
  Melting hearts and shaking knees,
  And anguish in all loins,
  And nothing but faces full of black fear.   {388}
  Where is the Lion's den,
  And the young lion's feeding ground?
  Whither has the Lion retreated,
  The whelps of the Lion with none to make afraid:
  The Lion who tore enough for his whelps,
  And strangled for his lionesses.
  And he filled his pits with prey,
  And his dens with rapine.
  Lo, I am at thee,
  I will put up thy lair in flames,
  The sword shall devour thy young lions;
  I will cut off the earth from thy rapine,
  And the noise of thine envoys shall no more be heard.

  Woe to the City of Blood,
  All of her guile, robbery full, ceaseless rapine!

  Hark the whip,
  And the rumbling of the wheel,
  And horses galloping,
  And the rattling dance of the chariot!
  Cavalry at the charge, and flash of sabres,
  And lightning of lances,
  Mass of slain and weight of corpses,
  They stumble on their dead!

  All thy fortresses are fig trees with figs early ripe:
  Be they shaken they fall on the mouth of the eater.
  Lo, thy folk are but women in thy midst:
  To thy foes the gates of thy land fly open;
  Fire has devoured thy bars.


{389}{390}

[Illustration]
  "THE PROPHETS"

  From the frieze of "The Prophets," by Sargent, in the Boston Public
  Library.

  The prophets here represented are Amos, Nahum, Ezekiel, and Daniel.
[End illustration]

{391}

  Draw water for the siege, strengthen thy forts!
  Get thee down to the mud, and tramp in the clay!
  Grip fast the brick mould!
  There fire consumes thee, the sword cuts thee off!

  Asleep are thy shepherds, O king of Assyria,
  Thy nobles do slumber;
  Thy people are strewn on the mountains,
  Without any to gather.
  There is no healing of thy wreck,
  Fatal thy wound.
  All who hear of thy fall shall clap their hands at thee,
  For upon whom hath not thy cruelty passed without ceasing?

[Footnote: This translation is, in part, that of George Adam Smith.]


{392}

HABAKKUK

(The little book of Habakkuk was written just before the fall of
Jerusalem. This prophet is dealing with a problem new to Israel. It
was, Why do the righteous suffer and the wicked prosper? It came from
the rapid rise of the great, cruel empire of Babylon. Assyria had
fallen, but instead of Israel being free as the people had expected
they would be when Assyria was out of the way, it found itself under
the power of the New Babylonian government. Why did God allow this?
the people asked, in sad despair at the hopeless political situation.
The prophet Habakkuk attempted to answer the question. He called
himself a watchman, set to see if God would not answer this question.
And the answer comes. It is in a sort of enigma: "Behold, his soul is
puffed up, it is not upright within him; but the just shall live by
his faith." Then the rest of the book is the expansion of the thought
of this enigma. And what is its meaning? It could be expressed
somewhat in this way: "Be patient; hold faith in God. In faith in him
is the promise of life. Wickedness contains the germs of its own
destruction, and will inevitably fall, Wait and you will see that this
is so.")


I

WARNINGS OF THE WATCHMAN


I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will look
forth to see what he will speak with me, and what I shall answer
concerning my complaint.

And the Lord answered me, and said, "Write the vision, and make it
plain upon tables, that he may run that readeth it. For the vision is
yet for the appointed time, and it hasteth toward the end, and shall
not lie: though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it
will not {393} delay. Behold, his soul is puffed up, it is not upright
in him: but the just shall live by his faith."

Woe to him that getteth an evil gain for his house, that he may set
his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the hand of evil! Thou
hast consulted shame to thy house, by cutting off many peoples, and
hast sinned against thy soul. For the stone shall cry out of the wall,
and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.

Woe to him that buildeth a town with blood, and stablisheth a city by
iniquity! Behold, is it not of the Lord of hosts that the peoples
labour for the fire, and the nations weary themselves for vanity? For
the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord,
as the waters cover the sea.

Woe unto him that giveth his neighbour drink.

What profiteth the graven image, that the maker thereof hath graven
it; the molten image, and the teacher of lies, that the maker of his
work trusteth therein, to make dumb idols? Woe unto him that saith to
the wood, "Awake;" to the dumb stone, "Arise!" Shall this teach?
Behold, it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is no breath
at all in the midst of it. But the Lord is in his holy temple: let all
the earth keep silence before him.


II

A PRAYER OF THE PROPHET

  O Lord, I have heard the report of thee, and am afraid:
  O Lord, revive thy work in the midst of the years,         {394}
  In the midst of the years make it known;
  In wrath remember mercy.

  God came from Teman,
  And the Holy One from mount Paran
  His glory covered the heavens,
  And the earth was full of his praise.
  And his brightness was as the light;
  He had rays coming forth from his hand:
  And there was the hiding of his power.
  Before him went the pestilence,
  And fiery bolts went forth at his feet.
  He stood, and measured the earth;
  He beheld, and drove asunder the nations:
  And the eternal mountains were scattered,
  The everlasting hills did bow;
  His goings were as of old.

  I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction:
  The curtains of the land of Midian did tremble.
  Was the Lord displeased against the rivers?
  Was thine anger against the rivers,
  Or thy wrath against the sea,
  That thou didst ride upon thine horses,
  Upon thy chariots of salvation?
  Thy bow was made quite bare;
  The oaths to the tribes were a sure word.
  Thou didst cleave the earth with rivers.

  The mountains saw thee, and were afraid;
  The tempest of waters passed by:            {395}
  The deep uttered his voice,
  And lifted up his hands on high.
  The sun and moon stood still in their habitation;
  At the light of thine arrows as they went,
  At the shining of thy glittering spear.

  Thou didst march through the land in indignation,
  Thou didst thresh the nations in anger.
  Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people,
  For the salvation of thine anointed;
  Thou woundedst the head out of the house of the wicked,
  Laying bare the foundation even unto the neck.
  Thou didst pierce with his own staves the head of his warriors:
  They came as a whirlwind to scatter me:
  Their rejoicing was as to devour the poor secretly.
  Thou didst tread the sea with thine horses,
  The heap of mighty waters.

  I heard, and my belly trembled,
  My lips quivered at the voice;
  Rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my place:
  That I should rest in the day of trouble,
  When it cometh up against the people which invadeth him in troops.
  For though the fig tree shall not blossom,
  Neither shall fruit be in the vines;
  The labour of the olive shall fail,
  And the fields shall yield no meat;          {396}
  The flock shall be cut off from the fold,
  And there shall be no herd in the stalls:
  Yet I will rejoice in the Lord,
  I will joy in the God of my salvation.
  Jehovah, the Lord, is my strength,
  And he maketh my feet like hinds' feet,
  And will make me to walk upon mine high places.


{397}

HAGGAI

(In 538 B.C., while Israel was still captive in Babylon, the mighty
Babylonian empire was overthrown by Cyrus the Great. What a
rejoicing there was among the Israelites and all the other enforced
colonists of Babylonia! Cyrus was a statesman. He saw how Babylon
was made weak by the large number of discontented inhabitants who
had been imported as captives of war. He wisely decided to allow all
who wished, to go home again. Many Israelites, who now were often
called Jews, accepted his offer and returned to Palestine, with high
hopes of a brilliant future for the nation. But they found Jerusalem
in ruins and their brother Jews discouraged. Then followed a long
series of famine years. Most of the people who came back had been
reared on the rich plains of Babylonia, and were not able easily to
make a living on the barren, rocky ridges of Judea. They became poor
and discouraged. Their plan had been to build the temple, and they had
set up an altar soon after they came, but fifteen years had passed,
and the temple was not yet built. Part of the time the government
had interfered with the building. The enemies of the Jews had
persuaded the imperial officers that a temple would be only a
fortress in disguise, and that the record of the Jews for
insurrection and revolt was such that fortresses were not safe in
their hands. But now a new king had come to the throne, and Haggai,
who seems to have been a priest, came forward on a feast day with a
proposal to build the temple. His little book has no grace of style,
no great prophetic thought, no poetry or oratory, but is a plain
proposition to get the temple built, with a promise that if they do,
God will give them his blessing. It is good to know that the people
responded to his appeal and the temple was built. This prophet with
his plain style was more successful than almost any other prophet.)


{398}

I

THE PROPHET URGES THE PEOPLE TO BUILD THE TEMPLE

In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, in the
first day of the month, came the word of the Lord by Haggai the
prophet unto Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua, the high
priest, saying, "Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying, 'This people
say, It is not the time for us to come, the time for the Lord's house
to be built.'" Then came the word of the Lord by Haggai, the prophet,
saying, "Is it a time for you yourselves to dwell in your ceiled
houses, while this house lieth waste? Now therefore thus saith the
Lord of hosts: 'Consider your ways. Ye have sown much, and bring in
little; ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not
filled with drink; ye clothe you, but there is none warm; and he that
earneth wages earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes.'"

Thus saith the Lord of hosts: "Consider your ways. Go up to the
mountain, and bring wood, and build the house; and I will take
pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, saith the Lord. Ye looked for
much, and, lo, it came to little; and when ye brought it home, I did
blow upon it. 'Why?' saith the Lord of hosts. Because of mine house
that lieth waste, while ye run every man to his own house. Therefore
for your sake the heaven withholdeth the dew, and the earth
withholdeth her fruit. And I called for a {399} drought upon the land,
and upon the mountains, and upon the corn, and upon the wine, and upon
the oil, and upon that which the ground bringeth forth, and upon men,
and upon cattle, and upon all the labour of the hands."

Then Zerubbabel and Joshua, the high priest, with all the remnant of
the people, obeyed the voice of the Lord their God, and the words of
Haggai the prophet, as the Lord their God had sent him; and the people
did fear before the Lord. Then spake Haggai the Lord's messenger in
the Lord's message unto the people, saying, "'I am with you,' saith
the Lord."

And the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel, governor of Judah,
and the spirit of Joshua, the high priest, and the spirit of all the
remnant of the people; and they came and worked in the house of the
Lord of hosts, their God.

A month later came the word of the Lord by Haggai the prophet, saying,
"Speak now to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua, the high
priest, and to the remnant of the people, saying, 'Who is left among
you that saw this house in its former glory? and how do ye see it now?
is it not in your eyes as nothing?' 'Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel,'
saith the Lord; 'and be strong, O Joshua, the high priest; and be
strong, all ye people of the land,' saith the Lord, 'and work: for I
am with you, saith the Lord of hosts, according to the word that I
covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, and my spirit abode
among you: fear ye not.' For thus saith the Lord of hosts: 'Yet once,
it is a little while, and I will shake the {400} heavens, and the
earth, and the sea, and the dry land; and I will shake all nations,
and the treasures of all nations shall come, and I will fill this
house with glory,' saith the Lord of hosts. 'The silver is mine, and
the gold is mine,' saith the Lord of hosts. 'The latter glory of this
house shall be greater than the former,' saith the Lord of hosts; and
in this place will I give peace,' saith the Lord of hosts."


{401}

ZECHARIAH

(Zechariah aided Haggai in his attempt to get the temple built.
Nothing is known of his personality or history. Most of his prophecy
is in the form of a series of visions, whose meaning as a whole is
that God is guiding in the history of the world, and will make Israel
glorious by and by, in spite of its present low estate.)


In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of
the Lord unto Zechariah the prophet, saying, "The Lord hath been sore
displeased with your fathers. Therefore say thou unto them, 'Thus
saith the Lord of hosts: Return unto me saith the Lord of hosts, and I
will return unto you, saith the Lord of hosts. Be ye not as your
fathers, unto whom the former prophets cried, saying, Thus saith the
Lord of hosts, Return ye now from your evil ways, and from your evil
doings: but they did not hear, nor hearken unto me, saith the Lord.
Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live for ever?
But my words and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the
prophets, did they not overtake your fathers? and they turned and
said, Like as the Lord of hosts thought to do unto us, according to
our ways, and according to our doings, so hath he dealt with us.'"


{402}

I

THE VISION OF THE HORSEMEN IN THE GLEN


I saw in the night, and behold a man riding upon a red horse, and he
stood among the myrtle trees that were in the glen; and behind him
there were horses, red, sorrel, and white. Then said I, "O my lord,
what are these?" And the angel that talked with me said unto me, "I
will shew thee what these are." And the man that stood among the
myrtle trees answered and said, "These are they whom the Lord hath
sent to walk to and fro through the earth." And they answered the
angel of the Lord that stood among the myrtle trees, and said, "We
have walked to and fro through the earth, and, behold, all the earth
sitteth still, and is at rest." Then the angel of the Lord answered
and said, "O Lord of hosts, how long wilt thou not have mercy on
Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah, against which thou hast had
indignation these threescore and ten years?" And the Lord answered the
angel that talked with me kind words and comforting. So the angel that
talked with me said unto me, "Cry thou, saying, 'Thus saith the Lord
of hosts: I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion with a great
jealousy. And I am very sore displeased with the nations that are at
ease: for I was but a little displeased, and they helped forward the
affliction. Therefore thus saith the Lord: I am returned to Jerusalem
with mercies; my house shall be built in it, saith the Lord of hosts,
{403} and a line shall be stretched forth over Jerusalem. Cry yet
again, saying, 'Thus saith the Lord of hosts: My cities shall yet
overflow with prosperity and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and
shall yet choose Jerusalem.'"


II

THE VISION OF THE CITY OF PEACE

And I lifted up mine eyes and saw, and behold a man with a measuring
line in his hand. Then said I, "Whither goest thou?" And he said unto
me, "To measure Jerusalem, to see what is the breadth thereof, and
what is the length thereof." And, behold, the angel that talked with
me went forth, and another angel went out to meet him, and said unto
him, "Run, speak to this young man, saying, 'Jerusalem shall be
inhabited as villages without walls, by reason of the multitude of men
and cattle therein. For I, saith the Lord, will be unto her a wall of
fire round about, and I will be the glory in the midst of her.'

"'Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for, lo, I come, and I will
dwell in the midst of thee, saith the Lord. And many nations shall
join themselves to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people: and I
will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shalt know that the Lord of
hosts hath sent me unto thee. And the Lord shall inherit Judah as his
portion in the holy land, and shall yet choose Jerusalem. Be silent,
all flesh, before the Lord: for he is waked up out of his holy
habitation.'"


{404}

III

THE VISION OF THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK


And the angel that talked with me came again, and waked me, as a man
that is wakened out of his sleep. And he said unto me, "What seest
thou?" And I said, "I have seen, and behold, a candlestick all of
gold, with its bowl upon the top of it, and its seven lamps thereon;
there are seven pipes to each of the lamps, which are upon the top
thereof: and two olive trees by it, one upon the right side of the
bowl, and the other upon the left side thereof."

And I answered and spake to the angel that talked with me, saying,
"What are these, my lord?" Then the angel that talked with me answered
and said unto me, "Knowest thou not what these are?" And I said, "No,
my Lord." Then he answered and spake unto me, saying, "This is the
word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying, 'Not by might, nor by power,
but by my spirit, saith the Lord of hosts. Who art thou, O great
mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain: and he shall
bring forth the top stone with shoutings of Grace, grace, unto it.'"
Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, "The hands of
Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house; his hands shall
also finish it; and thou shalt know that the Lord of hosts hath sent
me unto you. For who hath despised the day of small things? for they
shall rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel."


{405}

IV

THE VISION OF THE FLYING BOOK

(The flying book or roll is the vengeance of God, which flies into the
house of the evil-doer like a great bird, and roosts there and
destroys it.)

Then again I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and behold, a book flying.
And he said unto me, "What seest thou?" And I answered, "I see a book
flying; the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof
ten cubits."

Then said he unto me, "This is the curse that goeth forth over the
face of the whole land: for every thief shall be purged away from
hence; and every perjurer is hereby purged from hence. I will cause it
to go forth, saith the Lord of hosts, and it shall enter into the
house of the thief, and into the house of him that sweareth falsely by
my name: and it shall roost in the midst of his house, and shall
consume it with its beams and its stones."


V

THE VISION OF THE WOMAN IN THE BARREL

(The prophet sees Wickedness as a woman who is in a barrel measure.
She is pushed down into it, the leaden cover is put on, and she is
carried away out of the land.)


And the angel of Jehovah who spake with me came forward and spake to
me and said to me, "Lift now thine eyes and see what this is that
comes forth."    {406}

And I said, "What is it?"

And he said, "This is a barrel coming forth."

And he said, "This is their transgression in all the land."

And behold, the round leaden top was lifted off, and lo, a woman
sitting inside the barrel.

And he said, "This is Wickedness," and he thrust her back into the
barrel, and thrust the leaden cover upon the mouth of it. And I lifted
up mine eyes and looked, and lo, two women came forth with the wind in
their wings, and they bore the barrel betwixt earth and heaven.

And I said to the angel that talked with me, "Whither do they carry
the barrel?"

And he said to me, "To build it a house in the land of Shinar, that it
may be fixed and brought to rest there in a place of its own."


VI

THE VISION OF THE CHARIOTS OF THE FOUR WINDS

(The four chariots of the four winds go forth to guard the boundaries
of the land from all threatening foes.)


And again I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and behold, there came four
chariots out from between two mountains; and the mountains were
mountains of brass. In the first chariot were red horses; and in the
second chariot black horses; and in the third chariot white horses;
and in the fourth chariot dappled bay horses.   {407}

Then I answered and said unto the angel that talked with me, "What are
these, my lord?"

And the angel answered and said unto me, "These are the four winds of
heaven, which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the
earth." The chariot wherein are the black horses goeth forth toward
the north country; and the white went forth after them; and the
dappled went forth toward the south country. And the bay went forth,
and sought to go that they might walk to and fro through the earth:
and he said, "Get you hence, walk to and fro through the earth." So
they walked to and fro through the earth.


{408}

MALACHI

(Malachi wrote after the Exile. The temple, whose building Haggai had
urged, was erected; but the people were already tired of its service.
"What a weariness it is!" they said. They brought worthless animals
for sacrifice, and would do nothing in the temple except for pay.
Malachi denounced their selfishness, but said that if they would turn
to God, he would still be ready to bless them. Malachi's writing is
less poetical in its style than most of the prophets, but he speaks in
a very plain, straightforward fashion.)

"Behold, I send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me:
and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple; and the
messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in, behold, he cometh,"
saith the Lord of hosts. "But who may abide the day of his coming? and
who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire,
and like fullers' soap: and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of
silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold
and silver; and they shall offer unto the Lord offerings in
righteousness. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient
years. And I will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift
witness against the sorcerers, and against perjurers, and against
those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the
fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear
not me," saith the Lord of hosts. "For I the Lord change not;
therefore ye, O sons of Jacob, are not consumed.

"From the days of your fathers ye have turned aside {409} from mine
ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto me, and I will return
unto you," saith the Lord of hosts. "But ye say 'How then shall we
return?' Will a man rob God? yet ye rob me. But ye say, 'Wherein have
we robbed thee?' In tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with the
curse; for ye rob me, even this whole nation. Bring ye the whole tithe
into the storehouse, that there may be food in mine house, and prove
me now herewith," saith the Lord of hosts, "if I will not open you the
windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not
be room enough to receive it. And I will rebuke the devourer for your
sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither
shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field," saith
the Lord of hosts.

"And all nations shall call you happy: for ye shall be a delightsome
land," saith the Lord of hosts.

"Your words have been stout against me," saith the Lord. "Yet ye say,
'Wherein have we spoken against thee?' Ye have said, 'It is vain to
serve God: and what profit is it that we have kept his charge, and
that we have walked as mourners before the Lord of hosts? And now we
call the proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness are built up;
yea, they tempt God, and are delivered.'"

Then they that feared the Lord spake one with another: and the Lord
hearkened, and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before
him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name.
And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in the day that I
make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son
that serveth him.

{410}

{411}

SELECTIONS FROM THE NEW TESTAMENT

{412}

These selections from the Epistles are not in poetic form, but they
are given here because they are, in a way, the culmination of the
lofty and inspiring thought of the Bible. Not only do they treat of
the great themes of life and death, but they treat of them in the most
solemn and impressive manner. They are like organ music, not pleasing
the ear by the delicacy of rhythm, not having the rhyme and melody of
lyric verse, but moving with grandeur and sublimity of thought in the
higher ranges of being. Thus they form the fitting climax for all the
wealth of song and story which precedes them.


{413}

THE CHRISTIAN LIFE AND SERVICE

PAUL'S EPISTLES


The letters of a man tell us more about him than any books he could
write. Now Paul never wrote any books; but he wrote many letters. Some
were to the churches he had founded; some to his fellow workers. Some
of these letters were preserved and are in the Bible under the name of
Epistles. Even in these letters others are mentioned which are not
preserved. We have two letters to the Corinthian Church, but in them
Paul mentions other letters which he wrote to that church. In the
letter to the Colossian Church, he mentions a letter to the church at
Laodicea, a city near to Colosse. It is fair to suppose that many
other letters have also been lost. Probably the best and most
important of his letters were preserved. These letters are the outcome
of long thought. They were on subjects that Paul had considered for
many years. The writing of the letters, however, was often the work of
a short time, and their expression is not smooth and polished and
carefully wrought. Sometimes, as in the case of Galatians, the letter
was written because of a situation which he felt demanded immediate
attention. Sometimes, as in the case of I Corinthians, he replied to
letters of questions that had been sent to him from the churches.
Sometimes, as in the case of Philippians, the letter was called out in
thanks for the kindness of the church. The most important letter,
Romans, was written to prepare the church, which he had never visited,
for his expected coming to them. In every case--it is always true of
letters--the occasion of the letter largely determines its style and
tone, but in all cases the spontaneity of the letter-writer is seen.
Paul dictated or wrote his letters hurriedly. He cared less for style
than for thought. Vigor and force mark his writing. He did not try to
imitate the graces of the rhetorician. He did not {414} always follow
out a topic to the end. He sometimes began a sentence in one way and
finished it in another. He sometimes began a sentence, and, going off
to another topic, never finished it at all. He is not always easy
reading. But these evidences of a free, spontaneous writing are only
occasional. The greater part of the letters of Paul are very clear,
simple, forceful statements of what he wishes to say.

Paul was not merely a Jew. He was a citizen of the great world of the
Roman empire. He had been brought up in a city where Greek culture and
civilization were very flourishing. His travels brought him into
contact with all the varying forms of Greek life. He visited Athens.
He made long stays in Corinth, where the commerce of the world crowded
the docks, and sailors and merchants from all parts of the great
empire were to be met in the streets. He lived for nearly three years
in the great city of Ephesus, where the courtiers of the governor of
the province, fresh from all the latest fashions of Rome, jostled the
priests of the great temple of Diana, one of the seven wonders of the
ancient world. Before the end of his life he was a prisoner in Rome
itself, the one city into which all the world poured its
representatives, where the fair-haired men from distant Britain in the
North met the dusky Ethiopian from Africa, and the Spaniard from the
Atlantic coast walked the street with the Scythian from the distant
East. Paul the prisoner lived for two whole years in his own hired
house, and had permission to receive all who came to him. During this
time, and for two years of previous imprisonment, he was in daily
contact with the Roman soldiery. This cosmopolitan man, with his wide
experience of many phases of Roman and Greek life, has dropped here
and there in his writings many pictures from the civilization with
which he was in touch. He used it to illustrate the Christian life.
The athlete in the theater gave him a picture of the earnest, eager
strife of the Christian. The soldier with his clanging armor suggested
to him the armor by which a Christian might meet his foes. The temples
that studded every great town taught him how the Christian was himself
the temple of the living God. Thus it happens that the most lasting
memorial, the most widely read allusions, to the great civilization of
Greece and Rome come from this wandering preacher of an obscure faith
who at last {415} was a despised prisoner at Rome. How it would have
astonished the crowds at Ephesus who shouted, "Great is Diana of the
Ephesians!" to be told that their great temple and their goddess
herself would be known to most people in the world only because of
their connection with the life of this man Paul whom they wanted to
put out of the way! It was a wonderful civilization in the midst of
which Paul lived, and a very bustling, active, self-important world
through which he moved, but the most permanent things in it were by no
means the things that seemed to most people of the time to be the
greatest.



I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, to present
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your
reasonable service. And be not fashioned according to this world: but
be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what
is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.

For I say, through the grace that was given me, to every man that is
among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think;
but so to think as to think soberly, according as God hath dealt to
each man a measure of faith. For even as we have many members in one
body, and all the members have not the same office: so we, who are
many, are one body in Christ, and severally members one of another.
And having gifts differing according to the grace that was given to
us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of
our faith; or ministry, let us give ourselves to our ministry; or he
that teacheth, to his teaching; or he that exhorteth, to his
exhorting: he that giveth, let him do it with liberality; he that
ruleth, with diligence; he that sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness. Let
love be without hypocrisy. Abhor that {416} which is evil; cleave to
that which is good. In love of the brethren be tenderly affectioned
one to another; in honour preferring one another; in diligence not
slothful; fervent in spirit; serving the Lord; rejoicing in hope;
patient in tribulation; continuing steadfastly in prayer; communicating
to the necessities of the saints; given to hospitality. Bless them
that persecute you; bless, and curse not. Rejoice with them that
rejoice; weep with them that weep. Be of the same mind one toward
another. Set not your mind on high things, but condescend to things
that are lowly. Be not wise in your own conceits. Render to no man
evil for evil. Take thought for things honourable in the sight of all
men. If it be possible, as much as in you lieth, be at peace with all
men. Avenge not yourselves, beloved, but give place unto wrath: for it
is written, "Vengeance belongeth unto me; I will recompense," saith
the Lord. But if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him
to drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head.
Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.

                                                         --_Romans 12_.


Owe no man anything, save to love one another: for he that loveth his
neighbour hath fulfilled the law. For this, "Thou shalt not commit
adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not
covet," and if there be any other commandment, it is summed up in this
word, namely, "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." Love worketh
no ill to his neighbour: love therefore is the fulfilment of the law.

{417}{418}

[Illustration]
  RUINS OF THE TEMPLE OF JUPITER AT CORINTH.

  From a photograph taken by Mrs. Fontaine Meriwether,
  and used by her kind permission
[End illustration]

{419}

And this, knowing the season, that now it is high time for you to
awake out of sleep: for now is salvation nearer to us than when we
first believed. The night is far spent, and the day is at hand: let us
therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armour
of light. Let us walk honestly, as in the day; not in revelling and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and
jealousy. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision
for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof.
                                                 --_Romans 13:8-14_.


Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right. Honour thy
father and mother (which is the first commandment with promise), that
it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the earth.

                                                  --_Ephesians 6:1-3_.


For none of us liveth to himself, and none dieth to himself. For
whether we live, we live unto the Lord; or whether we die, we die unto
the Lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord's. For to
this end Christ died, and lived again, that he might be Lord of both
the dead and the living. But thou, why dost thou judge thy brother? or
thou again, why dost thou set at nought thy brother? for we shall all
stand before the judgment-seat of God. For it is written,

  As I live, saith the Lord, to me every knee shall bow,
  And every tongue shall confess to God.

So then each one of us shall give account of himself to God. {420}

Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge ye this
rather, that no man put a stumblingblock in his brother's way, or an
occasion of falling. I know, and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that
nothing is unclean of itself: save that to him who accounteth anything
to be unclean, to him it is unclean. For if because of meat thy
brother is grieved, thou walkest no longer in love. Destroy not with
thy meat him for whom Christ died. Let not then your good be evil
spoken of: for the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but
righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit.

                                                   --_Romans 14:7-.17_.


I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therein to be content. I
know how to be abased, and I know also how to abound: in everything
and in all things have I learned the secret both to be filled and to
be hungry, both to abound and to be in want. I can do all things in
him that strengtheneth me.
                                                --_Philippians 4:11,12_.


I therefore, the prisoner in the Lord, beseech you to walk worthily of
the calling wherewith ye were called, with all lowliness and meekness,
with longsuffering, forbearing one another in love; giving diligence
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one
body, and one Spirit, even as also ye were called in one hope of your
calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all,
who is over all, and through all, and in all. But unto each one of us
was the grace given according to the measure of the gift of Christ.
Wherefore he saith, {421}

  When he ascended on high, he led captivity captive,
  And gave gifts unto men.

And he gave some to be apostles; and some, prophets; and some,
evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the
saints, unto the work of ministering, unto the building up of the body
of Christ: till we all attain unto the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a fullgrown man, unto the measure of
the stature of the fulness of Christ: that we may be no longer
children, tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the sleight of men, in craftiness, after the wiles of
error; but speaking truth in love, may grow up in all things into him,
which is the head, even Christ; from whom all the body fitly framed
and knit together through that which every joint supplieth, according
to the working in due measure of each several part, maketh the
increase of the body unto the building up of itself in love.

                                                 --_Ephesians 4:1-16_.


Wherefore, putting away falsehood, speak ye truth each one with his
neighbour: for we are members one of another. Be ye angry, and sin
not: let not the sun go down upon your wrath: neither give place to
the devil. Let him that stole steal no more: but rather let him
labour, working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may
have whereof to give to him that hath need. Let no corrupt speech
proceed out of your mouth, but such as is good for edifying as the
need may be, that it may give grace to them that hear. And grieve not
the Holy Spirit of God, {422} in whom ye were sealed unto the day of
redemption. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and
railing, be put away from you, with all malice: and be ye kind one to
another, tenderhearted, forgiving each other, even as God also in
Christ forgave you.
                                            --_Ephesians 4:25-32_.


Now we that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and
not to please ourselves. Let each one of us please his neighbour for
that which is good, unto edifying. For Christ also pleased not
himself; but, as it is written, "The reproaches of them that
reproached thee fell upon me."
                                             --_Romans 15:1-3_.


But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
kindness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness, temperance: against such
there is no law. And they that are of Christ Jesus have crucified the
flesh with the passions and the lusts thereof.

If we live by the Spirit, by the Spirit let us also walk. Let us not
be vainglorious, provoking one another, envying one another.

Brethren, even if a man be overtaken in any trespass, ye which are
spiritual, restore such a one in a spirit of meekness; looking to
thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another's burdens, and
so fulfil the law of Christ. For if a man thinketh himself to be
something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself. But let each man
prove his own work, and then shall he have his {423} glorying in
regard of himself alone, and not of his neighbour. For each man shall
bear his own burden.

But let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that
teacheth in all good things. Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for
whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he that soweth
unto his own flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that
soweth unto the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap eternal life. And let
us not be weary in well-doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we
faint not. So then, as we have opportunity, let us work that which is
good toward all men, and especially toward them that are of the
household of the faith.
                                            --_Galatians 5:22-6:10_.


But we beseech you, brethren, to know them that labour among you, and
are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them
exceeding highly in love for their work's sake. Be at peace among
yourselves. And we exhort you, brethren, admonish the disorderly,
encourage the fainthearted, support the weak, be longsuffering toward
all. See that none render unto anyone evil for evil; but alway follow
after that which is good, one toward another, and toward all. Rejoice
alway; pray without ceasing; in everything give thanks: for this is
the will of God in Christ Jesus to you-ward. Quench not the Spirit;
despise not prophesyings; prove all things; hold fast that which is
good; abstain from every form of evil.

                                           --_I Thessalonians 5:12-22_.

{424}

Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honourable, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if
there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these
things.

                                             --_Philippians 4:8_.

{425}

THE GREATEST THING IN THE WORLD

If I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, but have not love, I
am become sounding brass, or a clanging cymbal. And if I have the gift
of prophecy, and know all mysteries and all knowledge; and if I have
all faith, so as to remove mountains, but have not love, I am nothing.
And if I bestow all my goods to feed the poor; and if I give my body
to be burned, but have not love, it profiteth me nothing. Love
suffereth long, and is kind; love envieth not; love vaunteth not
itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not
its own, is not provoked, taketh not account of evil; rejoiceth not in
unrighteousness, but rejoiceth with the truth; beareth all things,
believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. Love
never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall be done
away; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be
knowledge, it shall be done away. For we know in part, and we prophesy
in part: but when that which is perfect is come, that which is in part
shall be done away. When I was a child, I spake as a child, I felt as
a child, I thought as a child: now that I am become a man, I have put
away childish things. For now we see in a mirror, darkly; but then
face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I
have been known. But now abideth faith, hope, love, these three; and
the greatest of these is love.
                                             --_I Corinthians 13_.

{426}

FOLLOWING IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF JESUS.

[From the Epistle of James.]


TEMPTATION.

Count it all joy, my brethren, when ye fall into manifold temptations;
knowing that the proof of your faith worketh patience. And let
patience have its perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire,
lacking in nothing.

But if any of you lacketh wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth to
all liberally and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let
him ask in faith, nothing doubting: for he that doubteth is like the
surge of the sea driven by the wind and tossed. For let not that man
think that he shall receive anything of the Lord; a doubleminded man,
unstable in all his ways.

But let the brother of low degree glory in his high estate: and the
rich, in that he is made low: because as the flower of the grass he
shall pass away. For the sun ariseth with the scorching wind, and
withereth the grass; and the flower thereof falleth, and the grace of
the fashion of it perisheth: so also shall the rich man fade away in
his goings.

Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he hath been
approved, he shall receive the crown of life which the Lord promised
to them that love him. Let no {427} man say when he is tempted, "I am
tempted of God": for God cannot be tempted with evil, and he himself
tempteth no man: but each man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his
own lust, and enticed. Then the lust, when it hath conceived, beareth
sin: and the sin, when it is fullgrown, bringeth forth death. Be not
deceived, my beloved brethren. Every good gift and every perfect boon
is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom can be
no variation, neither shadow that is cast by turning. Of his own will
he brought us forth by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of
firstfruits of his creatures.


PURE RELIGION

Let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath: for the
wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God. Wherefore putting
away all filthiness and overflowing of wickedness, receive with
meekness the implanted word, which is able to save your souls. But be
ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deluding your own selves.
For if anyone is a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto
a man beholding his natural face in a mirror: for he beholdeth
himself, and goeth away, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man
he was. But he that looketh into the perfect law, the law of liberty,
and so continueth, being not a hearer that forgetteth, but a doer that
worketh, this man shall be blessed in his doing. If any man thinketh
himself to be religious, while he bridleth not his tongue but
deceiveth his heart, this man's religion {428} is vain. Pure religion
and undefiled before our God and Father is this: to visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world.


FAITH AND WORKS

What doth it profit, my brethren, if a man say he hath faith, but have
not works? can that faith save him? If a brother or sister be naked,
and in lack of daily food, and one of you say unto them, "Go in peace,
be ye warmed and filled"; and yet ye give them not the things needful
to the body; what doth it profit? Even so faith, if it have not works,
is dead in itself. Yea, a man will say, "Thou hast faith, and I have
works: shew me thy faith apart from thy works, and I by my works will
shew thee my faith."


AN UNRULY TONGUE

Be not many teachers, my brethren, knowing that we shall receive
heavier judgment. For in many things we all stumble. If any stumbleth
not in word, the same is a perfect man, able to bridle the whole body
also. Now if we put the horses' bridles into their mouths, that they
may obey us, we turn about their whole body also. Behold, the ships
also, though they are so great, and are driven by rough winds, are yet
turned about by a very small rudder, whither the steersman willeth. So
the tongue also is a little member, and boasteth great things. Behold,
how great a forest is kindled by how small a fire! And the {429}
tongue is a fire: the world of iniquity among our members is the
tongue, which defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the course
of nature, and is set on fire by hell. For every kind of beasts and
birds, of creeping things and things in the sea, is tamed, and hath
been tamed by mankind: but the tongue can no man tame; it is a
restless evil, it is full of deadly poison. Therewith bless we the
Lord and Father; and therewith curse we men, which are made after the
likeness of God: out of the same mouth cometh forth blessing and
cursing. My brethren, these things ought not so to be. Doth the
fountain send forth from the same opening sweet water and bitter? can
a fig tree, my brethren, yield olives, or a vine figs? neither can
salt water yield sweet.


THE PEACEABLE SPIRIT

Who is wise and understanding among you? let him shew by his good life
his works in meekness of wisdom. But if ye have bitter jealousy and
faction in your heart, glory not and lie not against the truth. This
wisdom is not a wisdom that cometh down from above, but is earthly,
sensual, devilish. For where jealousy and faction are, there is
confusion and every vile deed. But the wisdom that is from above is
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be intreated, full of
mercy and good fruits, without variance, without hypocrisy. And the
fruit of righteousness is sown in peace for them that make peace.

Whence come wars and whence come fightings among you? come they not
hence, even of your pleasures that war {430} in your members? Ye lust,
and have not: ye kill, and covet, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war;
ye have not, because ye ask not. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye
ask amiss, that ye may spend it in your pleasures. Whosoever therefore
would be a friend of the world maketh himself an enemy of God. Or
think ye that the scripture speaketh in vain? Doth the spirit which he
made to dwell in us long unto envying? But he giveth more grace.
Wherefore the scripture saith, God resisteth the proud, but giveth
grace to the humble. Be subject therefore unto God; but resist the
devil, and he will flee from you. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw
nigh to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and purify your hearts,
ye doubleminded. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: let your laughter
be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness. Humble yourselves in
the sight of the Lord, and he shall exalt you.

Speak not one against another, brethren. He that speaketh against a
brother or judgeth his brother, speaketh against the law, and judgeth
the law: but if thou judgest the law, thou art not a doer of the law,
but a judge. One only is the lawgiver and judge, even he who is able
to save and to destroy: but who art thou that judgest thy neighbour?


RICH AND POOR

My brethren, hold not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of
glory, with respect of persons.

{431}{432}

[Illustration]
  RUINS OF THE TEMPLE OF JUPITER AT CORINTH.

  Corinth was one of the richest cities of the Mediterranean in the
  time of Paul. It was called by the poets "the city of the two seas."
  The "Acrocorinthus," or Citadel of Corinth, crowned with
  fortifications and temples rose abruptly two thousand feet above the
  level of the sea.
[End illustration]


{433}

For if there come into your synagogue a man with a gold ring, in fine
clothing, and there come in also a poor man in vile clothing; and ye
have regard to him that weareth the fine clothing, and say, "Sit thou
here in a good place"; and ye say to the poor man, "Stand thou there,
or sit under my footstool"; are ye not divided in your own mind, and
become judges with evil thoughts? Hearken, my beloved brethren; did
not God choose them that are poor as to the world to be rich in faith,
and heirs of the kingdom which he promised to them that love him? But
ye have dishonoured the poor man. Do not the rich oppress you, and
themselves 'drag you before the judgment-seats? Do not they blaspheme
the honourable name by the which ye are called? Howbeit if ye fulfil
the royal law, according to the scripture, "Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself," ye do well: but if ye have respect of persons,
ye commit sin, being convicted by the law as transgressors. For
whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet stumble in one point, he
is become guilty of all. For he that said, "Do not commit adultery,"
said also, "Do not kill." Now if thou dost not commit adultery, but
killest, thou art become a transgressor of the law. So speak ye, and
so do, as men that are to be judged by a law of liberty. For judgment
is without mercy to him that hath shewed no mercy; mercy glorieth
against judgment.

Go to now, ye rich, weep and howl for your miseries that are coming
upon you. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are moth-eaten.
Your gold and your silver are rusted; and their rust shall be for a
testimony against you, and shall eat your flesh as fire. Ye have laid
up your treasure in the last days. Behold, the hire of the {434}
labourers who mowed your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud,
crieth out: and the cries of them that reaped have entered into the
ears of the Lord of Sabaoth. Ye have lived delicately on the earth,
and taken your pleasure; ye have nourished your hearts in a day of
slaughter. Ye have condemned, ye have killed the righteous one; he
doth not resist you.

Go to now, ye that say, "To-day or to-morrow we will go into this
city, and spend a year there, and trade, and get gain:" whereas ye
know not what shall be on the morrow. What is your life? For ye are a
vapour, that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away. For
ye ought to say, "If the Lord will, we shall both live, and do this or
that." But now ye glory in your vauntings: all such glorying is evil.
To him therefore that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it
is sin.

Be patient therefore, brethren, until the coming of the Lord. Behold,
the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, being
patient over it, until it receive the early and latter rain. Be ye
also patient; stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord is at
hand.

Is any among you suffering? let him pray. Is any cheerful? let him
sing praise.

The supplication of a righteous man availeth much in its working.

My brethren, if any among you do err from the truth, and one convert
him; let him know, that he which converteth a sinner from the error of
his way shall save a soul from death, and shall cover a multitude of
sins.


{435}

THE GOSPEL OF LOVE AND OF SONSHIP

Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we
should be called children of God: and such we are. For this cause the
world knoweth us not, because it knew him not. Beloved, now are we
children of God, and it is not yet made manifest what we shall be. We
know that, if he shall be manifested, we shall be like him; for we
shall see him even as he is. And everyone that hath this hope set on
him purifieth himself, even as he is pure. Everyone that doeth sin
doeth also lawlessness: and sin is lawlessness. And ye know that he
was manifested to take away sins; and in him is no sin. Whosoever
abideth in him sinneth not: whosoever sinneth hath not seen him,
neither knoweth him.

And this is the message which we have heard from him, and announce
unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we
say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in the darkness, we
lie, and do not the truth: but if we walk in the light; as he is in
the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus
his Son cleanseth us from all sin. If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins,
he is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness. {436} If we say that we have not sinned, we
make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

Beloved, no new commandment write I unto you, but an old commandment
which ye had from the beginning: the old commandment is the word which
ye heard. Again, a new commandment write I unto you, which thing is
true in him and in you; because the darkness is passing away, and the
true light already shineth. He that saith he is in the light, and
hateth his brother, is in the darkness even until now. He that loveth
his brother abideth in the light, and there is none occasion of
stumbling in him. But he that hateth his brother is in the darkness,
and walketh in the darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because
the darkness hath blinded his eyes.

Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one
that loveth is begotten of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not
knoweth not God; for God is love. Herein was the love of God
manifested in us, that God hath sent his only begotten Son into the
world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought
to love one another. No man hath beheld God at any time: if we love
one another, God abideth in us, and his love is perfected in us:
hereby know we that we abide in him, and he in us, because he hath
given us of his Spirit. And we have beheld and bear witness that the
Father hath sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world. Whosoever
shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God abideth in {437} him,
and he in God. And we know and have believed the love which God hath
in us. God is love; and he that abideth in love abideth in God, and
God abideth in him. Herein is love made perfect with us, that we may
have boldness in the day of judgment; because as he is, even so are we
in this world. There is no fear in love: but perfect love casteth out
fear, because fear hath punishment; and he that feareth is not made
perfect in love. We love, because he first loved us. If a man say, I
love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not
his brother whom he hath seen, cannot love God whom he hath not seen.
And this commandment have we from him, that he who loveth God love his
brother also.

Marvel not, brethren, if the world hateth you. We know that we have
passed out of death into life, because we love the brethren. He that
loveth not abideth in death.

Hereby we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and
do his commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments: and his commandments are not grievous.

                                       --_From the Epistles of John_.


{438}

THE CHRISTIAN ATHLETE

What then is my reward? That, when I preach the gospel, I may make the
gospel without charge, so as not to use to the full my right in the
gospel. For though I was free from all men, I brought myself under
bondage to all, that I might gain the more. And to the Jews I became
as a Jew, that I might gain Jews; to them that are under the law, as
under the law, not being myself under the law, that I might gain them
that are under the law; to them that are without law, as without law,
not being without law to God, but under law to Christ, that I might
gain them that are without law. To the weak I became weak, that I
might gain the weak: I am become all things to all men, that I may by
all means save some. And I do all things for the gospel's sake, that I
may be a joint partaker thereof. Know ye not that they which run in a
race run all, but one receiveth the prize? Even so run, that ye may
attain. And every man that striveth in the games is temperate in all
things. Now they do it to receive a corruptible crown; but we an
incorruptible. I therefore so run, as not uncertainly; so fight I, as
not beating the air: but I buffet my body, and bring it into bondage:
lest by any means, after that I have preached to others, I myself
should be a castaway.

                                        --_I Corinthians 9:24-27_.


{439}

Therefore let us also, seeing we are compassed about with so great a
cloud of witnesses, lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so
easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set
before us, looking unto Jesus the author and perfecter of our faith,
who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising
shame, and hath sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.

                                         --_Hebrews 12:1, 2_.


With freedom did Christ set us free: stand fast therefore, and be not
entangled again in a yoke of bondage. Ye were running well; who did
hinder you that ye should not obey the truth? This persuasion came not
of him that calleth you. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.

                                         --_Galatians 5:1, 7-9_.


{440}

THE CHRISTIAN TEMPLE

According to the grace of God which was given unto me, as a wise
masterbuilder I laid a foundation; and another buildeth thereon. But
let each man take heed how he buildeth thereon. For other foundation
can no man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. But if
any man buildeth on the foundation gold, silver, costly stones, wood,
hay, stubble; each man's work shall be made manifest: for the day
shall declare it, because it is revealed in fire; and the fire itself
shall prove each man's work of what sort it is. If any man's work
shall abide which he built thereon, he shall receive a reward. If any
man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall
be saved; yet so as through fire.
                                             --_I Corinthians 3:10-15_.


So then ye are no more strangers and sojourners, but ye are
fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God, being
built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus
himself being the chief corner stone; in whom each several building,
fitly framed together, groweth into a holy temple in the Lord; in whom
ye also are builded together for a habitation of God in the Spirit.

                                               --_Ephesians 2:19-22_.

{441}{442}

[Illustration]
  A GENERAL VIEW OF THE ACROPOLIS, ATHENS.

  From a picture belonging to Smith College and used by the kind
  permission of the Department of Greek Literature.

  This hill, covered with a fortress and temple, was the most
  pronounced object in ancient as in modern Athens. This is one of the
  beautiful temples which Paul saw, from which he drew many
  illustrations.
[End illustration]


{443}

For we are God's fellow-workers: ye are God's husbandry, God's building.
                                              --_I Corinthians 3:9_.


Know ye not that ye are a temple of God, and that the Spirit of God
dwelleth in you? If any man destroyeth the temple of God, him shall
God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.

                                            --_I Corinthians 3:16, 17_.


For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father, from whom every family
in heaven and on earth is named, that he would grant you, according to
the riches of his glory, that ye may be strengthened with power
through his Spirit in the inward man; that Christ may dwell in your
hearts through faith; to the end that ye, being rooted and grounded in
love, may be strong to apprehend with all the saints what is the
breadth and length and height and depth, and to know the love of
Christ which passeth knowledge, that ye may be filled unto all the
fulness of God.
                                                --_Ephesians 3:14-19_.


Now to him that is able to stablish you according to my gospel and the
preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery
which hath been kept in silence through times eternal, but now is
manifested, and by the scriptures of the prophets, according to the
commandment of the eternal God, is made known unto all the nations
unto obedience of faith; to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ,
to whom be the glory for ever. Amen.

                                                --_Romans 16:25-27_.

{444}

O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and the knowledge of God!
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past tracing out! For
who hath known the mind of the Lord or who hath been his counsellor?
or who hath first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him
again? For of him, and through him, and unto him, are all things. To
him be the glory for ever. Amen.
                                               --_Romans 11:33-36_.


Now unto the King eternal, incorruptible, invisible, the only God, be
honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.
                                              --_I Timothy 1:17_.


{445}{446}

[Illustration]
  VIEW OF ANTIOCH, WHERE THE DISCIPLES WERE FIRST CALLED CHRISTIANS.

  Copyright by Underwood & Underwood and used by special permission.

  There was everything in the situation and circumstances of this city
  to make it a place of concourse for all classes and kinds of people.
  By its harbor of Seleucia it was in communication with all the trade
  of the Mediterranean; and, through the open country behind the
  Lebanon, it was conveniently approached by the caravans from
  Mesopotamia and Arabia. It united the inland advantages of Aleppo
  with the maritime opportunities of Smyrna. It was almost an Oriental
  Rome, in which all the forms of the civilized life of the Empire
  found some representative.

  At the rugged bases of the mountain, the ground was leveled for a
  glorious street, which extended for four miles across the length of
  the city, and where sheltered crowds could walk through continuous
  colonnades from the eastern to the western suburb. The whole was
  surrounded by a wall, which, ascending to the heights and returning
  to the river, does not deviate very widely in its course from the
  wall of the Middle Ages, which can still be traced by the fragments
  of ruined towers. This wall is assigned by a Byzantine writer to
  Tiberius, but it seems more probable that the Emperor only repaired
  what Antiochus Epiphanes had built.
[End illustration]


{447}

THE CHRISTIAN WARRIOR

But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake
you as a thief: for ye are all sons of light, and sons of the day: we
are not of the night, nor of darkness; so then let us not sleep, as do
the rest, but let us watch and be sober. For they that sleep, sleep in
the night; and they that be drunken are drunken in the night. But let
us, since we are of the day, be sober, putting on the breastplate of
faith and love: and for a helmet, the hope of salvation. For God
appointed us not unto wrath, but unto the obtaining of salvation
through our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us, that, whether we wake
or sleep, we should live together with him. Wherefore exhort one
another, and build each other up, even as also ye do.

                                          --_I Thessalonians 5:4-11_.


Finally, be strong in the Lord, and in the strength of his might. Put
on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
wiles of the devil. For our wrestling is not against flesh and blood,
but against the principalities, against the powers, against the
world-rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual hosts of
wickedness in the heavenly places. Wherefore take up the whole armour
of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, having
done all, to stand. Stand therefore, {448} having girded your loins
with truth, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness, and
having shod your feet with the preparation of the gospel of peace;
also taking up the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to
quench all the fiery darts of the evil one. And take the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.

                                             --_Ephesians 6:10-17_.


Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong. Let
all that ye do be done in love.
                                              --_I Corinthians 16:13_.


Suffer hardship with me, as a good soldier of Christ Jesus. No soldier
on service entangleth himself in the affairs of this life; that he may
please him who enrolled him as a soldier.
                                                --_II Timothy 2:3, 4_.


But thou, O man of God, flee these things; and follow after
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness. Fight the
good fight of the faith, lay hold on the life eternal, whereunto thou
wast called, and didst confess the good confession in the sight of
many witnesses.
                                                 --_Timothy 6:11,12_.

{449}

THE HOPE OF IMMORTALITY

Now if Christ is preached that he hath been raised from the dead, how
say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead? But if
there is no resurrection of the dead, neither hath Christ been raised:
and if Christ hath not been raised, then is our preaching vain, your
faith also is vain. Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God;
because we witnessed of God that he raised up Christ: whom he raised
not up, if so be that the dead are not raised. For if the dead are not
raised, neither hath Christ been raised: and if Christ hath not been
raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins. Then they also
which are fallen asleep in Christ have perished. If in this life only
we have hoped in Christ, we are of all men most pitiable.

But now hath Christ been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of them
that are asleep. For since by man came death, by man came also the
resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ
shall all be made alive. But each in his own order: Christ the
firstfruits; then they that are Christ's, at his coming. Then cometh
the end, when he shall deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father;
when he shall have abolished all rule and all authority and power. For
he must reign, till he hath put all his enemies under his feet. The
last enemy that shall be abolished is death. For, "He put all things
in {450} subjection under his feet." But when he saith, "All things
are put in subjection," it is evident that he is excepted who did
subject all things unto him. And when all things have been subjected
unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subjected to him that did
subject all things unto him, that God may be all in all.

But some one will say, "How are the dead raised? and with what manner
of body do they come?" Thou foolish one, that which thou thyself
sowest is not quickened, except it die: and that which thou sowest,
thou sowest not the body that shall be, but a bare grain, it may
chance of wheat, or of some other kind; but God giveth it a body even
as it pleased him, and to each seed a body of its own. All flesh is
not the same flesh: but there is one flesh of men, and another flesh
of beasts, and another flesh of birds, and another of fishes. There
are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of
the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another.
There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and
another glory of the stars; for one star differeth from another star
in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in
corruption; it is raised in incorruption: it is sown in dishonour; it
is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power: it
is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. If there is a
natural body, there is also a spiritual body. So also it is written,
"The first man Adam became a living soul." The last Adam became a
life-giving spirit. Howbeit that is not first which is spiritual, but
that which is natural; then {451} that which is spiritual. The first
man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is of heaven. As is the
earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is the heavenly,
such are they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image
of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.

Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption. Behold,
I tell you a mystery: We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump:
for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put
on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. But when
this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall
have put on immortality, then shall come to pass the saying that is
written, "Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy
victory? O death, where is thy sting?" The sting of death is sin; and
the power of sin is the law: but thanks be to God, which giveth us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore, my beloved brethren,
be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not vain in the Lord.

                                           --_I Corinthians 15:12-58_.


But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the exceeding
greatness of the power may be of God, and not from ourselves; we are
pressed on every side, yet not straitened; perplexed, yet not unto
despair; pursued, yet {452} not forsaken; smitten down, yet not
destroyed; always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus, that
the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our body. For we which
live are always delivered unto death for Jesus' sake, that the life
also of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh. So then death
worketh in us, but life in you. But having the same spirit of faith,
according to that which is written, "I believed, and therefore did I
speak"; we also believe, and therefore also we speak; knowing that he
which raised up the Lord Jesus shall raise up us also with Jesus, and
shall present us with you. For all things are for your sakes, that the
grace, being multiplied through the many, may cause the thanksgiving
to abound unto the glory of God.

Wherefore we faint not; but though our outward man is decaying, yet
our inward man is renewed day by day. For our light affliction, which
is for the moment, worketh for us more and more exceedingly an eternal
weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are seen, but
at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are
temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal.

For we know that if the earthly house of our tabernacle be dissolved,
we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal, in
the heavens.
                                        --_II Corinthians 4:7-5:1_.


If then ye were raised together with Christ, seek the things that are
above, where Christ is, seated on the right hand of God. Set your mind
on the things that are above, {453} not on the things that are upon
the earth. For ye died, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When
Christ, who is our life, shall be manifested, then shall ye also with
him be manifested in glory.
                                          --_Colossians 3:1-4_.


For our citizenship is in heaven; from whence also we wait for a
Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: who shall fashion anew the body of our
humiliation, that it may be conformed to the body of his glory,
according to the working whereby he is able even to subject all things
unto himself.

                                           --_Philippians 3:20, 21_.


Howbeit what things were gain to me, these have I counted loss for
Christ. Yea verily, and I count all things to be loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but refuse, that I
may gain Christ, and be found in him, not having a righteousness of
mine own, even that which is of the law, but that which is through
faith in Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith: that I
may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of
his sufferings, becoming conformed unto his death; if by any means I
may attain unto the resurrection from the dead. Not that I have
already obtained, or am already made perfect: but I press on, if so be
that I may apprehend that for which also I was apprehended by Christ
Jesus. Brethren, I count not myself yet to have apprehended: but one
thing I do, forgetting the things which are behind, and stretching
forward to the {454} things which are before, I press on toward the
goal unto the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let us
therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in anything
ye are otherwise minded, even this shall God reveal unto you: only,
whereunto we have already attained, by that same rule let us walk.

                                              --_Philippians 3:7-16_.


For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy
to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed to us-ward. For
the earnest expectation of the creation waiteth for the revealing of
the sons of God. For the creation was subjected to vanity, not of its
own will, but by reason of him who subjected it, in hope that the
creation itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption
into the liberty of the glory of the children of God. For we know that
the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now.
And not only so, but ourselves also, which have the firstfruits of the
Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for our
adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body. For by hope were we
saved: but hope that is seen is not hope: for who hopeth for that
which he seeth? But if we hope for that which we see not, then do we
with patience wait for it.
                                                 --_Romans 8:18-25_.


What then shall we say to these things? If God is for us, who is
against us? He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all, how shall he not also with {455} him freely give us all
things? Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It is God
that justifieth; who is he that shall condemn? It is Christ Jesus that
died, yea rather, that was raised from the dead, who is at the right
hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us. Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Even as it
is written,

  "For thy sake we are killed all the day long;
  We were accounted as sheep for the slaughter."

Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that
loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be
able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.
                                                   --_Romans 8:31-39_.

{456}

SELECTIONS FROM THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN

(This book is also called the Revelation.)


The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him to shew unto his
servants, even the things which must shortly come to pass: and he sent
and signified it by his angel unto his servant John; who bare witness
of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, even of all
things that he saw. Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the
words of the prophecy, and keep the things which are written therein:
for the time is at hand.

John to the seven churches which are in Asia: Grace to you and peace,
from him which is and which was and which is to come; and from the
seven Spirits which are before his throne; and from Jesus Christ, who
is the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead, and the ruler of
the kings of the earth. Unto him that loveth us, and loosed us from
our sins by his blood; and he made us to be a kingdom, to be priests
unto his God and Father; to him be the glory and the dominion for ever
and ever. Amen.

Behold, he cometh with the clouds; and every eye shall see him, and
they which pierced him; and all the tribes of the earth shall mourn
over him. Even so, Amen.

{457}{458}

[Illustration]
  EPHESUS. VIEW OP THE RUINS OF THE AQUEDUCT.
  CASTLE IN THE BACKGROUND.

  From a photograph belonging to Miss Julia W. Snow and used by her
  kind permission.
[End illustration]


{459}

"I am the Alpha and the Omega," saith the Lord God, "which is and
which was and which is to come, the Almighty."

I John, your brother and partaker with you in the tribulation and
kingdom and patience which are in Jesus, was in the isle that is
called Patmos, for the word of God and the testimony of Jesus. I was
in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and I heard behind me a great voice,
as of a trumpet saying, "What thou seest, write in a book, and send it
to the seven churches; unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto
Pergamum, and unto Thyatira, and unto Sardis, and unto Philadelphia,
and unto Laodicea."

And I turned to see the voice which spake with me. And having turned I
saw seven golden candlesticks; and in the midst of the candlesticks
one like unto a son of man, clothed with a garment down to the foot,
and girt about at the breasts with a golden girdle. And his head and
his hair were white as white wool, white as snow; and his eyes were as
a flame of fire; and his feet like unto burnished brass, as if it had
been refined in a furnace; and his voice as the voice of many waters.
And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth
proceeded a sharp two-edged sword: and his countenance was as the sun
shineth in his strength. And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as one
dead.

And he laid his right hand upon me, saying, "Fear not; I am the first
and the last, and the Living one; and I was dead, and behold, I am
alive for evermore, and I have the keys of death and of Hades. Write
{460} therefore the things which thou sawest, and the things which
are, and the things which shall come to pass hereafter; the mystery of
the seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven
golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the angels of the seven
churches: and the seven candlesticks are seven churches.

"To the angel of the church in Ephesus write;

THE MESSAGE TO THE CHURCH IN EPHESUS

"These things saith he that holdeth the seven stars
in his right hand, he that walketh in the midst of the
seven golden candlesticks:

"I know thy works, and thy toil and patience, and that thou canst not
bear evil men, and didst try them which call themselves apostles, and
they are not, and didst find them false; and thou hast patience and
didst bear for my name's sake, and hast not grown weary. But I have
this against thee, that thou didst leave thy first love. Remember
therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works; or else I come to thee, and will move thy candlestick out of
its place, except thou repent. He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith to the churches. To him that overcometh, to him will
I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the Paradise of God.

"And to the angel of the church in Smyrna write;

THE MESSAGE TO THE CHURCH IN SMYRNA

"These things saith the first and the last, which was dead, and lived
again: I know thy tribulation, and thy {461} poverty (but thou art
rich), and the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and they are
not, but are a synagogue of Satan. Fear not the things which thou art
about to suffer: behold, the devil is about to cast some of you into
prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days.
Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the
churches. He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death.

"And to the angel of the church in Pergamum write;

THE MESSAGE TO THE CHURCH IN PERGAMUM

"These things saith he that hath the sharp two-edged sword: I know
where thou dwellest, even where Satan's throne is: and thou holdest
fast my name, and didst not deny my faith, even in the days of Antipas
my witness, my faithful one, who was killed among you, where Satan
dwelleth. But I have a few things against thee, because thou hast
there some that hold the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast
a stumblingblock before the children of Israel, to eat things
sacrificed to idols. Repent therefore; or else I come to thee quickly,
and I will make war against them with the sword of my mouth. He that
hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the churches. To
him that overcometh, to him will I give of the hidden manna, and I
will give him a white stone, and upon the stone a new name written,
which no one knoweth but he that receiveth it.

{462}

"And to the angel of the church in Thyatira write;

THE MESSAGE TO THE CHURCH IN THYATIRA

"These things saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes like a flame of
fire, and his feet are like unto burnished brass: I know thy works,
and thy love and faith and ministry and patience, and that thy last
works are more than the first. But I have this against thee, that thou
sufferest the woman Jezebel, which calleth herself a prophetess; and
she teacheth and seduceth my servants.

"But to you I say, to the rest that are in Thyatira, as many as have
not this teaching, which know not the deep things of Satan, as they
say; I cast upon you none other burden. Howbeit that which ye have,
hold fast till I come. And he that overcometh, and he that keepeth my
works unto the end, to him will I give authority over the nations: and
he shall rule them with a rod of iron, as the vessels of the potter
are broken to shivers; as I also have received of my Father: and I
will give him the morning star. He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith to the churches.

"And to the angel of the church in Sardis write;

THE MESSAGE TO THE CHURCH IN SARDIS

"These things saith he that hath the seven Spirits of God, and the
seven stars: I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest,
and thou art dead. Be thou watchful, and stablish the things that
remain, which were ready to die: for I have found no works of thine
{463} fulfilled before my God. Remember therefore how thou hast
received and didst hear; and keep it, and repent. If therefore thou
shalt not watch, I will come as a thief, and thou shalt not know what
hour I will come upon thee. But thou hast a few names in Sardis which
did not defile their garments: and they shall walk with me in white;
for they are worthy. He that overcometh shall thus be arrayed in white
garments; and I will in no wise blot his name out of the book of life,
and I will confess his name before my Father, and before his angels.
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the
churches.

"And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write;

THE MESSAGE TO THE CHURCH IN PHILADELPHIA

"These things saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the
key of David, he that openeth, and none shall shut, and that shutteth,
and none openeth: I know thy works (behold, I have set before thee a
door opened, which none can shut), that thou hast a little power, and
didst keep my word, and didst not deny my name. Behold, I give of the
synagogue of Satan, of them which say they are Jews, and they are not,
but do lie; behold, I will make them to come and worship before thy
feet, and to know that I have loved thee. Because thou didst keep the
word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of trial,
that hour which is to come upon the whole world, to try them that
dwell upon the earth. I come quickly: hold fast that which thou hast,
that no one take thy crown. He that overcometh, I will {464} make him
a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go out thence no more:
and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city
of my God, the new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my
God, and mine own new name. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the
Spirit saith to the churches.

"And to the angel of the church in Laodicea write;

THE MESSAGE TO THE CHURCH IN LAODICEA

"These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the
beginning of the creation of God: I know thy works, that thou art
neither cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot. So because thou
art lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I will spew thee out of my
mouth. Because thou sayest, I am rich, and have gotten riches, and
have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art the wretched one
and miserable and poor and blind and naked: I counsel thee to buy of
me gold refined by fire, that thou mayest become rich; and white
garments, that thou mayest clothe thyself, and that the shame of thy
nakedness be not made manifest; and eye-salve to anoint thine eyes,
that thou mayest see. As many as I love, I reprove and chasten: be
zealous therefore, and repent. Behold, I stand at the door and knock:
if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and
will sup with him, and he with me. He that overcometh, I will give to
him to sit down with me in my throne, as I also overcame, and sat down
with my Father in his throne. He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith to the churches."

{465}{466}

[Illustration]
  EPHESUS. THE TRADITIONAL TOMB OF ST. LUKE.

  From a photograph belonging to Miss Julia W. Snow and used by her
  kind permission.
[End illustration]

{467}

After these things I saw, and behold, a door opened in heaven, and the
first voice which I heard, a voice as of a trumpet speaking with me,
one saying, "Come up hither, and I will shew thee the things which
must come to pass hereafter."

Straightway I was in the Spirit: and behold, there was a throne set in
heaven, and one sitting upon the throne; and he that sat was to look
upon like a jasper stone and a sardius: and there was a rainbow round
about the throne, like an emerald to look upon. And round about the
throne were four and twenty thrones: and upon the thrones I saw four
and twenty elders sitting, arrayed in white garments; and on their
heads crowns of gold. And out of the throne proceed lightnings and
voices and thunders. And there were seven lamps of fire burning before
the throne, which are the seven Spirits of God; and before the throne,
as it were a glassy sea like unto crystal; and in the midst of the
throne, and round about the throne, four living creatures full of eyes
before and behind. And the first creature was like a lion, and the
second creature like a calf, and the third creature had a face as of a
man, and the fourth creature was like a flying eagle.

And the four living creatures, having each one of them six wings, are
full of eyes round about and within: and they have no rest day and
night, saying, "Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God, the Almighty, which
was and which is and which is to come."

And when the living creatures shall give glory and {468} honour and
thanks to him that sitteth on the throne, to him that liveth for ever
and ever, the four and twenty elders shall fall down before him that
sitteth on the throne, and shall worship him that liveth for ever and
ever, and shall cast their crowns before the throne, saying, "Worthy
art thou, our Lord and our God, to receive the glory and the honour
and the power: for thou didst create all things, and because of thy
will they were, and were created."

And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book
written within and on the back, close sealed with seven seals. And I
saw a strong angel proclaiming with a great voice, "Who is worthy to
open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?"

And no one in the heaven, or on the earth, or under the earth, was
able to open the book, or to look thereon.

And I wept much, because no one was found worthy to open the book, or
to look thereon: and one of the elders saith unto me, "Weep not:
behold, the Lion that is of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David,
hath overcome, to open the book and the seven seals thereof."

And I saw in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures,
and in the midst of the elders, a Lamb standing, as though it had been
slain, having seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits
of God, sent forth into all the earth. And he came, and he taketh it
out of the right hand of him that sat on the throne. And when he had
taken the book, the four living creatures and the four and twenty
elders fell down {469} before the Lamb, having each one a harp, and
golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints.

And they sing a new song, saying, "Worthy art thou to take the book,
and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and didst purchase
unto God with thy blood men of every tribe, and tongue, and people,
and nation, and madest them to be unto our God a kingdom and priests;
and they reign upon the earth."

And I saw, and I heard a voice of many angels round about the throne
and the living creatures and the elders; and the number of them was
ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; saying
with a great voice, "Worthy is the Lamb that hath been slain to
receive the power, and riches, and wisdom, and might, and honour, and
glory, and blessing." And every created thing which is in the heaven,
and on the earth, and under the earth, and on the sea, and all things
that are in them, heard I saying, "Unto him that sitteth on the
throne, and unto the Lamb, be the blessing, and the honour, and the
glory, and the dominion, for ever and ever."

And the four living creatures said, "Amen." And the elders fell down
and worshipped.

And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one
of the four living creatures saying as with a voice of thunder,
"Come."

And I saw, and behold, a white horse, and he that sat thereon had a
bow; and there was given unto him a crown: and he came forth
conquering, and to conquer.

{470}

And when he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature
saying, "Come."

And another horse came forth, a red horse: and to him that sat thereon
it was given to take peace from the earth, and that they should slay
one another: and there was given unto him a great sword.

And when he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature
saying, "Come."

And I saw, and behold, a black horse; and he that sat thereon had a
balance in his hand. And I heard as it were a voice in the midst of
the four living creatures saying, "A measure of wheat for a penny, and
three measures of barley for a penny; and the oil and the wine hurt
thou not."

And when he opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth
living creature saying, "Come."

And I saw, and behold, a pale horse: and he that sat upon him, his
name was Death; and Hades followed with him. And there was given unto
them authority over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword,
and with famine, and with death, and by the wild beasts of the earth.

And when he opened the fifth seal, I saw underneath the altar the
souls of them that had been slain for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they held: and they cried with a great voice, saying,
"How long, O Master, the holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the earth?"


{471}{472}

[Illustration]
  SAINT JOHN THE EVANGELIST
  By Dolci
[End illustration]


{473}

And there was given them to each one a white robe; and it was said
unto them, that they should rest yet for a little time, until their
fellow-servants also and their brethren, which should be killed even
as they were, should be fulfilled.

And I saw when he opened the sixth seal, and there was a great
earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the
whole moon became as blood; and the stars of the heaven fell unto the
earth, as a fig tree casteth her unripe figs, when she is shaken of a
great wind. And the heaven was removed as a scroll when it is rolled
up; and every mountain and island were moved out of their places.

And the kings of the earth, and the princes, and the chief captains,
and the rich, and the strong, and every bondman and freeman, hid
themselves in the caves and in the rocks of the mountains; and they
say to the mountains and to the rocks, "Fall on us, and hide us from
the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb: for the great day of their wrath is come; and who is able to
stand?"

After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the
earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that no wind should blow
on the earth, or on the sea, or upon any tree. And I saw another angel
ascend from the sun rising, having the seal of the living God: and he
cried with a great voice to the four angels, to whom it was given to
hurt the earth and the sea, saying, "Hurt not the earth, neither the
sea, nor the trees, till we shall have sealed the servants of our God
on their foreheads."

{474}

And I heard the number of them which were sealed, a hundred and forty
and four thousand, sealed out of every tribe of the children of
Israel.

After these things I saw, and behold, a great multitude, which no man
could number, out of every nation, and of all tribes and peoples and
tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, arrayed in
white robes, and palms in their hands; and they cry with a great
voice, saying, "Salvation unto our God which sitteth on the throne,
and unto the Lamb."

And all the angels were standing round about the throne, and about the
elders and the four living creatures; and they fell before the throne
on their faces, and worshipped God, saying, "Amen: Blessing, and
glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might,
be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen."

And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, "These which are
arrayed in the white robes, who are they, and whence come they?"

And I say unto him, "My lord, thou knowest."

And he said to me, "These are they which come out of the great
tribulation, and they washed their robes, and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God; and
they serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the
throne shall spread his tabernacle over them. They shall hunger no
more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun strike upon them,
nor any heat: for the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall
be their {475} shepherd, and shall guide them unto fountains of waters
of life: and God shall wipe away every tear from their eyes."

And I saw as it were a glassy sea mingled with fire; and them that
come victorious from the beast, and from his image, and from the
number of his name, standing by the glassy sea, having harps of God.
And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of
the Lamb, saying, "Great and marvellous are thy works, O Lord God, the
Almighty; righteous and true are thy ways, thou King of the ages. Who
shall not fear, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy;
for all the nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy
righteous acts have been made manifest."

And after these things I saw, and the temple of the tabernacle of the
testimony in heaven was opened: and there came out from the temple the
seven angels that had the seven plagues, arrayed with precious stone,
pure and bright, and girt about their breasts with golden girdles. And
one of the four living creatures gave unto the seven angels seven
golden bowls full of the wrath of God, who liveth for ever and ever.
And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from
his power; and none was able to enter into the temple, till the seven
plagues of the seven angels should be finished.

And I saw the heaven opened; and behold, a white horse, and he that
sat thereon, called "Faithful and True"; and in righteousness he doth
judge and make war.

{476}

And his eyes are a flame of fire, and upon his head are many diadems;
and he hath a name written, which no one knoweth but he himself. And
he is arrayed in a garment sprinkled with blood: and his name is
called "The Word of God."

And the armies which are in heaven followed him upon white horses,
clothed in fine linen, white and pure. And out of his mouth proceedeth
a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and he shall
rule them with a rod of iron: and he treadeth the winepress of the
fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God. And he hath on his garment
and on his thigh a name written,

  King of Kings and Lord of Lords.


VISIONS OF THE HEAVENLY CITY

And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the
first earth are passed away; and the sea is no more. And I saw the
holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, made
ready as a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a great voice
out of the throne saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men,
and he shall dwell with them, and they shall be his peoples, and God
himself shall be with them, and be their God: and he shall wipe away
every tear from their eyes; and death shall be no more; neither shall
there be mourning, nor crying, nor pain, any more: the first things
are passed away.

And he carried me away in the Spirit to a mountain {477} great and
high, and shewed me the holy city Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven
from God, having the glory of God: her light was like unto a stone
most precious, as it were a jasper stone, clear as crystal: having a
wall great and high; having twelve gates, and at the gates twelve
angels; and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve
tribes of the children of Israel: on the east were three gates; and on
the north three gates; and on the south three gates; and on the west
three gates. And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on
them twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. And he that
spake with me had for a measure a golden reed to measure the city, and
the gates thereof, and the wall thereof. And the city lieth
foursquare, and the length thereof is as great as the breadth: and he
measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs: the length
and the breadth and the height thereof are equal. And he measured the
wall thereof, a hundred and forty and four cubits, according to the
measure of a man, that is, of an angel. And the building of the wall
thereof was jasper: and the city was pure gold, like unto pure glass.
The foundations of the wall of the city were adorned with all manner
of precious stones. The first foundation was jasper; the second,
sapphire; the third chalcedony; the fourth, emerald; the fifth,
sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolite; the eighth,
beryl; the ninth, topaz; the tenth, chrysoprase; the eleventh,
jacinth; the twelfth, amethyst. And the twelve gates were twelve
pearls; each one of the several gates was of one pearl: and the street
of {478} the city was pure gold, as it were transparent glass. And I
saw no temple therein: for the Lord God the Almighty, and the Lamb are
the temple thereof. And the city hath no need of the sun, neither of
the moon, to shine upon it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and
the lamp thereof is the Lamb. And the nations shall walk amidst the
light thereof: and the kings of the earth do bring their glory into
it. And the gates thereof shall in no wise be shut by day (for there
shall be no night there): and they shall bring the glory and the
honour of the nations into it: and there shall in no wise enter into
it anything unclean, or he that maketh an abomination and a lie: but
only they which are written in the Lamb's book of life. And he shewed
me a river of water of life, bright as crystal, proceeding out of the
throne of God and of the Lamb, in the midst of the street thereof. And
on this side of the river and on that was the tree of life, bearing
twelve manner of fruits, yielding its fruit every month: and the
leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations. And there
shall be no curse any more: and the throne of God and of the Lamb
shall be therein: and his servants shall do him service; and they
shall see his face; and his name shall be on their foreheads. And
there shall be night no more; and they need no light of lamp, neither
light of sun; for the Lord God shall give them light: and they shall
reign for ever and ever.

                              --_Revelations 21:1-4, 10-27; 22:1-5_.

{479}

HYMNS OF THE AGES

{480}

Many of the great hymns are given elsewhere in the series.
A few of the choicest of the centuries are given here.


{481}

NEARER, MY GOD, TO THEE

  Nearer, my God, to Thee,
    Nearer to Thee!
  E'en though it be a cross
    That raiseth me!
  Still all my song shall be,
  Nearer, my God, to Thee,
    Nearer to Thee!

  Though, like a wanderer,
    The sun gone down,
  Darkness be over me,
    My rest a stone,
  Yet in my dreams I'd be
  Nearer, my God, to Thee,
    Nearer to Thee!

  There let the way appear,
    Steps unto heaven;
  All that Thou sendest me,
    In mercy given;
  Angels to beckon me
  Nearer, my God, to Thee,
    Nearer to Thee!
                                      {482}
  Then, with my waking thoughts
    Bright with Thy praise,
  Out of my stony griefs
    Bethel I'll raise;
  So by my woes to be
  Nearer, my God, to Thee,
    Nearer to Thee!
                           --_Sarah Flower Adams_.

{483}

JESUS, LOVER OF MY SOUL

  Jesus, lover of my soul,
    Let me to Thy bosom fly
  While the billows near me roll,
    While the tempest still is high!
  Hide me, O my Saviour! hide,
    Till the storm of life is past;
  Safe into the haven guide;
    Oh, receive my soul at last!

  Other refuge have I none;
    Hangs my helpless soul on Thee;
  Leave, ah! leave me not alone,
    Still support and comfort me.
  All my trust on Thee is stayed;
    All my help from Thee I bring;
  Cover my defenseless head
    With the shadow of Thy wing.

  Thou, O Christ! art all I want;
    More than all in Thee I find:
  Raise the fallen, cheer the faint,
    Heal the sick, and lead the blind.
  Just and holy is Thy name,
    I am all unrighteousness;
  Vile and full of sin I am,
    Thou art full of truth and grace.
                                           {484}
  Plenteous grace with Thee is found,
    Grace to pardon all my sin;
  Let the healing streams abound,
    Make and keep me pure within.
  Thou of life the fountain art,
    Freely let me take of Thee;
  Spring Thou up within my heart,
    Rise to all eternity.
                                  --_Charles Wesley_.

{485}

MY FAITH LOOKS UP TO THEE

  My faith looks up to Thee,
  Thou Lamb of Calvary,
    Saviour divine!
  Now hear me while I pray,
  Take all my guilt away,
  Oh, let me from this day
    Be wholly Thine!

  May Thy rich grace impart
  Strength to my fainting heart,
    My zeal inspire;
  As Thou hast died for me,
  Oh, may my love to Thee
  Pure, warm, and changeless be,
    A living fire!

  While life's dark maze I tread,
  And griefs around me spread,
    Be Thou my guide;
  Bid darkness turn to day,
  Wipe sorrow's tears away,
  Nor let me ever stray
    From Thee aside.
                                     {486}
  When ends life's transient dream,
  When death's cold, sullen stream
    Shall o'er me roll,
  Blest Saviour! then, in love,
  Fear and distrust remove;
  Oh, bear me safe above.
    A ransomed soul!
                                 --_Ray Palmer_

{487}

FOLLOWING THE MASTER

  Art thou weary, art thou languid,
    Art thou sore distressed?
  "Come to Me," saith One, "and coming,
    Be at rest."

  Hath He marks to lead me to Him,
    If He be my Guide?--
  "In His feet and hands are wound-prints,
    And His side."

  Is there diadem, as Monarch,
    That His brow adorns?--
  "Yea, a crown, in very surety;
    But of thorns."

  If I find Him, if I follow,
    What His guerdon here?--
  "Many a sorrow, many a labor,
    Many a tear."

  If I still hold closely to Him,
    What hath He at last?--
  "Sorrow vanquished, labor ended,
    Jordan passed."
                                         {488}
  If I ask Him to receive me,
    Will He say me nay?--
  "Not till earth, and not till heaven
    Pass away."

  Finding, following, keeping, struggling,
    Is He sure to bless?--
  "Saints, apostles, prophets, martyrs,
    Answer, Yes."

                   --_Translated by John Mason Neale from the Greek_.


{489}

ROCK OF AGES

  Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
  Let me hide myself in Thee;
  Let the water and the blood,
  From Thy riven side which flowed,
  Be of sin the double cure,
  Cleanse me from its guilt and power.

  Not the labors of my hands
  Can fulfill the law's demands;
  Could my zeal no respite know,
  Could my tears forever flow,
  All for sin could not atone;
  Thou must save, and Thou alone.

  Nothing in my hand I bring,
  Simply to Thy cross I cling;
  Naked, come to Thee for dress;
  Helpless, look to Thee for grace;
  Foul, I to the fountain fly;
  Wash me, Saviour, or I die.

  While I draw this fleeting breath,
  When my eyelids close in death,
  When I soar to worlds unknown,
  See Thee on Thy judgment throne,
  Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
  Let me hide myself in Thee.

                             --_Augustus Montague Toplady_.

{490}

CROSSING THE BAR

  Sunset and evening star,
  And one clear call for me!
  And may there be no moaning of the bar,
    When I put out to sea,

  But such a tide as moving seems asleep,
  Too full for sound and foam,
  When that which drew from out the boundless deep
    Turns again home.

  Twilight and evening bell,
  And after that the dark!
  And may there be no sadness of farewell,
    When I embark;

  For tho' from out our bourne of Time and Place
  The flood may bear me far,
  I hope to see my Pilot face to face
    When I have crost the bar.

                                    --_Alfred, Lord Tennyson_.

{491}

LEAD, KINDLY LIGHT

  Lead, kindly Light! amid the encircling gloom,
    Lead Thou me on;
  The night is dark and I am far from home,
    Lead Thou me on;
  Keep Thou my feet; I do not ask to see
  The distant scene; one step enough for me.

  I was not ever thus, nor prayed that Thou
    Shouldst lead me on;
  I loved to choose and see my path; but now
    Lead Thou me on:
  I loved the garish day, and, spite of fears,
  Pride ruled my will. Remember not past years.

  So long Thy power has blessed me, sure it still
    Will lead me on
  O'er moor and fen, o'er crag and torrent, till
    The night is gone;
  And with the morn those angel faces smile
  Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile!

                                             --_John H. Newman_.


{492}

MY COUNTRY! 'T IS OF THEE

  My country! 't is of thee,
  Sweet land of liberty,
    Of thee I sing;
  Land where my fathers died!
  Land of the Pilgrims' pride!
  From every mountain side
    Let freedom ring!

  My native country, thee--
  Land of the noble, free--
    Thy name I love;
  I love thy rocks and rills,
  Thy woods and templed hills;
  My heart with rapture thrills
    Like that above.

  Let music swell the breeze,
  And ring from all the trees
    Sweet freedom's song:
  Let mortal tongues awake;
  Let all that breathe partake;
  Let rocks their silence break,--
    The sound prolong.
                                   {493}
  Our fathers' God! to Thee,
  Author of liberty,
    To Thee we sing:
  Long may our land be bright
  With freedom's holy light;
  Protect us by Thy might,
    Great God, our King!
                                     --_Samuel F. Smith_.

{494}

FROM ALL THAT DWELL BELOW THE SKIES

  From all that dwell below the skies
  Let the Creator's praise arise;
  Let the Redeemer's name be sung
  Through every land, by every tongue.

  Eternal are Thy mercies, Lord;
  Eternal truth attends Thy word;
  Thy praise shall sound from shore to shore,
  Till suns shall rise and set no more.

                                         --_Isaac Watts_.

{495}

NOTES

{496}

{497}

NOTES

THE PSALMS.

_Psalm 1_. Ruskin, in "Our Fathers Have Told Us," declares that among
others Psalms 1, 8, 15, 19, 23, 24, well studied and believed, are
sufficient for all personal guidance; that Psalm 72 contains many of
the principles of just government; and that Psalm 104 anticipates the
triumphs of natural sciences.

Jerome, a great scholar in the early church, was drawn to study while
still young. One of his favorite texts was from Psalm 1: "But his
delight is in the law of the Lord; And in his law doth he meditate day
and night."


_Psalm 3_ was used as a prayer by the English when they learned that
the great Spanish Armada had sailed against England in 1588. A still
more romantic use was by the Huguenots of France, in whose armies it
is said sentries were posted and relieved to the chant of Psalms, and
Psalm 3 was used as the signal of danger.


_Psalm 4_ was an evening prayer, in the early church as well as in the
Jewish nation. Many have turned to it in the evening of life. Luther
said that he wished to hear it sung in his last moments; and the
martyr Ridley, who died in England for conscience's sake in 1555,
spent the last night of his life in quiet sleep, having repeated the
last verse of this Psalm.


_Psalm 8_. Not only Protestants, but, at other times, Catholics
suffered in England for conscience's sake. One of these, the Earl of
Arundel, imprisoned in the tower of London, carved the words of Psalm
8, lines 11, 12, on the wall, where they still remain. This is one of
the nature Psalms, and men who loved nature have often had it on their
lips, as did frequently Palissy, the Huguenot inventor of porcelain
ware. The guild of butchers in Mediaeval England took their motto from
Psalm 8, lines 13-16.

{498}

_Psalm 16_. One of the last days of Henry Martyn's life was spent in
"writing notes on Psalms 15 and 16." Hugh M'Kail, a young Scottish
insurgent, repeated the first line of Psalm 16 on the evening before
his execution.


_Psalm 17_. The funeral text of John Howard, the great prison
reformer, was taken from Psalm 17, lines 18, 19.


_Psalm 19_. Another great nature Psalm. Joseph Addison (1672-1719)
paraphrased it in the hymn--

  "The spacious firmament on high."


_Psalm 23_. No Psalm has been translated in verse so often. George
Herbert, an English poet (1593-1632), is the author of one version--
  "The God of love my Shepherd is."
Joseph Addison, of another--
  "The Lord my pasture shall prepare."


_Psalm 25_. In the Indian Mutiny an English collector, Mr. Edwards,
was for weeks among natives of doubtful loyalty, hidden with a few
other English in a cowhouse, almost stifled with the heat. He derived,
according to his letters, unspeakable comfort from the 25th Psalm,
especially lines 28-34.


_Psalm 27_. The motto of the University of Oxford, "Dominus
illuminatio mea," is taken from the first two lines of Psalm 27.


_Psalm 29_. Another nature Psalm. From lines 15 and 16 is taken the
motto of George Herbert's "Sacred Poems."


_Psalm 31_. Few Psalms have been more widely used in Christian history
than this. The last work which Savonarola did was to write a
commentary on it, which was left unfinished by his death. So highly
did Luther consider this commentary that he had it published. The
words, "Into thy hand I commend my spirit," were consecrated by the
use of Christ on the cross, and have been the words with which many of
his followers have met death. The list of those who thus used them
begins with the first martyr Stephen, and includes kings, like
Charlemagne and Charles V.; martyrs, like Huss, Bishop Ridley and Lady
Jane Grey; reformers, like Luther, Melancthon, and {499} John Knox;
poets, like Tasso and George Herbert; missionaries, like Henry Martyn.
Mary Queen of Scots on the scaffold and Columbus in a wretched lodging
at Valladolid, both passed out of life with these words on their lips.


_Psalm 34_. Columba, the great missionary to North Britain in the
sixth century, sat on the last day of his life transcribing the 34th
Psalm. He had written lines 19 and 20 when he laid down his pen,
saying, "Here I make an end"; and he never took up his pen more.


_Psalm 37_. Livingstone says of lines 9 and 10 that they sustained him
at every turn of his course in Africa, and even in England.


_Psalm 42_. The hart was the symbol in the early church for those
souls who thirsted for the love of God. Cardinal Manning, one of the
ablest of Catholic statesmen of the last century, wrote, "'Why art
thou cast down, O my soul,' always seemed a voice to me." Scott was
true to the love of the Scottish people for the Psalms when he makes
Jeanie Deans repeat the above words in an hour of peril during her
journey to save her sister's life.


_Psalm 45_. It is said that the coronation ceremonies of English
monarchs are founded on this Psalm--the oil of gladness, the sword,
the crown, the sceptre, the throne.


_Psalm 46_. The best known paraphrase is Luther's vigorous version--

  "A mighty fortress is our God."

In times of discouragement he would often say to his friend
Melancthon, "Come, let us sing the 46th Psalm." Cromwell also often
turned to it, and his speech at the opening of his second Parliament
was in part an exposition of this Psalm. At the beginning of the
Indian Mutiny, on the Sunday after the troops of Havelock first
learned of their danger, he chose, instead of the Psalm of the day,
this Psalm for their encouragement. "On the foundation of sure
confidence, gained from a reading of many Psalms, John Wesley built
up, by means of his intense energy, his organizing genius, and his
{500} administrative capacity, the mighty movement that still bears
his name. It was with the words of the Psalms that he met the approach
of death. Gathering his remaining strength into the cry, 'The best of
all, God is with us,' he lay for some time exhausted. One of the
bystanders wetted his parched lips. 'It will not do,' he said, 'we
must take the consequence, never mind the poor carcase.' Pausing a
little, he cried, 'Thy clouds drop fatness,' and soon after, 'The Lord
of hosts is with us; The God of Jacob is our refuge.' Throughout the
night he was heard attempting to repeat these beautiful words from
Psalm 46. The next morning he was dead."


_Psalm 51_ was the favorite prayer of Sir Thomas More, the English
Catholic, who was as much a martyr for religion and liberty as ever
any man of English blood. It was his last prayer, repeated kneeling on
the scaffold where he was beheaded. Lady Jane Grey also repeated it on
the scaffold, as soon after did her father, the Duke of Suffolk, who
also suffered death for his Protestant faith. So did Egmont, executed
in Brussels at the command of the infamous Duke of Alva. Carey, the
first English missionary to India, desired the first four lines to be
the text of his funeral sermon. Shakespeare uses lines 11 and 12 in
the King's speech in Hamlet--

  "Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
    To wash it white as snow?"

Lines 19 and 20 were repeated by the great English teacher, Thomas
Arnold, on his deathbed, while Teresa, the Spanish Catholic saint,
died repeating lines 15 and 16. Lines 21 and 22 serve as the motto of
Michael Angelo's picture of Savonarola. Few Psalms have been more on
the lips of holy men of all ages than the 51st.


_Psalm 68_ was the favorite Psalm of the Emperor Charlemagne. It was
used by the friends of Savonarola at the crisis of his career. A
Franciscan friar, whom he had angered by his preaching, challenged
him, after the custom of the Middle Ages, to prove his preaching by
the test of fire. One of his friends accepted the challenge for him,
and on the appointed day headed a procession which marched through the
streets of Florence, singing Psalm 68. The challenger did not appear;
and the crowd, with the usual bad logic of crowds, {501} turned
against Savonarola. Two days later he was thrown into prison, and
torture and death ended the scene. This Psalm was the battle hymn of
the Huguenots, in the form of a verse translation into French by Beza,
a great scholar of the Reformation. Battle after battle was entered to
the sound of this splendid song. At one battle, that of Courtras, a
young courtier in the opposing army saw the Huguenots kneel as they
sang. "See," he said, "the cowards are afraid. They are confessing."
"When the Huguenots behave thus, they are ready to fight to the
death," replied a veteran from the ranks. Cromwell opened his
Parliament with a speech expounding this Psalm. Lines 1 and 2 were the
text of the sermon at the service held by the Russians of Moscow in
1812 to give thanks for the retreat of the French from Moscow.
Cromwell's "Ironsides" sang this Psalm at the decisive battle at
Dunbar, when, the mists arising from the valley, they charged and
broke the enemy's ranks.


_Psalm 72_ was the favorite Psalm of Athanasius, the greatest figure
at the Nicene Council in 325 A. D. "Against all assaults upon thy
body," he says, "thine estate, thy soul, thy reputation, against all
temptations, tribulations, plots and slanderous reports, say this
Psalm." The familiar representation, in picture, song and story, of
the three Wise Men from the East at the Cradle of Christ as three
kings, is based on the kings mentioned in lines 18 and 19.


_Psalm 77_. Bishop Hooper, a prisoner for conscience's sake in England
in 1553, wrote to his wife to read Psalm 77, because of the great
consolation which it contained for those who are in anguish of mind.
Catholics as well as Protestants found comfort in it.


_Psalm 80_ was the first of nine Psalms, translated by Milton into
English verse in 1648. Lines 10 and 11 underlie Elizabeth Barrett
Browning's "The Measure," stanza 2.


_Psalm 84_. Lines 21 and 22 were the words that called Thomas Aquinas
from his life in the world to a monastic career. They came to him as
the voice of God. Paula, a holy woman of the early church, died with
the words of this Psalm on her lips. Carlyle, in one of his writings,
strikes a note of courage and demand for work, with the joyful
confidence of the last two lines.

{502}

_Psalm 85_ Lines 15-17 are the keynote of Book III. of the Imitation
of Christ. Langland's _Vision of Piers Ploughman_ is full of allusions
to the Psalms, as when Righteousness kisses Peace (Psalm 85, line 21).


_Psalm 86_. In "Rizpah," Tennyson has a beautiful use of lines 30 and 31.

  "And read me a Bible verse of the Lord's goodwill toward men--
  'Full of compassion and mercy, the Lord,' --let me hear it again;
  'Full of compassion and mercy--long suffering.'"


_Psalm 87_. The motto of the University of Durham in England is taken
from line 1. Lines 2 and 3 are the motto of Augustine's great work,
"The City of God."


_Psalm 90_ was the favorite Psalm of the Emperor Charles V., of the
Reformation period. It has had its place in the burial service of the
Church of England since 1662. Newman's _Dream of Gerontius_ uses a
part of this Psalm as a chant of the souls in purgatory. Its solemn
strains have very often been used in the church to recall men to the
thought of the permanence of God and the fleeting life of man.


_Psalm 91_ is said to be the Psalm that was sung at the first
attendance of Beza upon a Protestant service, and to have made a great
impression upon him. In 1177, as a long and bitter conflict between
the Emperor and the Pope ended in the triumphs of the latter, and
Barbarossa bowed before the Pope Alexander, legend says that the Pope
set his foot on the neck of the kneeling Emperor, repeating lines 27
and 28.


_Psalm 93_. In the days of the Scottish Covenanters it was believed
that Psalm 93 was heard sweetly chanted by spiritual visitants. In the
belief of such visions the Covenanters became strong to suffer and
endure. Quite another use of the Psalm was as a proof of the fixity of
the earth, as against the Copernican theory that the earth, not the
sun, moved.


_Psalm 95_ was the battle cry of the Templars during the Crusades,
sung as they marched to fight the Saracens. It was used in the more
{503} peaceful campaign of missions. Schwartz, the greatest Danish
missionary to India, inscribed lines 11 and 12 on the front of a
church which he built in South India before the end of the eighteenth
century.


_Psalms 96, 103, 146, 147_, are recommended by William Law as setting
forth wonderfully "the glory of God," so that they may always be
profitably used for devotion.


_Psalm 100_ gives the name to the familiar tune of "Old Hundred,"
which was the tune to which the Scottish version of Psalm 100 was
sung. Edward Fitzgerald chose lines 2 and 3 to be put on his tomb.


_Psalm 103_ was chanted by the Protestants of Scotland at the
communion. It is one of the most beautiful of Psalms.


_Psalm 104_ is one of the fine nature Psalms, the most elaborate of
the group, which includes Psalms 8,19,29. It has had some curious
uses, as when, in the Middle Ages, men opposed the theory of the
motion of the sun with lines 11 and 12 and explained earthquakes from
lines 57 and 58; when the tail of Leviathan is scorched by the sun, he
seeks to seize it, and his movements shake the earth. But a great
scientist, Humboldt, wrote, "The 104th Psalm may be said to present a
picture of the entire cosmos . . . We are astonished to see, within
the compass of a poem of such small dimension, the universe, the
heavens and the earth, thus drawn with a few grand strokes."


_Psalm 105_. Lines 1 and 2 of this Psalm are inscribed on the pulpit
in which Baxter, the great Puritan divine, preached. "He was one of
the greatest of preachers, patient alike under the lifelong pains of
disease and thirty years of almost incessant persecution. He so
transformed his parish of Kidderminster that on the Lord's day there
was no disorder to be seen in the streets; but you might hear a
hundred families singing psalms, and repeating sermons as you passed
through them."

_Psalm 107_. One of the earliest Scottish reformers, Wishart, was a
preacher of remarkable power. At one time, hearing that {504} the
plague had appeared in Dundee, he hastened there, and preached his
first sermon in one of the gates of the city. Its text was from Psalm
107: "He sent his word, and healed them." Alexander Duff was the first
Scotch missionary to India. On his way out, in 1830, the ship in which
he sailed was wrecked at the Cape of Good Hope. The passengers and
crew escaped to a small island, but all their possessions were lost.
Duff's Bible and Book of Psalms were among the few things that drifted
ashore; and, while passengers and crew kneeled on the sand, Duff read
Psalm 107. It is said that the loss of all things except the Word of
God made a profound impression on Duff, who was for many years a most
devoted and valuable worker in India.


_Psalm 114_ is used in Dante's Divine Comedy, where he gives a picture
of a boat, on which are seen a hundred spirits, singing together Psalm
114. (_Purgatorio_, Canto II. 11 40ff.) Milton translated this Psalm
into verse when a student at Cambridge, at the age of 15.


_Psalm 116_. At the famous relief of Lucknow in the Indian Mutiny, a
soldier known as "Quaker Wallace" went into the fight quoting the
Scotch version of this Psalm. Lines 27 and 28 were chosen as one of
the texts from which Bernard preached the Crusade.


_Psalm 117_. The shortest Psalm. This is the Psalm which Cromwell sung
on the battlefield after his victory at the battle of Worcester.


_Psalm 118_. Luther said of it, "This is my Psalm, my chosen Psalm. I
love them all; I love all Scripture; . . . But this Psalm is nearest
my heart, and I have a familiar right to call it mine. It has saved me
from many a passing danger, from which not emperor nor kings nor sages
nor saints could have saved me. It is my friend; dearer to me than all
the honors and power of the earth." Curiously enough, it was also the
favorite Psalm of the emperor of the time, Charles V. This Psalm was
sung by the soldiers of the Prince of Orange, King William, when he
landed in England. It was sung as they stood upon the beach, and thus
the landing was made a religious service. In the words of lines 45 and
46 Queen Elizabeth expressed her relief from the feeling of danger, at
the news of the death of Queen {505} Mary, her bitter enemy. When
Charlemagne entered Rome he was hailed by the people with lines 51 and
52. So all through Christian history the Psalm has lent itself to use
as celebrating triumph and success.


_Psalm 119_ is an alphabetic Psalm, in sections consisting of eight
couplets, and each couplet of the same section beginning with the same
letter. The sections follow in the order of the Hebrew alphabet. It is
the most elaborate alphabetic Psalm, there being several others where
each verse begins with a successive letter. It is also the longest
Psalm in the book. Still another peculiarity is that every verse
contains a reference to the law of God. It is a Psalm greatly loved by
many people. William Wilberforce, the great opponent of slavery, said
at one specially busy time that he found great comfort in repeating
the 119th Psalm. Ruskin, who learned it in his boyhood, later writing
of it, notes how the sense of delight in the law of God runs through
it all. Henry Martyn committed it to memory. David Livingstone learned
it in Sunday school at the age of nine. The names of those who have
found delight in this Psalm would make a very long list and be
representative of many different vocations.


_Psalm 121_. This Psalm was read by David Livingstone with his family
on the morning when he started for his first mission tour to Africa. A
later missionary, James Harrington, on his journey into Africa,
repeated this, which he called his "Traveling" Psalm, every morning.


_Psalm 122_. James Hogg, the Scottish poet, is said to have learned
this Psalm before he knew his letters. The Bible was his only book in
boyhood. This Psalm was used in the Huguenot wars as the Huguenot's
chant of victory after battle.


_Psalm 126_. Robert Estienne, a French printer of the Reformation
time, who was very influential in giving the Bible to the people, says
that often in his controversies he found strength in this Psalm.


_Psalm 130_. One of Luther's best known German hymns is founded on
this Psalm--
  "Aus tiefer Noth schrel Ich zu dir."

{506}

Beza died repeating lines 5 and 6, and it was one of the sustaining
influences of Bunyan in his spiritual struggles with himself.


_Psalm 136_. Milton's hymn, written when a student at Cambridge, at
the age of 15, is founded on Psalm 136--

  "Let us with a gladsome mind
  Praise the Lord for he is kind,
  For his mercies aye endure,
  Ever faithful, ever sure."


_Psalm 144_ was used by Bernard as a text from which to preach a
crusade to win Jerusalem from the Saracens. Lines 10 and 11 have been
used, both in England and in France, as a motto on the face of
sundials. "Man is like to vanity. His days are as a shadow that
passeth away."


_Psalm 145_ is the base of Gerhardt's hymn--

  "I who so oft in deep distress."

Milton has paraphrased it in _Paradise Lost_, Book XII, 11, 561-6,
beginning--

  "Henceforth I learn, that to obey is best."

Augustine's _Confessions_ begins with lines 5 and 6 of Psalm 145. Carey,
who was not only a great missionary, but a great linguist and a great
botanist, prefixed Psalm 145, lines 19 and 20, to his edition of
Roxburgh's _Flora Indica_. Lines 25 and 26 are inscribed in Greek over
the portal of the Mohammedan mosque at Damascus; a relic of the time,
thirteen hundred years ago, when it was a Christian church. William
Law chose this Psalm for a morning hymn.


_Psalm 147_. "Afflavit Deus," the motto on the coins struck in England
to commemorate the victory over the Spanish Armada was taken from the
lines: "He sendeth out his word and melteth them: He causeth his wind
to blow, and the waters flow."

{507}

_Psalm 148_. St. Francis' famous Canticle of the Sun is founded on
this Psalm.


_Psalm 150_. This final Psalm was a sort of doxology, written to close
the book of Psalms. It expresses what is the central thought of the
book--praise to God. The Benedictine Monks in the Middle Ages were
accustomed to sing this Psalm during the casting of their bells, while
the metal was cooling. Two missionaries to the Slavs in Eastern Europe
wished to construct an alphabet and translate the Bible into the
Slavic language. It was referred to Pope John in 879 A.D. He
sanctioned it on the basis of the last two lines of the Psalms. The
alphabet was made, and is the basis of that used by the Russian,
Bulgarian, Roumanian and other Slavonic languages to this day; while
the translation is the basis of that used by the Russian church.

{508}

{509}

GENERAL INDEX

The letter "f" annexed to page number signifies and _following page_:
"ff," and _following pages_.

  Aaron, II.146ff
  Abanah, III.144, 493
  Abed-nego, III.184f, 190ff
  Abel, III.22f
  Abel-beth-maacah, III.408
  Abel-main, III.253
  Abel-meholah, III.124
  Abigail, I.418ff
  Abihail, III.64
  Abijah, daughter of Zechariah, III.299
  Abijah, king of Judah, III.242ff
  Abijah, son of Jeroboam, III.362ff
  Abijah, son of Samuel, II.350
  Abimelech, II.39f
  Abimelech, son of Gideon, II.332ff
  Abinadab, II.385, 389
  Abinoam, III.52, 54
  Abishai, II.407, 443
  Abner, II.393, 402, 407
  Abraham, story of, I.211ff; II.21-49
  -- sends for a wife for Isaac, I.211; II.49f
  -- at Haran, II.21
  -- the migration, II.21f
  -- and Lot, II.21, 22f
  -- and Sarai, II.21
  -- at Shechem, II.22
  -- the capture of Lot and rescue by, II.25ff
  -- God's covenant with, II.27f
  -- receives a new name, II.28f
  -- birth of Isaac, II.36
  -- the testing of, II.41ff
  -- death of Sarah, his wife, II.45f
  -- death of, II.59
  Absalom, I.167ff; II.443ff
  Achaia, IV.411, 418
  Achan, II.294, 296f
  Achor, valley of, II.297
  Acts, IV.482
  Adam, III.19ff, 22
  -- and Eve, story of, 19ff
  Adida, III.464
  Adoniram, II.458
  Adoni-zedek, II.305
  Adora, III.467
  Adoram, III.239
  Adramyttium, IV.469
  Adriatic Sea, IV.466, 473
  Adullam, cave of, II.437f
  Aegean Sea, IV.496
  Aenon, IV.149
  Agabus, IV.430
  Agag, II.370, 375
  Agrippa, IV.455ff, 497
  Ahab, III.111, 113, 116ff, 123, 127ff, 157, 377ff, 395ff
  Ahasuerus, king of Persia, III.60ff, 487
  Ahaz, III.292, 293ff; V.266
  Ahaziah, king of Israel, III.265, 382ff
  Ahaziah, king of Judah, III.159ff, 269ff, 272, 396
  Ahijah, father of Baasha, III.130, 367
  Ahijah, the prophet, III.362ff, 368
  Ahimaaz, II.447f
  Ai, attack upon, II.294ff, 487
  Aijalon, III.295
  Alcimus, III.448
  Alexander, IV.421
  Alexander the Great, III.418f, 452
  Alexandria, IV.469
  Almug, II.482, 498
  Alphabet, a Bible, I.25
  Amalek, II.197ff, 315, 370ff
  Amalekites, II.324, 370f, 425f
  Amariah, the chief priest, III.257
  Amasa, III.294
  Amaziah, king of Judah, III.281ff, 401
  Amaziah, priest of Bethel, V.355f
  Amittai, III.165
  Ammon, II.254,315; III.84, 258f, 292
  Ammonites, III.219                         {510}
  Amon, king of Judah, III.319, 322
  Amon, governor of the city, III.380
  Amorites, II.254, 295, 301, 306, 319
  Amos, prophecies of, V.354ff
  Amoz, III.313
  Amphipolis, IV.403
  Anak, children of, II.243f
  Ananias, the high priest, IV.448
  Ananias and Sapphira, IV.335f
  Ananias of Damascus, IV.371f
  Ancient Mariner, I.299
  Andrew, IV.74f, 94ff, 125, 147, 243
  Angel of the Lord, II.319ff, 494
  Animals, Bible sayings about, I.303f
  Annas, IV.268, 332, 492
  Antioch, III.437,452; IV.375f, 391, 412
  Antioch of Pisidia, IV.380, 387
  Antiochus IV, III.418ff, 460
  Antiochus V, III.468, 476
  Antipatris, IV.447
  Aphek, III.162
  Apocalypse, V.456ff
  Apocrypha, III.80, 320, 329, 418, 489
  Apollonia, IV.403
  Apollonius, III.431, 452ff
  Apollos, IV.418
  Aquila, IV,408ff
  Arabah, sea of, III.401
  Arabia, V.350
  Arabians, III.256, 267
  Araunah, the Jebusite, II.441f, 461
  Arbela, III.448
  Archelaus, IV.46
  Areopagus, IV.407
  Argob, III.407
  Arieh, III.407
  Arioch, III.186ff
  Aristarchus, IV.421,469
  Ark, building of, III.24f
  Ark of bulrushes, Moses in, II.138
  Ark of covenant, II.285ff, 288f, 455
  Armor, II.497
  Arphaxad, III.80
  Artaxerxes, the king, III.214, 222, 494
  Arvad, V.349
  Arza, III.370
  Asa, III.247ff, 367; V.321
  Asaph, the seer, III.302
  Ascension of Jesus, IV.310f
  Asenath, II.107f
  Ashdod, III.288; V.359
  Ashdodites, III.219
  Asherah, II.494; III.119, 250, 399, 490
  Asherim, III.247, 279, 307,364, 495
  Asheroth, III.257, 317, 495
  Ashkelon, III.174, 496
  Ashpenaz, III.183
  Ass, Baalam and the, II.259ff
  Asshur, III.81, 84f, 103; V.350
  Assos, IV.425
  Assyria, III.293, 495; V.273,364ff
  Assyrians, III.84, 90, 92, 404, 408
  Atad, II.131
  Athaliah, III.255, 266, 269, 271ff, 278
  Athenobius, III.476
  Athens, IV.404
  Attalia, IV.387
  Augustus, Roman emperor, IV.37
  Autumn, I.55
  Azaliah, III.324
  Azariah, priest of the house of Zadok, III.311
  Azariah, priest in the reign of Uzziah, III.291
  Azariah, son of Hoshaiah, V.325
  Azariah, son of Johanan, III.294
  Azariah, son of Oded, III.248
  Azariah (Abed-nego), III.184f,427
  Azotus, III.450, 455f, 480, 496
  Azrikan, III.294
  Azubah, III.265

  Baal, II.323, 494;
        III.276, 293, 326, 382, 387, 397f, 490; V.304
  -- prophets of, III.111, 116ff
  Baalim, V.365
  Baalis, V.319
  Baal-zebub, god of Ekron, III.382ff
  Baasha, III.130, 158, 247, 250f, 368f, 373; V.321
  Babel, tower of, III.32
  Baby hid in a basket, I.117
  Babylon, III.63, 186ff, 210, 319
  Bacchides, III.448ff
  Balaam, II.255ff

{511}

  Balak, son of Zippor, II.255ff
  Band of Mercy, I.292
  Baptism of Jesus, IV.65ff
  Barabbas, IV.276
  Barak, III.51ff
  Bar-Jesus, IV.379
  Barnabas, IV.375f, 384f, 395ff
  Bartholomew, IV.95
  Bartimaeus, the blind, IV.221
  Baruch, V.305ff, 326, 331
  Bascama, III.467
  Bashan, II.255; V.349, 359, 386
  Basket, baby hid in, I.117
  Battle with the Five Kings, II.305ff
  Bear, V.191
  Beating out wheat in the wine press, II.493
  Beatitudes, I.130; IV.105f
  Bectileth, III.81
  Bedtime Stories, I.245-304
  Beelzebub, IV.l71
  Beer-sheba, II.40, 42, 123, 456, 488;
              III.123, 257, 305, 326
  Belshazzar, III.201ff, 211
  Belteshazzar, III.184, 188, 197f
  Ben-hadad, king of Syria, III.111, 152, 250f, 399, 400
  Ben-hail, III.256
  Benjamin, I.185; II.91, 111, 114
  Beracah, III.262
  Berea, III.449
  Berechiah, III.294
  Bernice, IV.455ff
  Beroea, IV.403f
  Bethany, I.218; IV.215, 229, 233, 237, 313
  Beth-aven, II.361, 367
  Beth-dagon, III.456
  Bethel, II.22, 67f, 87f, 298f, 349, 487;
          III.52, 130, 246, 326f, 354, 495; V.355, 360f
  Bethesda, pool of, IV.167,489
  Beth-horon, II.306; III.285, 431f, 444, 496
  Bethlehem, I.139, 151, 163, 229, 245;
             II.382, 400, 402, 438; III.35; IV.37f, 41, 45
  Bethlehem-judah, III.35
  Beth-peor, II.273f
  Bethphage, IV.233
  Bethsaida, IV.77
  Beth-shan, II.381; III.460
  Beth-shemesh, III.286, 295
  Bethsura, III.437, 439, 459, 475, 496
  Bethuel, II.50ff
  Bethulia, III.80ff, 489
  Bethzacharias, III.439f
  Betrayal of Jesus, IV.267
  Bible Primer, I.25
  Bidkar, III.160
  Bigthan, III.64, 70
  Bildad, the Shuhite, V.184, 189, 196, 199, 204; 207, 213, 232
  Bilhah, II.91
  Birth of Ishmael, II.28
  Birthright, II.60ff, 491
  Bithynia, IV.395
  Boaz, II.462; III.35ff
  Boy who came when he was called, I.132
  Boy who was raised from the dead, I.193
  Brave Women, Tales of, III.33ff
  Brazen serpent, II.250f; III.299
  Brothers of the air and fields, I.292ff
  Browning, I.151
  Burning bush, II.142

  Caesar, IV.455, 462
  Caesarea, IV.430, 447,452, 455
  Caesarea Philippi, IV.178, 489
  Caiaphas, IV.269, 332, 492
  Cain, III.22f
  Caleb, II.244, 247, 418; III.427
  Calf, golden, II.204ff
  Cana of Galilee, IV.78,92
  Canaan, land of, II.25, 243, 277, 487
  Candace, queen, IV.345,348
  Canneh, V.350
  Capernaum, IV.92, 121, 125ff
  Caravan, II.492
  Carmel, III.111, 119, 122, 141, 490; V.386
  Carmel in Judah, II.418f
  Cenchreae, IV.412
  Cendebaeus, III.479f
  Cephas, IV.77
  Chaldeans, III.183ff, 351, 494; V.309ff, 322, 331f
  Cherith, brook, III.111, 114, 490

  {512}

  Cherubim, III.21
  Children in the lands of the Bible, I.217
  Chilion, III.35f
  Chilmad, V.350
  Chios, IV.425
  Christians, first called so at Antioch, IV.375
  Christmas, story of the first, I.245
  Cilicia, II1.81; IV.390, 395
  Clauda, IV.470
  Claudius, IV.408
  Cleopas, IV.301
  Cnidus, IV.469
  Coelesyria, III.452
  Coleridge, I.299
  Colossians, epistle to, V.452f
  Commandments, the ten, II.202f
  - the greatest, IV.240f
  Coniah, son of Jehoiakim, V.309
  Corinth, IV.408, 418
  Corinthians, first epistle to, V.425, 438, 440, 443, 448, 449ff
  -- second epistle to, V.451f
  Cornelius, IV.353ff
  Cos, IV.429
  Council at Jerusalem, IV.388ff
  Covenant, making of, II.27
  Cowper, I.296f
  Creation, story of the, III.15ff
  Crete, III.452; IV.462, 470, 498
  Crispus, IV.411
  Crucifixion of Jesus, IV.281ff, 493
  Cubit, II.499
  Cushite, II.447ff
  Cydnus, river, IV.367
  Cyprus, IV.379, 395, 429f, 495
  Cyrus, the Persian, III.209

  Dagon, III.181, 494
  Dalmanutha, IV.176
  Damaris, IV.408
  Damascus, II.26, 488; III.l11, 124, 144, 250, 293, 295; IV.371f; V.350
  Dan, place, II.26, 488; III.253, 305, 495
  Dan, tribe of, III.172
  Daniel, III.427
  Daniel, story of:
  -- early life, III.183f
  -- interprets king's dreams, III.185ff, 196ff
  Daniel and his three friends in the fiery furnace, II1.190ff
  -- reads the handwriting on the wall, III.20lff
  -- in lions' den, III.206ff
  Darius, the Mede, III.206ff, 419
  David, I.225, 229; III.48, 427
  David, city of, III.421
  David, story of:
  -- secretly anointed by Samuel, II.382ff
  -- and Goliath, II.386ff
  -- and Jonathan, II.399ff
  -- an outlaw, II.406ff
  -- pursued by Saul, II.411ff
  -- adventure in the wilderness, II.417ff
  -- becomes king, II.424ff
  -- rebuked by Nathan, II.430ff
  -- and his three brave soldiers, II.438
  -- buys threshing floor, II.438ff
  -- and his son Absalom, II.443ff
  -- death of, II.451
  David, stories of:
  -- the shepherd boy who killed a giant, I.139ff
  -- and King Saul, I.151
  -- an outlaw, I.155
  -- and Jonathan, I.156
  -- and his three brave soldiers, I.163ff
  -- and his son Absalom, I.167
  Dead Sea, I.226
  Death of firstborn in Egypt, II.177f
  Deborah, II.87
  Deborah and Jael, II1.51ff
  Decapolis, IV.140, 487
  Dedan, V.349f
  Dedication, feast of, IV.197ff
  Delaiah, III.226; V.308
  Delilah, III.176ff
  Demetrius, king, II1.448, 452, 468f
  Demetrius, silversmith, IV.418f
  Derbe, IV.386, 395
  Destruction of the cities of the plain, II.32
  Diana, IV.418ff
  Dionysius, IV.408
  Disciples, choosing of, IV.94f
  -- first, IV.74f
  -- list of, IV.96f

{513}

  Disobedience and consequences, story of, III.19ff
  Divining cups, II.117ff, 492
  Dok, III.481
  Dor, III.476
  Dorcas, IV.350
  Dotaea, III.82
  Dothan, II.95, 492; III.151
  Dove and the olive leaf, III.29ff
  Drusilla, IV.452
  Dura, III.190

  Easter day, the story of the first, I.265ff
  Eating with blood, II.368, 497
  Ebed-melech, Ethiopian, V.312, 317
  Eben-ezer, II.349
  Ecclesiastes, selections from, V.241-246
  Eden, II.19ff; V.350
  Edom, II.249, 482; III.255, 265, 267; V.370f
  Eglon, II.307, 315f, 493
  Egypt, II.96ff, 492; IV.45f; V.303, 322ff, 349, 359, 364ff
  Ehud, II.315ff
  Ekron, III.382, 456
  Elah, king, III.370
  Elah, vale of, II.389
  Elasa, III.449
  Elath, II.482; III.287
  Eleazer, son of Aaron, II.250
  Eleazer, who was called Avaran, III.423
  Elephants, fighting, III.439ff
  Eli, I.132ff; II.338ff
  Eliab, II.389f
  Eliakim, III.332, V.271ff
  Eliezer, II.27, 49f
  Elihu, V.213ff
  Elijah, III.1ll, 382ff, 396ff, 427; IV.180
  Elijah, stories of:
  -- lodges with the widow at Zarephath, III.114
  -- restores the widow's son to life, I.193ff; III.115
  -- and the prophets of Baal, III.ll9ff
  -- flees from Jezebel, III.123ff
  -- rebukes king and queen for evil deed, III.127ff
  -- translated in chariot of fire, III.130ff
  Elim, II.191
  Elimelech, III.35f
  Eliphaz, the Temanite, V.184f, 195f, 204f, 213, 232
  Elisha, III.111, 124f, 388f
  Elisha, stories of:
  -- takes up work of Elijah, III.130ff
  -- heals the waters, III.137
  -- helps a poor woman to pay a debt, III.137f
  -- restores Shunammite's son, III.138ff
  -- heals Naaman, the Syrian, I.206ff; III.143ff
  -- returns good for evil, III.148f
  -- at siege of Samaria, III.152ff
  -- anoints Jehu as king, III.157ff
  -- death of, III.162
  Elishama, the scribe, V.307
  Elkanah, III.294
  Elnathan, V.308
  Elymas, the sorcerer, IV.379
  Embalming, II.493
  Emmaus, III.432f; IV.301, 305, 493
  En-dor, witch of, II.376ff
  En-gedi, wilderness of, II.413
  Ephesians, epistle to, V.419ff, 443, 447f
  Ephesus, IV.412, 418ff, 425f
  Ephesus, church in, message to, V.460
  Ephraim, II.444; III.302; V.369ff
  -- hill country of, II.316, 493; III.52, 148, 245, 249, 257
  Ephrath, II.88
  Ephrathah, III.47
  Ephron, II.45f; III.246
  Epistles of Paul, introduction, V.413ff
  Erastus, IV.418
  Esarhaddon, V.276
  Esau, II.60ff, 76ff, V.370f
  Esdraelon, III.82
  Eshcol, II.243
  Esther, story of, III.60ff
  Etam, rock of, III.175
  Etham, II.179
  Ethiopia, III.60, 74
  Ethiopians, III.247ff, 267
  Euphrates, II.28, 455f, 488; III.328, 330
  Eupolemus, son of John, III.447

{514}

  Euraquilo, IV.470
  Eutychus, IV.425
  Eve, III.19ff, 22
  Evil-Merodach, III.346
  Ezekiel, prophecies of, V.344ff
  Ezion-geber, II.482, 498; III.265
  Ezra, the scribe, III.227ff

  Fair Havens, IV.462, 469
  Familiar spirit, II.376ff, 497
  Father, God is our, I.105
  Father, talking with our, I.101
  Felix, IV.445, 447ff, 497
  Festus, IV.452f, 455ff, 497
  Fight of the Five Kings against the Four, II.25
  Fish, IV.487
  Flood, story of the, III.24ff
  Forgiveness, stories of divine, IV.202ff
  Four thousand, feeding of the, IV.175f

  Gad, II.441f
  Gaius, IV.421
  Galatia, IV.395, 418, 495
  Galatians, epistle to, V.422f, 439
  Galeed, II.75, 492
  Galilee, III.408, 459, 460; IV.17f, 37, 46, 66, 78, 82, 190, 310
  -- sea of, I.94; IV.94, 307
  Gallio, IV.411
  Gamaliel, IV.437
  Gashmu, III.226
  Gath, II.386, 497; III.288
  Gauls, III.445
  Gaza (or Gazara), II.456; III.176, 181, 471f, 475f, 481f
  Geba, II.360, 365; III.82, 253, 489
  Gedaliah, V.318ff
  Gederoth, III.295
  Gehazi, III.111, 138ff
  Gemariah, V.308
  Gennesaret, water of, III.459
  Gentiles, III.419f, 431, 438, 464
  Gerar, III.248
  Gerasenes, country of, IV.136
  Gershom, II.142
  Geruth Chimham, V.322
  Geshem, III.218, 225
  Gethsemane, I.258; IV.264
  Gibbethon, III.367, 373
  Gibeah, II.359, 362, 375, 406, 412; III.242
  Gibeon, II.300, 305, 452; V.321f
  Gideon, II.319ff
  Gihon, III.319
  Gilboa, II.376, 425
  -- battle of, II.380f
  Glead, III.408
  -- land of, II.71, 272; III.467
  Gilgal, II.305f, 349, 361, 375; III.130, 448, 490; V.360
  Gimzo, III.295
  God is our Father, I.105
  God sees me, I.81
  God, what he gives, I.85
  God, what he wants me to do, I.82
  God's promises, II.27
  Golden calf, II.204ff
  Golden rule, IV.115
  Golgotha, IV.281
  Goliath, I.143ff, 151; II.386ff
  Gomorrah, the fate of Sodom and, II.32ff
  Gorgias, III.433
  Goshen, land of, II.123ff, 158, 493
  Gourd, Jonah and the, III.l71
  Growing grain, story of the, IV.134
  Gur-baal, III.288

  Habakkuk, prophecies of, V.392ff
  Hachilah, II.406, 412
  Hadassah, III.63
  Hagar, II.28, 36ff
  Haggai, prophecies of, V.398ff
  Ham, III.24, 26
  Haman, III.65ff
  Hamath, III.401
  Hanani, the seer, III.253, 256
  Hananiah, III.184f, 288, 427
  Handwriting on the wall, III.201ff
  Hannah, mother of Samuel, I.132
  Haran, II.21, 68, 487; V.350
  Harod, II.325
  Hathach, III.67f
  Hazael, III.124, 127, 159, 269, 398, 399f
  Hazor, III.51, 408, 459
  Heaven, the Kingdom of, I.201
  Heber, the Kenite, III.51ff

{515}

  Hebrews, epistle to, V.439
  Hebron, II, 25, 45f, 92, 243, 429f, 488, 493; III.176
  Hegai, III.63f
  Herod, IV.275f, 485f
  Herod Antipas, IV.150
  Herod the Great, IV.41f, 45f
  Herodias, IV.150f
  -- daughter of, IV.154
  Heshbon, II.254f
  Heth, II.45, 491
  Hezekiah, III.299ff; V.268rf
  Hilkiah, the high priest, III.323ff
  Hinnom, III.293, 317, 327
  Hiram, I.173; II.457ff,482f
  Hittites, II.45, 430
  Hobah, II.26, 488
  Holofernes, III.80ff, 92ff, 489
  Hophni, II.345f
  Hor, mount, II.250
  Horeb, II.470; III.111, 123
  Hosea, prophecies of, V.363ff
  Hoshea, son of Elah, III.408, 411ff
  Houses in the lands of the Bible, I.214
  Huldah, prophetess, III.325
  Hur, II.197

  Iconium, IV.385, 387, 395
  Idumaea, III.437, 439
  Ijon, III.253, 408
  Immortality, Paul on, V.449
  India, III.60, 74
  Isaac, III.88
  Isaac, story of:
  -- birth of, II.36
  -- attempted sacrifice by Abraham, II.4lf
  -- and Rebekah, II.49ff
  Isaiah, the prophet, III.313; IV.65,481
  -- call of, V.264ff
  -- prophecies of, V.266ff
  Ishmael, birth of, II.28, 36ff
  Ishmael, son of Nethaniah, V.319ff
  Ishmaelites, II.95f
  Israel, Jacob's name changed to, II.80
  Israel, kingdom of, III.353ff
  Issachar, III.57
  Ittai, the Gittite, II.443f

  Jabbok, II.80, 492
  Jabesh, II.381, 494
  Jabesh-gilead, II.359f, 381, 429
  Jabin, king of Canaanites, III. 51ff
  Jabneh, III.288
  Jachin, II.462
  Jacob, III.88; V.370f
  Jacob, story of:
  -- and Esau, II.60ff
  -- goes from home, II.67ff
  -- and Rachel, II.69ff
  -- sets out for his native land, II.7Iff
  -- wrestles with angel, II.76ff
  -- reconciled with Esau, II.83ff
  -- erects an altar at Bethel, II.87ff
  -- sends his sons to Egypt to buy corn, II.111ff
  -- in Egypt, I.190; II.123ff
  -- death and burial, I.190; II.129f
  Jacob and Joseph, I.177ff
  Jacob's well, Jesus at, IV.82ff
  Jael, III.51 ff
  Jahaziel, III.261
  Jairus, I.110; IV.141
  James, epistle of, V.426ff
  James, son of Alphaeus, IV.95ff
  James, son of Zebedee, IV.94ff, 125, 141, 185, 264, 307, 330ff, 359
  Jamnia, III.455, 479
  Janoah, III.408
  Japheth, III.24, 26
  Jarmuth, II.307, 493
  Jason, III.447; IV.403
  Javan, V.349f
  Jechiliah, III.287
  Jeconiah, king of Judah, III.63
  Jehiel, III.266
  Jehizkiah, III.294
  Jehoaddan, III.281
  Jehoahaz, king of Israel, III.285, 399
  Jehoahaz, king of Judah, III.332
  Jehoiachin, king of Judah, III.346f
  Jehoiada, III.271ff, 277ff
  Jehoiakim, king of Judah, III.183, 332, 335ff, 348; V.305, 309
  Jehonadab, III.397
  Jehoram, king of Judah, III.255, 266ff
  Jehoshaphat, III.158, 255ff, 266, 377ff, 388

{516}

  Jehosheba, III.27lf
  Jehovah-jireh, II.42
  Jehozabad, III.280
  Jehu, III.111, 124f, 157ff, 256, 270, 285, 395ff
  Jehu, the prophet, III.368f, 370
  Jehudi, V.306f
  Jeiel, the scribe, III.288
  Jemimah, V.232
  Jeremiah, III.329f, 335ff; IV.45
  Jeremiah, call of, V.298ff
  -- imprisonment, V.309ff
  -- prophecies of, V.30lff
  Jericho, II.287ff, 300, 305, 315; III.133, 134; IV.88, 221
  Jeroboam, king, III.130, 153, 237ff, 242ff, 327, 353ff,
                  368, 374, 413; V.355
  Jeroboam II, king, III.401
  Jerubbaal, II.324f, 332
  Jerusalem, I.218, 251;
             II.455, 461, 470, 478, 483, 493;
             III.161, 183, 201, 212, 217f, 231, 237, 240, 249, 257,
             262f, 269f, 277, 281, 286f, 311, 33lf, 348ff, 418ff, 443,
             449,459, 463, 472, 481;
             IV.17, 20, 41, 49, 65, 70, 79, 88, 179, 190, 233f, 310,
             326, 344, 388;
             V.344
  Jerusalem, New, I.223
  Jerushah, daughter of Zadok, III.292
  Jeshanah, III.246
  Jesse, II.385, 389; III.48
  Jesus and his friends, I.86
  -- had no home, I.89
  -- the people loved, I.93
  -- boyhood of, I.97
  -- and sick people, I.98
  -- what he said about birds and flowers, I.106
  -- what he said about trees, I.109
  -- and the little girl, I.110
  -- some things which he taught, I.130
  -- boyhood of, I.217
  -- infancy, I.245ff
  -- triumphant entry into Jerusalem, I.25lff
  -- how he gave his life for the world, I.257
  -- crucifixion of, I.258
  -- resurrection of, I.266ff
  Jesus, life of the Lord:
  -- nativity, IV.37f
  Jesus, wise man's visit, IV.41f
  -- in Egypt, IV.45f
  -- boyhood of, IV.49ff
  -- baptism of, IV.65ff
  -- temptation of, IV.70f
  -- first disciples of, IV.74f
  -- first miracle of, IV.78
  -- at the passover, IV.79ff
  -- at Jacob's well, IV.82ff
  -- choosing of twelve disciples, IV.94f
  -- sermon on the mount, IV.105ff
  -- heals Roman captain's servant, IV.12lf
  -- at Capernaum, IV.125ff
  -- raises widow's son from the dead, IV.130
  -- stills the storm, IV.136ff
  -- Jairus' daughter brought to life, IV.14lff
  -- feeding of the multitude, IV.144ff
  -- John the Baptist and, IV, 149ff
  -- Sunday controversy, IV.167ff
  -- woman anoints his feet, IV.169f
  -- traveled in the north, IV,172ff
  -- feeds the four thousand, IV.175f
  -- transfiguration, IV.180
  -- and little children, IV.188f
  -- teaches truth and freedom, IV.190ff
  -- feast of dedication, IV.197ff
  -- and the rich young man, IV.21lf
  -- raises Lazarus from the dead, IV.215ff
  -- Zacchaeus the publican, IV.22lf
  -- Bethany, supper at, IV.229f
  -- Jerusalem, triumphant entry into, IV.233f
  -- drives the money changers from the temple, IV.237
  -- the last supper, IV.248ff
  -- Gethsemane, agony in, IV.264
  -- the betrayal, IV.267
  -- trial before Annas, IV.268
  -- before Caiaphas, IV, 269f
  -- before Jewish court, IV.270f
  -- before Pilate, IV.272f
  -- before Herod, IV.275f
  -- Pilate and, IV.276ff
  -- the crucifixion of, IV.28lff
  -- burial of, IV.286f
  -- resurrection of, IV.297f
  - on the way to Emmaus, IV.30lf

{517}

  Jesus, ascension of, IV.310f
  Jethro, II.142
  Jezaniah, son of Hoshaiah, V.322
  Jezebel, III.111, 113, 119, 123ff, 128ff, l58, 161f, 373
  Jezreel, II.324, 494; III.122, 127, 158f, 396, 490
  Joah, V.271ff
  Joakim, III.104
  Joash, king of Israel, III.162, 281, 285, 400
  Joash, king of Judah, III.271, 277ff, 380
  Joash, the Abiezrite, II.320, 329, 331
  Job, selections from, V.177-232
  Joel, II.350
  Joel, prophecies of, V.374ff
  Johanan, son of Kareah, V.319ff
  John, the Baptist, IV.65ff, 74, 149ff, 485
  John, the disciple, IV.74f, 95ff, 123, 141, 185, 259, 264
  -- epistles of, V.435ff
  John, son of Simon, III.472, 480
  John Gaddis, III.422f
  Jonah, story of, III.165ff, 401
  Jonathan, II.360, 362f, 380, 393, 399ff, 412, 426
  Jonathan, Apphus, III.423, 450ff
  Jonathan, son of Absalom, III.464ff
  Jonathan, son of Kareah, V.319
  Jonathan and David, I.156ff; II.393f, 399ff
  Joppa, III.165, 455, 464, 475ff; IV.350, 353
  Joram, king of Israel, III.111, 157f, 387ff
  Jordan, I.224f; II.285ff, III.133 , 134, 144, 154, 452; IV.66
  -- plain of, II.22, 466, 487
  Joseph, III.427
  Joseph, story of:
  -- favorite of his father, I.177; II.91
  -- dreams of supremacy in family; is hated
     by brethren and sold into slavery, I.181; II.95f
  -- in Egypt, II.96f
  -- interprets dreams of Pharaoh's officers, II.99ff
  -- interprets the dream of Pharaoh, I.18If; II.104ff
  -- made prime minister, I.185; II.107
  -- and his brethren, I.185; II.ll1ff
  -- death and burial, II.132
  Joseph, father of Jesus, I.217; IV.37f, 45f, 50
  Joseph of Arimathaea, IV.286
  Josephus, III.234
  Joshua, II.208, 247, 268; III.231, 427
  Joshua, story of:
  -- spies are sent to Jericho, II.277ff
  -- crosses the Jordan, II.285ff
  -- capture of Jericho, II.287ff
  -- attack upon Ai, II.294ff
  -- submission of Gibeon, II.300ff
  -- battle with the five kings, II.305ff
  -- last addresses, II.308ff
  -- death, II.312
  Joshua, high priest, V.398f
  Josiah, king of Judah, III.322, 323ff
  Jotham, II.333; III.292
  Judah, II.115; III.237ff, 421f; V.350
  Judas, called Barsabbas, IV.390
  Judas, son of Simon, III.480
  Judas Isacariot, IV.95ff, 229, 248ff, 267
  Judas Maccabaeus, III.423, 427, 428ff
  Judges, the, II.315-337
  Judith, story of, III.80ff
  Julius, IV.469
  Juniper tree, Elijah and, III.123
  Jupiter, IV.386

  Kadesh, II.248f
  Kedar, V.350
  Kedesh, III.52, 408, 459
  Kedesh-naphtali, III.52
  Kenites, III.52
  Keren-happuch, V.232
  Keziah, V.232
  Kidron, brook, III.250, 300, 306, 326f
  -- city, III.479, 480
  "King of the Jews," IV.276f, 282
  Kingdom of God, IV.23, 79f, 134, 489
  Kingdom of the North, III.353ff
  Kingdom of the South, III.237ff
  Kings, the five, II.488
  Kings, table of, III.236
  Kinsman, III.487
  Kir-hareseth, III.392
  Kiriath-huzoth, II.261
  Kish, II.352

{518}

  Kishon, brook, III.122
  Kishon, the river, III.51f

  Laban, II.51ff, 68, 70ff; III.88
  Lachish, II.307, 493; III.286, 312; V.274
  Lands of the Bible, how people travel in, I.208ff
  Laodicea, church in, message to, V.464ff
  Lappidoth, III.52
  Lasea, IV.469
  Lazarus, IV.215ff, 229
  Leah, II.71; III.47
  Lebanon, II.458, 482
  -- cedars of, II.334, 456; III.281
  Legion, IV.139
  Lehi, III.175
  Leprosy, I.206; III.153, 287, 291; IV.126, 489
  -- Naaman's, III.143f
  Levi, II.138
  Levi, son of Alphaeus, IV.94
  Levites, II.285; III.228f, 231f, 256f, 277f, 299f, 307, 329
  Libnah, III.267; V.274
  Little brothers of the air and field, I.292ff
  Lord and Job, V.181ff, 222ff
  Lot, II.21, 26, 32f
  Lot's wife, II.36
  Lud, V.349
  Luz, II.87
  Lycaonia, IV.386
  Lydda, IV.350
  Lydia, IV.396
  Lysias, III.437
  Lystra, IV.386f, 392, 395

  Maacah, III.242, 250
  Maaseiah, III.288
  Maaseiah, son of Ahaz, III.294
  Maccabaeus, III.418, 423, 427ff
  Maccabees, tales of, III.417ff
  Macedonia, IV.396, 422f, 495
  "Macedonian cry," IV.396
  Machpelah, cave of, II.45f, 59, 129f, 491
  Mahanaim, II.76
  Mahlon, III.35f
  Maid, little captive, I.205ff
  Makkedah, II.306f
  Malachi, prophecies of, V.408f
  Malchus, IV.267
  Malta, IV.474f
  Mamre, oak of, II.25, 29, 487
  Manasseh, III.249, 302, 306, 308
  Manasseh, king of Judah, III.314, 317ff, 322, 327
  Manasseh, son of Joseph, II.108
  Manasses, husband of Judith, III.86, 91
  Manna and quails, II.192ff
  Maon, wilderness of, II.413, 418
  Mara, III.39
  Marah, II.l91
  Mareshah, III.248
  Mark, John, IV.360, 380, 395
  Market of Appius, IV.477
  Martha, IV.215ff, 229
  Martyr, the first, IV.339ff
  Mary, mother of Jesus, IV.37f, 42
  Mary, mother of Joses, IV.286
  Mary, sister of Martha, IV.215ff, 229
  Mary, wife of Cleopas, IV.285
  Mary Magdalene, I.267; IV.285, 286, 297f
  Mattan, priest of Baal, III.276.
  Mattaniah, III.347
  Mattathias, son of Absalom, III.459
  Mattathias, son of John, III.418, 422ff
  Mattathias, son of Simon, III.481
  Matthew, IV.95
  Matthias, IV.325
  Medes, III.80, 494
  Medes and Persians, laws of, III.62, 207f
  Media, III.60, 62
  Mediterranean Sea, IV.17
  Megiddo, III.161, 323, 328, 331f
  Mehetabel, III.226
  Melchizedek, king of Salem, II.26, 488
  Memory verses, I.491ff; II.503ff; III.501ff; IV.50lff
  Menahem, son of Jabesh, III.403f
  Mercury, IV.386
  Meribah, II.249
  Merodach-baladan, V.268
  Mesaloth, III.448
  Mesha, king of Moab, III.387f
  Meshach, III.184, 190ff
  Meshech, V.349
  Meshullam, III.324
  Mesopotamia, II.50, 491

{519}

  Messenger, visit of, II.29ff
  Messiah, IV.20, 86
  Meunim, III.288
  Micah, prophecies of, V.367ff
  Micaiah, V.306
  Micaiah, son of Imlah, III.256, 378f
  Michael, III.266
  Michmash, II.361, 365, 497
  Midian, II.255ff, 319, 330
  Midianites, II.319f, 324
  Migdol, V.327
  Migration, II.21
  Milcah, II.50f, 55
  Miletus, IV.425f
  Millo, III.311
  Miracles, New Testament:
  -- water changed to wine, IV.78
  -- king's officer's son healed, IV.92f
  -- Roman captain's servant healed, IV.121f
  -- Simon's wife's mother healed, IV.126
  -- leper at Capernaum healed, IV.126f
  -- man sick of palsy healed, IV.127f
  -- two blind men healed, IV.128
  -- widow's son raised from dead, IV.130
  -- storm stilled, IV.136
  -- man of Gadara with unclean spirit healed, IV. 139f
  -- woman long time invalid healed, IV.140
  -- daughter of Jairus raised from dead, IV.141f
  -- multitude, feeding of, IV.144ff
  -- man at pool of Bethesda healed, IV.167f
  -- man with withered hand healed, IV.169
  -- the demoniac blind and dumb healed, IV.170f
  -- daughter of Syrophoenician woman healed, IV.172
  -- deaf man healed, IV.175
  -- four thousand fed, IV.175f
  -- blind man at Bethsaida, IV.177
  -- boy with dumb spirit healed, IV.181f
  -- blind man at pool of Siloam, IV.197f
  -- raising of Lazarus, IV.215ff
  -- blind Bartimaeus given sight, IV.221
  -- lame and blind in the temple healed, VI.237
  -- Malchus healed, IV.267
  -- draught of fishes, IV.307f
  -- lame man healed, IV.330
  -- raising of Dorcas, IV.350
  Miracles, Old Testament:
  -- water from the rock, II.247ff
  -- the cruse of oil, III.114f
  -- widow's son restored to life, III.115
  -- waters healed by Elisha, III.137
  -- increase of oil for widow, III.137f
  -- the Shunammite boy brought to life, III.l38ff
  -- Naaman healed of leprosy, III.143ff
  -- Jonah saved from drowning, III.169
  -- children of Israel in the fiery furnace, III.190ff
  -- deliverance of Daniel, III.206ff
  Miriam, II.187, 248
  Mishael, III.185f, 427
  Mitylene, IV.425
  Mizpah, II.75, 349, 357, 494; III.253; V.319ff
  Mnason, IV.430
  Moab, II.255ff; III.35ff, 83, 258f, 487
  Moabites, II.316
  Modin, III.418, 422, 428, 450, 467f, 480, 496
  Molech, or Moloch, III.293, 327
  Money changers driven from the temple, IV.237
  Mordecai, III.60ff
  Moreh, II.325
  Moriah, mount, II.461
  Moses, IV.180
  Moses, story of:
  -- birth, I.117; II.137f
  -- in Midian, II.141f
  -- the call of God, II.142ff
  -- conflict with Pharaoh, II.149ff
  -- leads Israelites out of bondage, II.178f
  -- pursued by Egyptians, II.180ff
  -- wanderings in the wilderness, II.191ff
  -- at Sinai, II.201f
  -- in the wilderness, II.214ff
  -- march to the Promised Land, II.241ff
  -- death of, II.268ff
  Mount of Olives, I.218; IV.233, 264
  Multitude, feeding of, IV.144ff, 175f

{520}

  Murder, story of first, III.22f
  Mustard seed, story of, I.201f; IV.134f
  Myra, IV.462, 469
  Mysia, IV.395

  Naaman, I.205f; III.111, 143ff
  Nabal, II.418ff
  Naboth, III.111, 160f
  -- his vineyard, III.127ff
  Nadab, king, III.364, 367
  Nahash, II.359
  Nahor, II.50f
  Nahum, prophecies of, V.385ff
  Nain, IV.130
  Naomi, III.35ff
  Naphtali, III.52, 253
  Nathan, II.431ff; III.301
  Nathanael, IV.77
  Nativity of Jesus, IV.37f
  Nazareth, I.217; IV.18, 37, 45f, 49f
  Nazirite, III.178
  Neapolis, IV.392, 396
  Nebo, mount, II.268, 272
  Nebuchadnezzar, III.63, 80f, 93f, 183ff, 344, 346ff;
                  V.309, 314f, 330, 333, 346
  Nebuzaradan, III.351; V.317f, 321, 326
  Neco, king of Egypt, III.328, 332
  Nehemiah, royal cupbearer:
  -- asks to return to Jerusalem, III.212ff
  -- arrives at Jerusalem, III.217
  -- builds walls, III.217ff
  -- dedication of walls, III.231f
  Neighbor, who was the, I.279
  Nethanel, III.256
  New Testament, selections from, V.411ff
  Nicanor, III.443ff
  Nicodemus, IV.79
  Nimshi, III.124, 158, 159
  Nineveh, III.81, 165f, 493; V.385, 387f
  Noadiah, prophetess, III.227
  Noah, III.24ff
  Noph, V.327

  Obadiah, prince, III.111, 116ff, 256
  Obadiah, prophecies of, V.370f
  Obed, III.48
  Obed-edom, III.286
  Oded, III.249, 294
  Og, II.255, 268, 281, 301
  Oholiab, II.216, 219ff
  Olive leaf, the dove and, III.29ff
  Olives, mount of, I.218; IV.233, 264
  Omri, III.373f
  Ono, plain of, III.225
  Ophel, III.292, 319
  Ophir, II.482, 498; III.255, 265, 495
  Ophrah, II.323, 331f, 494
  Oreb, II.330
  Orion, V.191, 361
  Orpah, III.35ff
  Orthosia, III.479
  Ozias, III.80, 85ff

  Paddan-aram, II.67f, 84, 87, 492
  Palestine, III.418, 452
  -- in the days of Jesus, IV.17
  Palm Sunday, story of, I.251ff
  "Palm Tree of Deborah," III.51f
  Pamphylia, IV.380, 387, 395
  Paphos, IV.379f
  Parables:
  -- the good Samaritan, I.279ff; IV.88
  -- story of the sower, I.126; IV.133f
  -- growing grain, IV.134
  -- mustard seed, I.201f; IV.134f
  -- ungrateful servant, IV.186f
  -- good shepherd and the sheep, IV.200
  -- lost sheep, IV.202
  -- lost money, IV.202f
  -- prodigal son, IV.203f
  -- dishonest steward, IV.204f
  -- Dives and Lazarus, IV.206f
  -- poor man and the rich man, IV.206f
  -- man who made excuses, IV.207f
  -- foolish rich man, IV.212
  -- wicked husbandmen, IV.238f
  -- faithful servant, IV.244ff
  -- judgment of the King, IV.246ff
  Paran, wilderness of, II.242, 491
  Passover, feast of, I.251; III.302f, 329f;
                      IV.49f, 79ff, 229, 248f, 491
  -- institution of, II.173ff
  Patara, IV.429
  Pathros, V.327f

{521}

  Patriarchs, the, II.19-132
  Paul, the Apostle:
  -- summary of life, IV.367ff
  -- conversion, IV.37lff
  -- first missionary journey, IV.376ff
  -- second missionary journey, IV.392ff
  -- third missionary journey, IV.417ff
  -- at Jerusalem, IV.433ff
  -- examination before King Agrippa and Queen Bernice, IV.455ff
  -- voyage to Rome, IV.462ff
  -- shipwreck, IV.469ff
  -- at Malta, IV.474f
  -- at Rome, IV.478f
  -- appeals to Caesar, IV.452f
  -- riot at Ephesus, IV.418ff
  -- at Corinth, IV.408ff
  -- at Athens, IV.404ff
  -- in Macedonia, IV.403f
  -- in Galatia, IV.385
  -- in Cyprus, IV.376f
  -- at Antioch, IV.380ff
  Pekah, III.293, 407, 408; V.266
  Pekahiah, III.407
  Pentecost, day of, IV.325, 493
  Penuel, II.80, 492; III.353
  Perga, IV.380, 387
  Pergamum, church in, message to, V.461
  Persia, V.349
  Persians and Medes, laws of, III.62, 207f
  Peter, I.267; IV.74, 94, 95ff, 125, 141, 166, 178, 186, 250ff,
         264f, 270, 297f, 307f, 326ff, 336, 347f, 350, 353ff, 359f
  -- denies Christ, IV.270
  Pharaoh, I.181
  -- and Joseph, II.99ff, 104ff, 123ff
  -- and Moses, II.149ff
  Pharaoh Hophra, V.330
  Pharisees, IV.19, 65, 94, 176, 192f, 198ff, 234, 287, 442, 488
  Pharpar, III.144, 493
  Phicol, II.39f
  Philadelphia, church in, message to, V.463f
  Philip, III.419
  Philip, the disciple, IV.77, 95ff, 243, 254, 345f,348f
  Philip, the evangelist, IV.430
  Philippi, IV.396, 425
  Philistia, III.404, 408
  Philistines, I.140, 143; II.342ff, 36Of, 376, 380, 386ff, 399, 413,
               438, 455, 493; III.172, 175ff, 256, 267, 288, 295,
               299, 432f, 493
  Philippians, epistle to, V.420, 424, 453f
  Phinehas, II.345f; III.427
  Phoenicia, IV.388
  Phoenix, IV.462, 470
  Phrygia, IV.395, 418
  Pilate, IV.272ff, 491
  Pilgrims, I.270
  Pillar of fire, II.179
  Pillars of stone, II.69, 75, 492
  Pisgah, II.253, 263, 272
  Pitchers, II.329f, 494
  Plagues of Egypt:
  -- blood, II.155f
  -- frogs, II.156ff
  -- lice, 11.158
  -- flies, II.158f
  -- cattle disease, II.160
  -- boils, II.160f
  -- hail, II.166ff
  -- locusts, II.168f
  -- blackness, II.17lff
  -- death of firstborn, II.177f
  Pleiades, V.191, 361
  Poetry of the Bible, V.11ff
  Potiphar, II.96f
  Poti-phera, II.107f
  Pottage, II.60, 491
  "Potter and his clay," V.30lff
  Prayer, Lord's, IV.112
  Prayers for little children, I.319
  Priests, garments of, II.227ff
  Priscilla, IV.408ff
  Prophets, roll of, V.260
  -- selections from, V.263-409
  Proverbs, selections from, V.248-257
  Psalms, introduction to, V.17
  -- selections from, I.12lff; V.19-174
  -- Shepherd, I.289
  Ptolemais, III.460, 464; IV.430
  Ptolemy, king of Egypt, III.420
  Ptolemy, son of Abulus, III.481

{522}

  Publius, IV.477
  Purah, II.326f
  Purim, III.78f, 488
  Put, V.349
  Puteoli, IV.477

  Quails and manna, II.192ff

  Raamah, V.350
  Rabshakeh, V.271ff
  Rachel, II.69ff, 88; III.47
  Rahab, II.278ff, 292
  Rainbow in the sky, III.31
  Ramah, II.386, 494; III.52, 247, 250
  Rameses, II.137,493
  Ramoth-gilead, III.158f, 269, 377ff, 387
  Rebekah, II.50ff
  Red Sea, II.178f, 482, 498
  Rehoboam, III.237ff
  Remaliah, III.293, 407, 408; V.266f
  Rephaim, II.438
  Rephidim, II.197, 201
  Resurrection of Jesus, IV.297f
  Reuben, I.178; II.95, 112f
  Reuel, II.141
  Rezin, V.266
  Rhegium, IV.477
  Rhoda, IV.360
  Rhodes, IV.429
  Riblah, III.351; V.314
  Rich young man, story of, IV.211f
  Riddle, III.173f
  Rimmon, Il1.147, 493
  Rock, water from, II.247ff
  Romans, III.445
  Romans, epistle to, V.415ff, 419f, 422, 443, 444, 454f
  Rome, I.201; III.420, 447; IV.19, 462, 477f
  Ruskin, John, I.299f
  Ruth, I.229; III.35ff

  Sacrifices, II.491
  Sadducees, IV.65, 488
  Saint Francis of Assisi, I.292
  Salamis, IV.376, 379
  Salmone, IV.469
  Salt, valley of, III.282, 495
  Samaria, III.111, 116, 127, 152, 285, 293, 374, 380f, 382, 388f,
           395, 399, 402, 411, 431, 490; IV.82, 346f, 388, 488;
           V.320, 359
  Samaritan, good, I.279ff; IV.88
  -- woman, IV.82ff
  Samos, IV.425
  Samothrace, IV.396
  Samson, story of:
  -- slays a lion and makes a riddle, III.172ff
  -- burns a cornfield and slays his enemies, III.175f
  -- carries off gates of Gaza, III.176
  -- betrayed by Delilah, III.176ff
  -- his revenge and death, III.181ff
  Samuel, story of:
  -- and Eli, I.132ff; II.338ff
  -- the call of God, I.132ff; II.341f
  -- anoints Saul king, II.352ff
  -- and Saul, II.373ff, 379
  -- and David, II.382ff
  -- death of, II.376
  Sanballat, III.217f, 225
  Sapphira, IV.335f
  Sarai or Sarah, II.29, 36f, 45f
  Sardis, church in, message to, V.462f
  Satan, IV.72f
  -- and Job, V.181ff
  Saul, story of:
  -- anointed by Samuel, II.352ff
  -- proclaimed king, II.357f
  -- first battle, II.359f
  -- and Jonathan, II.362ff
  -- disobedience, II.370ff
  -- with witch of En-dor, II.376ff
  -- death at Gilboa, I.160; II.380f, 424
  -- and David, I.147ff; II.386ff
  -- jealous of David, II.396ff
  -- pursues David, II.411ff
  Scythopolis, III.82, 489
  Sea-shore, I.63
  Seir, children of, III.282
  -- mount, II.84, 492; III.258f
  Seleucia, IV.376, 379
  Sennacherib, III.299, 311ff, 315; V.271
  Sergius Paulus, IV.379
  Sermon on the mount, IV.105ff
  Seron, III.431f

{523}

  Serpent, brazen, II.25Of; III.299
  -- in the garden of Eden, III.19f
  Shadrach, III.184, 190ff
  Shallum, III.402f
  Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, III.411
  Shamgar, III.54, 488
  Shammah, II.385, 389
  Shaphan, the scribe, III.323f
  Shaphat, III.124, 125
  Sheba, II.498; V.350
  -- queen of, I.173; II.478f
  Shebna, V.27lff
  Shechem, II.22, 84, 92f, 332f, 487; III.238, 353; V.320
  Shekel, II.46, 491
  Shem, III.24, 26
  Shemaiah, III.226, 240
  Shemer, III.374
  Shephatiah, III.266
  Shepherd, the good, I.282; IV.200
  -- psalm, I.289
  Shilhi, III.265
  Shiloh, II.345f; III.362; V.320
  Shimeath, the Ammonitess, III.280
  Shimrith, the Moabitess, III.280
  Shinar, land of, III.32, 487
  Shishak, III.240
  Shittim, II.278, 285, 493
  Shunammite, III.138, 141, 143
  Shunem, III.111, 138, 490
  Shur, wilderness of, II.191
  Shushan, III.60ff, 212, 488, 494
  Sidon, IV.172, 462, 469
  Sihon, 11.253f, 268, 281, 301
  Silas, IV.390, 395, 399, 403f
  Siloam, pool of, IV.197f
  Simeon, I.186; II.113
  Simon, the sorcerer, IV.346f
  Simon, a tanner, IV.350
  Simon, Thassi, III.423, 427, 450, 455, 463ff
  Simon, the Zealot, IV.95ff
  Simon of Cyrene, IV.281
  Simon Peter, see Peter.
  Sin, wilderness of, II.192
  Sinai, wilderness of, II.201ff, 212, 242
  Sion, mount, III.438, 444
  Sisera, III.51ff
  Slime pits, II.25, 488
  Smyrna, church in, message to, V.46Of
  So, king of Egypt, III.411
  Soco, III.295
  Sodom, II.22, 23; 32ff
  Solomon, III.237f, 255
  Solomon, story of:
  -- dream of, I.170f; II.452f
  -- prosperity of, II.455ff
  -- treaty with Hiram, I.173f, II.457ff
  -- his temple, I.173; II.461ff
  -- his palace, II.469f
  -- dedication of the temple, II.470ff
  -- and queen of Sheba, I.173; II.478f
  -- greatness of his empire, II.48lff
  Solomon's temple, I.174
  Song of the Bow, II.426f
  Song of songs, selections from, V.235-239
  Song of the Well, II.253
  Songs, an old book of, I.121
  Sorek, III.176
  Sosthenes, IV.411
  South, the, II.22, 487
  Sower, story of, I.126; IV.133f
  Spain, III.445
  Spies, sending out of, by Moses, II.243ff
  Spring, I.51
  Stephen, IV.339ff
  Story of a good king, I.170
  Story of Palm Sunday, I.251ff
  Succoth, II.84, 466, 492
  Summer, I.52
  Summer room, II.315, 493
  Supper, the last, IV.248ff
  Sur, III.272
  Sycamore tree, IV.222
  Sychar, IV.82
  Symeon, called Niger, IV.379
  Syracuse, IV.477
  Syria, I.205; III.124, 143, 148f, 493; IV.390, 395, 425, 429; V.350
  Syrophoenician woman, IV.172, 489
  Syrtis, IV.465

  Tabernacle in the wilderness, II.217ff
  -- and furnishings, II.217ff
  -- tent, II.217ff

{524}

  Tabernacle, ark, II.220
  -- table, II.221
  -- candlestick, II.221
  -- altar of incense, II.222
  -- -- burnt offering, II.222
  -- court, II.225
  Tabernacles, feast of, IV.190
  Tabitha, IV.350
  Tabor, mount, III.52f
  Tahpanhes, V.326f
  Talking with our Father, I.101
  Tarshish, II.483; III.165, 171, 265, 493, 495; V.349f
  Tarsus, IV.367, 375
  Tebeth, III.64, 488
  Tekoa, III.261; V.354
  Temple, Solomon's, I.174
  Temptation of Jesus in the wilderness, IV.70f
  Teresh, III.64, 70
  Tertullus, IV.448
  Thaddaeus, IV.95ff
  Thanksgiving, the first, I.270
  Thebez, II.337
  Thessalonians, epistle to, V.423, 447
  Thessalonica, IV.403f
  Thomas, IV.95ff, 216, 254, 306f
  "Three Taverns," IV.477
  Thyatira, IV.396
  -- church in, message to, V.462
  Tiglath-pileser, III.295, 404, 408; V.267
  Timnah, III.172, 295, 493
  Timnath-serah, II.312
  Timothy, IV.395, 404, 411, 418
  -- first epistle to, V.444
  -- second epistle to, V.448
  Tiphsah, II.456
  Tirhakah, V.274
  Tirshatha, III.228
  Tirzah, III.364, 368ff, 403, 495
  Titus Justus, IV.411
  Tobiah, III.217f, 225
  Togarmah, V.349
  Topheth, III.327; V.304f
  Transfiguration of Jesus, IV.180
  Trees, what Jesus said about, I.109
  Tribute, question about, IV.240
  Triumph, song of, III.54ff
  Troas, IV.395f, 425, 495
  Trophimus, IV.433
  Tryphon, III.46Off
  Tubal, V.349
  "Twin Brothers," IV.477
  Tyre, II.457, 497; III.233; IV.172, 429, 430; V.346ff

  Ur of Chaldees, II.21, 27, 487
  Uriah, II.430ff
  Uriel, III.242
  Urijah, priest, III.295f
  Uz, V.181
  Uzziah, III.287ff; V.264

  "Valley of dry bones," V.352f
  Vashti, III.60If
  Vedan, V.350
  Vial, II.357, 494
  Vine, Jesus, the, IV.258f
  Vineyard, Naboth's, III.127ff
  -- parable of, Isaiah, V.280ff
  Vision of Peter, IV.353f, 357
  Visions, horsemen in the glen, V.402f
  -- City of Peace, V.403f
  -- golden candlestick, V.404
  -- flying book, V.405
  -- woman in the barrel, V.405f
  -- chariot of the four winds, V.406f
  -- of Heavenly City, V.476ff

  Water from the rock, II.247ff
  Widow, the poor, I.193
  Widow's mite, IV.243
  Winter, I.59
  Wise Men, I.249ff; IV.41f,485

  Zabad, III.280
  Zacchaeus, the publican, IV.221f
  Zadok, II.447f
  Zalmon, II.334f
  Zarephath, III.111, 114, 490
  Zebadiah, III.257
  Zebedee, IV.94
  Zebidah, III.344
  Zebulun, III.52, 306
  Zechariah, prince, III.256, 261, 266

{525}

  Zechariah, prophecies of, V.401
  Zedekiah, king of Judah, III.348ff; V.309ff, 330
  Zedekiah, son of Chenaanah, III.378, 380
  Zeeb, II.330
  Zemaraim, mount, III.242
  Zerah, III.248
  Zeresh, III.70ff
  Zeredah, II.466
  Zerubbabel, V.398f
  Zeruiah, II.443
  Zibiah, III.277
  Zichri, III.294
  Zidon, II.457, 497; III.114, 490; V.349
  Zimri, III.16l, 370, 373f
  Zion, II.470; V.373
  Ziph, wilderness of, II.406, 412
  Ziphites, II.406, 412
  Zipporah, II.141f
  Zoar, II.25,487
  Zophar, the Naamathite, V.184, 193, 196, 201, 204, 209, 213, 232


INDEX TO BIBLICAL PASSAGES

This index gives the pages of The Bible Story on which the
corresponding passages in the Bible may be found.

THE OLD TESTAMENT
  Genesis
    1-4,             III.15-23
    6-9,             III.24-31
    11:1-9,          III.32
    12-15,           II.21-28
    17-19,           II.28-36
    21-23,           II.36-46
    24,              II.49-59
    24:10ff,         I.211ff
    25:27-34,        II.60
    27-29,           II.61-71
    31:22-33:20,     II.71-84
    35,              II.87f
    37-50,           II.91-132

  Exodus
    1:8-15:21,       II.137-188
    2,               I.117f
    15:22-17:16,     II.191-197
    19-20,           II.201-204
    32,              II.204-212
    34,              II.212
    35-40,           II.214-237

  Numbers
    9:15-23,         II.241f
    10:11-13; 33-36, II.242
    13:1-14:9,       II.243-247
    20,              II.247-250
    21,              II.250-255
    22-24,           II.255-267

  Deuteronomy
    30:11-20,        II.271f
    31:1-8,          II.268f
    32:45-52,        II.272
    34,              II.272f

  Joshua
    1-4,             II.277-287
    6,               II.287-292
    7, 8,            II.294-300
    9, 10,           II.300-308
    23, 24,          II.308-312

  Judges
    3:12-30,         II.315f
    4, 5,            III.51-59
    6-8,             II.319-331
    9,               II.332-337
    14-16,           III.172-182

  Ruth,              III.35-48

  I Samuel
    3:2-10,          I.135f
    3-4,             II.338-346
    8-11,            II.349-360
    13-15,           II.360-375
    16,              I.139ff
    16-20,           II.382-406
    23:14-24:22,     II.412-417
    25,              II.417-424
    26,              II.406-411
    28,              II.375-380
    31,              II.380f

  II Samuel
    1,               II.424-429
    1:23-27,         I.160
    2:4-7,           II.429
    5:1-4,           II.430

{526}

  II Samuel
    11:14-12:23,     II.430-436
    18,              I.167ff; II.443-451
    23:13-17,        I.163f; II.438
    24,              II.438-442

  I Kings
    2:1-4,           II.451
    3:4ff,           I.170ff
    3:4-15,          II.452f
    4:21-34,         II.455f
    5,               I.205ff
    5-8,             II.457-478
    10,              II.478-483
    12,              III.238-240
    12:25-14:20,     III.353-364
    14:21-31,        III.240f
    15:1-8,          III.242f
    15:25-16:28,     III.367-374
    17:10ff,         I.193ff
    17-19,           III.113-127
    21,              III.127-130
    22,              III.377-381

  II Kings
    1,               III.382-386
    2,               III.130-137
    3,               III.387-392
    4, 5,            III.137-148
    6:8-7:20,        III.148-157
    9,               III.158-162
    10,              III.395-398
    13,              III.399f
    13:14-20,        III.162
    14:23-29,        III.40lf
    15:8-31,         III.402-408
    16:7-10,         V.267
    17,              III.411ff
    24:18-25:21,     III.348ff

  II Chronicles
    13:4-19,         III.242ff
    14-16,           III.247-254
    17,              III.255f
    19, 20,          III.256-265
    21,              III.266ff
    22:1-9,          III.269f
    22:10-23:21,     III.272-276
    24-36,           III.277-329

  Nehemiah
    1, 2,            III.212-218
    4-6,             III.218-227
    8,               III.227-231
    12:27-43,        III.23lf
    13:15-31,        III.233f

  Esther,            III.60-79

  Job,
    Selections from, V.181-232

  Psalms
    1,               V.19
    3,               V.20
    4,               V.21
    8,               V.22
    15,              V.23
    16,              V.24
    17,              V.25
    18:1-33; 46-50,  V.26ff
    19,              V.30f
    20,              V.32
    23,              I.289f; V.35
    24,              V.36
    25,              V.37f
    26,              V.39
    27,              V.40f
    29,              V.42
    30,              V.45f
    31,              V.47ff
    33,              V.50f
    34,              V.52f
    36:5-10,         V.54
    37:1-6, 23-27,
       35-40,        V.55f
    40:1-11,         V.57f
    42, 43,          V.61f
    44,              V.63ff
    45,              V.66f
    46,              V.68
    47,              V.69
    48:1, 2, 9-14,   V.70
    50:1-15,         V.73f
    51:1-17,         V.75f
    57,              V.77
    61:1-4;
      62:1,2,5-7,    V.79
    65,              V.81f
    66:1,2,4,8-10,
       16-20,        V.80
    67,              V.85
    68:1-12,         V.86
    70,              V.87
    72:2-19,         V.88f
    77:11-20,        V.90
    80,              V.91f
    84,              V.95f
    85,              V.97
    86,              V.98f

{527}

  Psalms
    87,              V.100
    89:1,2,5,
       6,9,11-18,    V.103
    90,              V.104f
    91,              V.106f
    93,              V.108
    95,              I.122
    95:1-7,          V.111
    96,              V.112
    97,              V.113
    98,              V.114
    99,              V.115
    100,             I.121f; V.116
    102:24-27,       V.117
    103,             V.118f
    104,             V.120ff
    105, 106,        V.123ff
    107:1-43,        V.130ff
    113:1-8; 114,    V.134f
    115:1-8,         V.136
    116:1-18,        V.137f
    117,             I.125; V.139
    118,             V.140ff
    119:1-48,73-160, V.143ff
    121,             I.125; V.155
    122,             I.221f; V.156
    126,             V.157
    130,             V.158
    133,             V.159
    134-136,         V.160ff
    137,             I.222
    139:1-12, 17,
        18, 23, 24,  V.164f
    144,             V.166f
    145,             V.168f
    146-148; 150,    V.170ff

  Proverbs,
    Selections from, I.501-504

  Proverbs
    1:20-33,         V.249f
    3:1-20,          V.250f
    4:14-19; 6:6-8,  V.255
    8,               V.252ff
    31:10-31,        V.256f

  Ecclesiastes
    3:1-8,           V.243f
    12:1-7,          V.245f

  The Song of Solomon
    2:2-4,           V.235
    2:10-17,         V.236
    4:8-16,          V.237
    6:1-3; 7:10-13,  V.238
    8:6-7,           V.239

  Isaiah
    5,               V.280-283
    6:1-7:9,         V.264-267
    9:6,7,           V.278
    11:6-9,          I.303
    36,37,           V.271-276
    39,              V.268
    40:1-11,         V.284f
    42:10-13,        V.279
    52,              V.286f
    53,              V.288f
    54:11-17,        V.290
    55,              V.291f
    60,              V.293-296

  Jeremiah
    1,               V.298f
    18, 19,          V.302-305
    22, 23,          III.335-344
    36,              V.305-308
    37-44,           V.309-331
    50, 51,          V.331-343

  Ezekiel
    19,              V.344-346
    26, 27,          V.346-352
    37:1-14,         V.352f

  Daniel
    1-6,             III.183-209

  Hosea
    7, 8,            V.363-365
    11,              V.365f

  Joel,
    Selections from, V.374-379
  Amos
    3-5, Selections from, V.356-362
    7,               V.354f

  Obadiah,           V.370-373

  Jonah,             III.165-171

  Micah,
    Selections from, V.367-369

  Nahum,
    Selections from, V.385-391

  Habakkuk
    2, 3,            V.392-396

  Zephaniah
    1:14-3:17,       V.380-384

  Haggai
    1:1-2:9,         V.389-400

  Zechariah 1-6,
    Selections from, V.401-407

  Malachi
    3, 4,            V.408f


  THE APOCRYPHA

  I Esdras
    1:1-32,          III.329-331

  Judith,            III.80-107

  The Prayer of
    Manasseh,        III.320f

  I Maccabees,       III.418-482

{528}

  THE NEW TESTAMENT

  Matthew
    2,               IV.41-46
    3,               IV.65ff
    5:1-12,          I.130f
    5-7,             IV.105-118
    6:26-30,         I.106
    7:16-20,         I.109
    9:27-31,         IV.128
    12:22-28,        IV.170f
    13:31ff,         I.201f
    18:1-5,          IV.188
    18:10-14,        I.286f
    18:21-35,        IV.186
    21:12-17,        IV.237
    25:14-46,        IV.244-247
    28:16-20,        IV.310

  Mark
    1:16-20,         IV.94
    1:21-2:12,       IV.125-128
    2:13-17,         IV.94f
    4:3ff,           I.126ff
    4,5,             IV.133-142
    5:21ff,          I.110ff
    6:21-29,         IV.154
    6:30-50,         IV.144-148
    7:24-9:29,       IV.172-182
    10:17-27,        IV.211f
    10:35-45,        IV.185-187
    10:46-52,        IV.221f
    11:1-11,         IV.233f
    14:1-16,         IV.248f
    15:6-15,         IV.276f

  Luke
    2:21; 29-30,     I.109
    2,               IV.37-50
    4:1-13,          IV.70f
    7:2-10,          IV.121f
    7:11-17,         IV.130
    7:18-35,         IV.150-154
    7:36-50,         IV.169f
    10:25-37,        I.279f; IV.88f
    12:16-21,        IV.212
    14,              IV.207f
    15, 16,          IV.202-207
    19:1-10,         IV.222
    20,21,           IV.238-243
    22:14-18,        IV.249f
    22:39-46,        IV.264f
    23:8-12,         IV.275
    24:13-35,        IV.301f

  John
    1:29-4:42,       IV.74-87
    3:22-36,         IV.149f
    4:43-53,         IV.92f
    5,               IV.167-171
    6:22-71,         IV.161-166
    7-10,            IV.190-201
    10:1-15,         I.285f
    11,              IV.215-220
    11:55-12:5,      IV.229f
    12:20-30,        IV.243f
    13-17,           IV.249-263
    18:10-38,        IV.267-275
    19,              IV.279-287
    20:1-18,         I.267f
    20,21,           IV.297-309

  Acts
    1:6-11,          IV.31Of
    2:1-5:11,        IV.325-336
    6-8,             IV.339-349
    9:1-31,          IV.371-375
    9:32-43,         IV.350
    10-12,           IV.353-361
    13-15,           IV.376-391
    15:36-18:22,     IV.395-412
    18:23-21:16,     IV.418-430
    21:17-28:31,     IV.433-481

  Romans
    8:18-25,         V.454
    8:31-39,         V.454f
    11:33-36,        V.444
    12,              V.415f
    13:8-14,         V.416f
    14:7-17,         V.419f
    15:1-3,          V.422
    16:25-27,        V.443

  I Corinthians
    3:9,             V.443
    3:10-15,         V.440
    3:16, 17,        V.443
    9:24-27,         V.438
    13,              V.425
    15:12-58,        V.449ff
    16:13,           V.448

  II Corinthians
    4:7-5:1,         V.451f
    11:24-27,        IV.482

  Galatians
    5:1, 7-9,        V.439        {529}
    5:22-6:10,       V.422f

  Ephesians
    2:19-22,         V.440
    3:14-19,         V.443
    4:1-16,          V.420f
    4:25-32,         V.421f
    6:1-3,           V.419
    6:10-17,         V.447f

  Philippians
    3:7-16,          V.453f
    3:20,21,         V.453
    4:8,             V.424
    4:11,12,         V.420

  Colossians
    3:1-4,           V.453

  I Thessalonians
    5:4-11,          V.447
    5:12-22,         V.423

  I Timothy
    1:17,            V.444
    4:6-8,           IV.482
    6:11, 12,        V.448

  II Timothy
    2:3,4,           V.448

  Hebrews
    12:1, 2,         V.439

  Epistle of James,
    Selections from, V.426-434

  I John
    3, 4,            V.435-437

  Revelation,
    Selections from, V.456-478


  INDEX TO POEMS

  * Indicates titles of poems.

  A fair little girl sat under a tree,                 I.472
  A little word in kindness spoken,                    I.448
  A swallow in the spring,                             I.451
  Above the clear blue sky,                            I.242
  Abroad in the meadows, to see the young lambs,       I.343
  All things bright and beautiful,                     I.476
  Am I a soldier of the cross,                         IV.58
  And now another day is gone,                         I.333
  *Ant, The,                                           I.329
  April's gone, the king of showers,                   I.379
  Art thou weary, art thou languid,                    V.487
  As with gladness men of old,                         I.394
  Away in a manger, no crib for a bed,                 I.409

  *Baby and Mamma,                                     I.372
  *Babylon,                                            III.210
  Baby's in the boat,                                  I.424
  *Belshazzar,                                         III.211
  Belshazzar is king! Belshazzar is lord,              III.211
  Blest land of Judea! thrice hallowed of song,        II.15
  *Bridge, The,                                        I.446
  Brightest and best of the sons of the morning,       IV.26
  *Burial of Moses, The,                               II.274
  By Nebo's lonely mountain,                           II.274

  Calm on the listening ear of night,                  I.419
  *Calvary,                                            IV.225
  Carol, sweetly carol,                                I.406
  *Cave of Adullam,                                    II.437
  *Chambered Nautilus, The,                            I.477
  *Children,                                           I.459
  *Child's Thought of God,                             I.483
  Christ, the Lord, is risen to-day,                   IV.291
  *Christmas Carol, A,                                 I.393, 397, 402
  *Christmas Hymns,                                    I.389-420
  *Christmas Tree, The,                                I.401
  Come to me, O ye children,                           I.459
  Comrades, haste! the tent's tall shading,            II.198
  *Cow, The,                                           I.369
  *Cradle Hymn,                                        I.409
  *Crossing the Bar,                                   V.490

  David and his three captains bold,                   II.437
  *Day by Day,                                         I.239
  Dear Jesus, ever at my side,                         IV.292
  Deep was the furrow in the royal brow,               II.395
  *Destruction of Sennacherib, The,                    III.315
  Down in a green and shady bed,                       I.376

  *Elixir, The,                                        IV.157
  *Evening Song, An,                                   I.333
  Every day has its dawn,                              I.239

  *Fall of Jericho, The,                               II.293
  *Farewell,                                           I.471
  *Field Daisy, The,                                   I.353
  *Finding of Moses, The,                              II.134
  *Flower and the Lady, The,                           I.352
  *Following the Master,                               V.487
  From all that dwell below the skies,                 V.494
  From Greenland's icy mountains,                      IV.318

{530}

  *Gethsemane,                                         IV.223
  *Getting up,                                         I.361
  *Glorious Heavens, The,                              I.434
  Glorious things of Thee are spoken,                  IV.319
  *Glorious Zion,                                      IV.319
  God rest ye, merry gentlemen; let nothing you dismay, I.397
  *Going to Bed,                                       I.357, 371
  *Going to Jesus,                                     I.235
  *Good Night and Good Morning,                        I.472
  Gracious Saviour, holy Shepherd,                     I.313
  *Guiding Star, The,                                  I.394

  Hail the night! All hail the morn,                   I.398
  Hail to the Lord's Anointed,                         IV.102
  Hark, hark, my soul, angelic songs are
    swelling,                                          I.487
  Hark! the clock strikes from the steeple,            I.423
  Heaven is not reached at a single bound,             I.77
  How doth the little busy bee,                        I.327
  How fair is the rose! What a beautiful flower,       I.338
  How fine has the day been! How bright
    was the sun,                                       I.346
  How gentle God's commands,                           I.241
  How glorious is our heavenly King,                   I.342
  How proud we are! how fond to show,                  I.328
  Hush, my dear, lie still and slumber,                I.411
  *Hymn by the Euphrates,                              III.316

  I am a pebble and yield to none,                     I.438
  I heard the voice of Jesus say,                      IV.158
  I met a little cottage girl,                         I.454
  I sing th' Almighty power of God,                    I.341
  I stood on the bridge at midnight,                   I.446
  I think, when I read that sweet story of old,        I.237
  If Fortune, with a smiling face,                     I.463
  I'm a pretty little thing,                           I.353
  I'm a very little child,                             I.354
  Immortal love, forever full,                         IV.54
  In heavenly love abiding,                            I.314
  *Innocent Play,                                      I.343
  In the cross of Christ I glory,                      I.261
  It came upon the midnight clear,                     IV.25
  It chanced upon the merry, merry Christmas eve,      I.402
  Jesus calls us: o'er the tumult,                     IV.l01
  Jesus, I my cross have taken,                        IV.57
  Jesus, lover of my soul,                             V.483
  Jesus, Saviour, pilot me,                            IV.100
  Jesus shall reign where'er the sun,                  IV.317
  Joy to the world, the Lord is come,                  IV.30

  *Kindness,                                           I.448

  *Lamb, The,                                          I.380
  Lazy sheep, pray tell me why,                        I.366
  Lead, kindly Light, amid th' encircling gloom        I.467; V.491
  *Lead me on,                                         II.238
  Let dogs delight to bark and bite,                   I.344
  *Light of Stars, The,                                I.452
  Little baby, lay your head,                          I.371
  *Little Child, The,                                  I.354
  Little drops of water,                               I.384
  Little lamb, who made thee?                          I.380
  *Little Voices,                                      I.427
  Look, ye saints, the sight is glorious,              IV.226
  Lord of all being; throned afar,                     I.233
  *Lullaby,                                            I.389, 484

  *May Day Song,                                       I.379
  *Morning Hymns,                                      I.71-78
  "Morning Song,                                       I.330
  My country! 'tis of thee,                            V.492
  My fairest child, I have no song to give you,        I.471
  My faith looks up to Thee,                           V.485
  My God, who makes the sun to know,                   I.330

  *Nearest Friend, The,                                IV.292
  Nearer, my God, to Thee,                             V.481
  *New Year's Eve,                                     I.475
  Now, my baby, ope your eye,                          I.361
  Now the day is over,                                 I.468
  Now the spring is coming on,                         I.359

  O God, beneath thy guiding hand,                     I.276
  O little town of Bethlehem,                          I.250
  O Love Divine, that stooped to share,                IV.155
  O Master, let me walk with Thee,                     IV.156
  O Thou that wilt not break the bruised reed,         III.316
  Oft in the stilly night,                             I.445

{531}

  Oh, what can little hands do,                        I.240
  Oh, where is He that trod the sea?                   IV.99
  Oh, worship the King, all-glorious above!            IV.294
  On our way rejoicing,                                I.234
  Once in royal David's city,                          I.415
  *One by one,                                         I.461
  One by one the sands are flowing,                    I.461
  Onward, Christian soldiers,                          I.255

  *Palestine,                                          II.15
  Pause in this desert! Here, men say, of old,         III.210
  *Pebble and the Acorn, The,                          I.438
  *Perseverance,                                       I.451
  *Pilgrims of the Night, The,                         I.487
  *Praise for Creation and Providence,                 I.341
  *Praise to God,                                      I.342
  *Prayers for Little Children,                        I.319-324
  Pretty flower, tell me why,                          I.352
  *Psalm of Life,                                      I.440
  Put off, put off your mail, ye kings, and
    beat your brands to dust,                          I.300

  *Ready for Bed,                                      I.423
  Ride on! ride on in majesty,                         IV.224
  Ring out, wild bells, to the wild sky,               I.475
  Rock of Ages, cleft for me,                          V.489
  *Rose, The,                                          I.338
  *Ruth,                                               III.49

  *Saul and David,                                     II.395
  Saviour, breathe an evening blessing,                I.430
  Saviour, like a shepherd lead us,                    I.309
  See the dark vapors cloud the sky,                   I.375
  *Seventh Plague of Egypt, The,                       II.162
  She stood breast high amid the corn,                 III.49
  *Sheep, The,                                         I.366
  *Shepherd Hymns,                                     I.309-315
  Sleep, baby, sleep,                                  I.484
  Sleep, baby, sleep. The mother sings,                I.389
  Slow glides the Nile: amid the margin flags,         II.134
  *Sluggard, The,                                      I.334
  *Snowdrop, The,                                      I.359
  Some murmur when their sky is clear,                 I.383
  *Song of Peace,                                      I.300
  *Song of the Manna Gatherers,                        II.198
  Sound, sound for ever, Clarions of Thought,          II.293
  *Star, The,                                          I.350, 390
  Still, still with Thee, my God,                      I.464; IV.293
  Still, still with Thee when purple morning breaketh, I.78
  *Summer,                                             I.349
  *Summer Evening, A,                                  I.346
  *Summer Rain,                                        I.433
  Sun of my soul, Thou Saviour dear,                   I.238
  Sunset and evening star,                             V.490

  Teach me, my God and King,                           IV.157
  Tell me not, in mournful numbers,                    I.440
  *Tempest, The,                                       I.375
  *Thanksgiving, Song of,                              I.75
  Thank you, pretty cow, that made,                    I.369
  The Assyrian came down like the wolf on the fold,    III.315
  The breaking waves dashed high,                      I.271
  The cock, who soundly sleeps at night,               I.358
  The day is done, and the darkness,                   I.481
  The heats of Summer come hastily on,                 I.349
  The King of love my Shepherd is,                     I.315
  The Lord is my shepherd; no want shall I know,       I.291
  The Master has come over Jordan,                     I.235
  The moon is up, the sun is gone,                     I.357
  The morning light is breaking,                       IV.320
  The mountain streams are silent,                     I.433
  The night is come, but not too soon,                 I.452
  The spacious firmament on high,                      I.434
  The terror of the night has fled,                    I.268
  The twilight falls, the night is near,               I.429
  The twilight is sad and cloudy,                      I.437
  There came three kings, ere break of day,            IV.29
  There is a green hill far away,                      IV.225
  There's a wonderful tree, a wonderful tree,          I.401
  These emmets, how little they are in our eyes,       I.329
  They followed the star the whole night through,      I.390
  They say that God lives very high,                   I.483
  This is the ship of pearl, which, poets feign,       I.477
  *Three Kings, The,                                   IV.29

{532}

  *Time to Get Up,                                     I.358
  'Tis midnight,--and on Olive's brow,                 IV.223
  'Tis the voice of the sluggard: I heard him complain, I.334
  *To-day and To-morrow,                               I.463
  Traveling to the better land,                        II.238
  'Twas morn,--the rising splendor rolled,             II.162
  *Twilight,                                           I.437
  Twinkle, twinkle, little star,                       I.351

  *Victor, The,                                        IV.226
  *Violet, The,                                        I.376

  Was there ever kindest shepherd,                     I.310
  *We Are Seven,                                       I.454
  We plough the fields and scatter,                    I.75
  We see Him come, and know Him ours,                  I.412
  What a little thing am I,                            I.372
  *What can Little Hands Do,                           I.240
  What says the little brook,                          I.427
  What sweeter music can we bring,                     I.393
  Whatever brawls disturb the street,                  I.345
  When morning gilds the skies,                        I.71
  Whene'er I take my walks abroad,                     I.337
  While shepherds watched their flocks by night,       I.405
  While Thee I seek, protecting Power,                 I.442
  Who am I that shines so bright,                      I.365
  Who am I with noble face,                            I.362


INDEX TO AUTHORS OF POEMS

  Adams, Sarah Flower,             V.481
  Addison,                         I.434
  Alexander, Mrs. Cecil Frances,   I.415; II.274; IV.101, 225

  Baker, Sir H. W.,                I.315
  Baring-Gould, S.,                I.468
  Blake, William,                  I.380
  Bonar, Horatius,                 IV.158
  Brewer, Ebenezer Cobham,         I.384
  Brooks, Phillips,                I.250
  Browning, Elizabeth Barrett,     I.483
  Burns, James Drummond,           I.464; IV.293
  Burns, Robert,                   I.324
  Byron, Lord,                     III.315

  Chandler, John,                  I.242
  Claudius, Mathias,               I.75
  Colesworthy,                     I.448
  Cooper, George,                  I.424
  Cornwall, Barry,                 III.211
  Croly,                           II.162

  Dix, William C.,                 I.394
  Doddridge, Philip,               I.241

  Edmeston, James,                 I.430

  Faber, Frederick William,        I.310, 487; IV.292
  Fabin,                           I.240
  Fay, Ida,                        I.423

  Gill, Julia,                     I.235
  Gladden, Washington,             IV.156
  Gould,                           I.438
  Grant, R.,                       IV.294

  Heber, Reginald,                 IV.26, 318
  Herbert, George,                 IV.157
  Herrick, Robert,                 I.324, 412
  Holland, J. G.,                  I.77
  Holmes, Oliver Wendell,          I.233, 477; IV.155
  Hood, Thomas,                    III.49
  Hopper, E.,                      IV.100
  Houghton, Lord,                  I.472
  Hugo, Victor,                    II.293

  Keble, John,                     I.238, 379, 476; II.198
  Kelly, Thomas,                   IV.226
  Kingsley, Charles,               I.402, 471

  Lamb, Charles,                   II.437
  Leeson, Jane E.,                 I.313
  Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth,     I.437, 440, 446, 452, 459, 481
  Luke, Jemima Thompson,           I.237
  Luther, Martin,                  I.409
  Lynch, Thomas T.,                IV.99
  Lyte, Henry Francis,             IV.57

  Milman, Henry Hart,              III.316; IV.224
  Monsell, James Samuel Bewley,    I.234
  Montgomery, James,               IV.102

{533}

  Moore, Thomas,                   I.445
  Mulock, Dinah Maria,             I.397

  Newman, John Henry,              I.467; V.491
  Newton, J.,                      IV.319

  Palmer, Ray,                     V.485
  Procter, Adelaide Ann,           I.461

  Ruskin, John,                    I.299

  Sears, Edmund Hamilton,          I.419; IV.25
  Smith, Samuel F.,                IV.320; V.492
  Stowe, Harriet Beecher,          I.78
  Symonds, John Addington,         I.389

  Tappan, W. B.,                   IV.223
  Taylor, Ann,                     I.365
  Taylor, Jane,                    I.349-362, 366-376
  Tennyson, Alfred,                I.475; V.490
  Thrupp, Dorothy Ann,             I.309
  Toplady, Augustus Montague,      V.489
  Trench, Archbishop,              I.383

  Waring, Anna L.,                 I.314
  Watts, Isaac,                    I.327-346, 411; IV.31, 58, 317; V.494
  Wesley, Rev. Charles,            IV.291; V.483
  Whittemore, J.,                  I.313
  Whittier, John Greenleaf,        II.15; IV.54
  Williams, Helen Maria,           I.442
  Wordsworth, William,             I.454


INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS

  Abraham, Traditional Oak of,                         II.24
  Acropolis at Athens,                                 V.442
  Adoration of the Angels, _Adolph Bouguereau_,        I.426
  Adoration of the Children, _Gherado delle Notte_,    I.414
  Age of Innocence, _Sir Joshua Reynolds_,             I.382
  Aijalon, Valley of,                                  II.364
  Along the Appian Way, the Great Roman Aqueduct,      IV.476
  Anathoth, the Home of Jeremiah,                      V.316
  Angel, Head of,                                      I.486
  Announcement to the Shepherds, _Bernard Plockhorst_, I.388
  Antioch,                                             V.446
  Aphamea, Site of,                                    III.454
  Appian Way,                                          IV.472
  Appian Way, The Great Roman Aqueduct,                IV.476
  Ark, Building The, _W. Scott_,                       III.Frontispiece
  Ascalon,                                             III.474
  Ascension of Christ, _G. Biermann_,                  IV.312
  Assos, Harbor of,                                    IV.424
  Athens, Acropolis at,                                V.442
  Athens, Harbor of Piraeus,                           IV.398
  Athens, Parthenon,                                   IV.406
  Autumn Woods, I.54

  Barley Harvest near Bethlehem,                       III.478
  Beautiful Nazareth: Outlook from Hills above
    Town to Historic Esdraelon,                        I.88
  Bedouins with Camels in the Plain near Mount Sinai,  V.94
  Bethany,                                             I.92; IV.218
  Bethel,                                              II.86
  Bethel, Ruins of,                                    III.498
  Bethlehem,                                           I.138; IV.28, 32
  Bethlehem, Church of the Nativity,                   III.492; IV.36
  Bethlehem, at Sunset,                                I.248
  Beth-Shan, Ruins of Roman Bridge,                    II.372
  Boy and Dog, _Blume_,                                I.298
  Building the Ark, W. Scott,                          III.Frontispiece

  Caesar Augustus,                                     IV.444
  Caesarea-Philippi,                                   IV.174
  Camel Merchants,                                     I.176
  Camel Rider,                                         II.58
  Camels, Loading at Jerusalem,                        I.204
  Camp in the Desert,                                  II.318
  Cana, Children at,                                   I.172
  Capernaum, Ruins of the Synagogue,                   IV.120
  Cape Sunion,                                         IV.432
  Caravan Loading for Journey,                         II.94
  Carpenter Shop,                                      IV.56
  Carmel, Mount,                                       V.154
  Child with Dog, _Sir Joshua Reynolds_,               I.374
  Children at Cana,                                    I.172
  Children of Nazareth,                                I.216

{534}

  Children of The Shell, Murillo,                      I.480
  Christ and his Disciples on the Way to
    Emmaus, _Bernard Plockhorst_,                      IV.304
  Christ and John the Baptist, _Guido Reni_,           IV.152
  Christ and the Rich Ruler, _Heinrich Hofmann_,       IV.210
  Christ: Ascension of Christ, _G. Biermann_,          IV.312
  Christ before Pilate, _Munkacsy_,                    IV.274
  Christ, Head of, _Leonardo da Vinci_,                IV.256
  Christ in Gethsemane, _Heinrich Hofmann_,            IV.266
  Christ in the Temple, Finding of, _Holman Hunt_,     IV.52
  Christmas Bells, _Edwin Howland Blashfield_,         I.474
  Coming of the Magi,                                  I.408
  Corinth, Ruins at,                                   IV.410
  Corinth, Ruins of the Temple of Jupiter,             V.418, 432
  Corinth, Temple of Apollo,                           IV.402
  Corner of Old Wall at Damascus,                      IV.378
  Crete, Island of, "Fair Havens,"                     IV.454

  Damascus,                                            III.406; IV.378
  Damascus, Corner of Old Wall at,                     IV.378
  Damascus, River Abana,                               III.410
  Dan, Site of Ancient,                                II.340
  Daniel in the Lions' Den, _Vernet_,                  III.204
  Dar el Bahari, Temple of,                            II.170
  David, _Michael Angelo_,                             II.384
  Dead Sea,                                            I.228; II.34, 258
  Desert Warriors,                                     II.322
  Divine Mother and the Child, _Murillo_,              I.30
  Divine Shepherd, The, _Murillo_,                     I.336
  Dog, Head of,                                        I.294
  Druse Family,                                        I.134

  Easter Dawn, The First, _J. K. Thompson_,            I.264
  Egypt, Date Palms,                                   II.102, 148
  Egypt, Great Statues of Memnon,                      I.192
  Egypt, Luxor,                                        II.128, 170
  Egypt, Nile, The,                                    I.120; II.148, 154
  Egypt, Pyramids,                                     I.124, 180;
                                                       II.98, 110, 140
  Egypt, Pyramids and the Sphinx,                      I.124
  Egypt, Temple on the Island of Philae,               I.116
  Egypt, Thebes,                                       II.176, 182
  Elimelech, Family of, Going to Moab, _Bida_,         III.38
  Elisha Raises the Shunammite's Son,                  III.140
  En-dor,                                              II.378
  En-Rogel, from the South,                            II.490
  Ephesus, Ruins of the Aqueduct,                      V.458
  Ephesus, The Traditional Tomb of St. Luke at,        V.466
  Esdraelon, Plain of,                                 II.328

  Famous Monastery of Saint Catherine in
    the Shadow of Mount Sinai,                         II.210
  Finding of Christ in the Temple, _Holman Hunt_,      IV.52
  Flight into Egypt, _W. A. Bouguereau_,               IV.40
  Flood, End of the, _Moritz Oppenheim_,               III.28
  Following the Star, _Sidney H. Riesenberg_,          I.Frontispiece
  Four Thousand Years unchanged Patriarchal
    Life in Palestine To-day,                          II.234

  Galilee, Lake of,                                    I.108; III.462; IV.146
  Gathering Tares in Stony Fields near Bethel,         IV.22
  Gerizim, Mount,                                      III.366
  Going to the Doctor,                                 I.200
  Golden Gate,                                         III.216; IV.322
  Good Samaritan, Inn of the,                          IV.90
  Good Shepherd, The, _W. C. T. Dobson_,               I.288
  Good Shepherd, The, _Bernard Plockhorst_,            I.308
  Great Stairway approaching Herod's Temple
    at Samaria,                                        III.350
  Greek Temple, The, _C. A. Widmarsky_,                V.Frontispiece.
  Greek Theater at Miletus, Ruins of,                  IV.420

  Hagar and Ishmael, _Cazin_,                          II.38
  Head of Christ, _Leonardo da Vinci_,                 IV.256
  Hebron,                                              I.166; 11.44, 74
  Hebron, Traditional Oak of Abraham,                  III.24
  Hermon, Mount,                                       III.372; V.60
  Hezekiah, Pool of,                                   III.298
  Hill of the Golden Calf (Jebel Aaron) and
    its Moslem Tower below the Ridge of Sinai,         II.206
  Holy Family, _Carl Mueller_,                         I.404
  Holy Family, Flight into Egypt, _W. A. Bouguereau_,  IV.40
  Holy Family, Repose in Egypt,                        IV.44
  Holy Night, Correggio,                               I.396

{535}

  Hor, View from Mount,                                II.230
  Horeb, Mount,                                        II.240
  House, An Eastern,                                   I.188
  Housetop, Praying on,                                III.192

  Inn of the Good Samaritan,                           IV.90
  Island of Naxos,                                     IV.432

  Jabbok, Valley of,                                   II.78
  Jacob's Dream, _Murillo_,                            II.64
  Jaffa, the Ancient Joppa,                            III.168, 458
  Jehoshaphat, Valley of, from North,                  III.264
  Jehoshaphat, Valley of, from South,                  III.252
  Jehoshaphat, Valley of, Tombs in,                    III.260
  Jericho, Fountain of Elijah,                         III.126
  --Mounds marking site,                               II.280
  --Plain of,                                          II.290; III.394
  --Ruins at,                                          III.390
  Jerusalem,                                           III.230, 466, 470
  --Church of the Holy Sepulcher,                      IV.284
  --"David Street,"                                    II.428
  --from Citadel,                                      II.480
  --from Mount of Olives,                              II.474
  --from Northeast,                                    II.496
  --from West,                                         III.290, 342
  --from the Well of En-Rogel,                         II.446
  --Golden Gate,                                       III.216; IV.322
  --Jews' Wailing Place,                               III.244
  --looking along the Northern Wall,                   III.484
  --looking toward Bethlehem,                          II.14
  --looking up through Valley of Hinnom,               II.422
  --Mosque of Omar,                                    II.468; III.224
  --Mosque of Omar and the Ancient Temple Area,        II.464
  --Old Street of,                                     III.334
  --outside East Wall, Golden Gate at left,            III.216
  --Pool of Hezekiah,                                  III.298
  --Saint Stephen's Gate,                              IV.338
  --Street in,                                         II.416; V.300
  --Street Leading to the
      Church of the Holy Sepulcher,                    IV.278
  Jesus, Adoration of the Angels, _Adolph Bouguereau_, I.426
  --Adoration of the Children, _Gherado delle Notte_,  I.414
  --and John, _Murillo_,                               I.436
  --and the Fishermen, _Zimmermann_,                   IV.76
  --and the Little Girl, _Gustav Richter_,             I.112
  --and the Money Changers, _Heinrich Hofmann_,        IV.236
  --and the Woman of Samaria, _Heinrich Hofmann_,      IV.84
  --Announcement to the Shepherds,
      _Bernard Plockhorst_,                           I.388
  --at the Door, _Carl Schoenherr_,                     IV.184
  --Blessing the Little Children,
      _Bernard Plockhorst_,                           I.236
  --Boy, The, _Winterstein_,                           I.74
  --Boy, on his Way to Jerusalem, _O. Mengelberg_,     IV.48
  --Coming of the Magi,                                I.408
  --Divine Mother and the Child, _Murillo_,            I.30
  --Entering Jerusalem in Triumph,
      _Bernard Plockhorst_,                            I.254
  --Healing the Sick, _Heinrich Hofmann_,              I.104
  --in the Home of Mary and Martha, _Siemiradski_,     I.260
  --in the Temple, _Holman Hunt_,                      I.458
  --Knocking at the Door, _Heinrich Hofmann_,          I.498
  --Lord, The, _Heinrich Hofmann_,                     IV.164
  --Preaching by the Seaside,                          IV.132
  --Preaching the Sermon on the Mount,                 IV.114
  --Shepherd, The Divine, _Murillo_,                   I.336
  --Shepherd, The Good, _W. C. T. Dobson_,             I.288
  --Shepherd, The Good, _Bernard Plockhorst_,          I.308
  --Taking Leave of his Mother, _Bernard Plockhorst_, IV.68
  --Triumphal Entry into Jerusalem,                    IV.232
  --Women at the Tomb of,                              IV.300
  --Women at the Tomb of, _Bouguereau_,                IV.290
  John, Saint, The Evangelist, _Dolci_,                V.472
  Joppa,                                               III.458
  --looking from the Sea,                              III.168
  Jordan, Lower Fords of the,                          II.284; IV.64
  --Plain of the,                                      III.126
  --Sources of the, the Ancient Dan,                   II.340
  Joseph the Prime Minister Greeting his Family,
      _E. Martin Hennings_,                            II.Frontispiece

{536}

  Joshua, Tomb of, at Timneh,                          II.31O
  Judaea, Wilderness of,                               II.404
  Kidron, Valley of,                                   II.398; III.252, 274

  Lachish, Digging in the mound at,                    III.310
  Last Supper, The, _Leonardo da Vinci_,               IV.252
  Lebanon, Cedar of,                                   II.454
  --Range and a Grove of Cedars,                       II.460
  --Village in,                                        V.44
  Lepers at the Leper Hospital, Jerusalem,             III.150
  Light of the World, The, _Holman Hunt_,              I.466
  "Lo, I Stand at the Door and Knock,"
  _Carl Schoenherr_,                                    IV.184
  Looking across the Red Sea from Sinai toward Egypt,  II.186
  Lost Lamb Found, _P. Giradet_,                       I.312
  Luxor, Cliffs near Temple of Dar el Bahari,          II.170
  --View in,                                           II.128
  Lydda,                                               IV.352

  Madonna, _Murillo_,                                  I.450
  --and Child,                                         I.418
  --and Child, _Carlo Dolci_,                          I.340
  --and Child, _Georg Papperitz_,                      I.364
  --and Child, _Sichel_,                               I.392
  --della Tenda, _Raphael_,                            I.444
  --Granduca, _Raphael_,                               I.356
  --of the Angels, _Adolph Bouguereau_,                I.332
  --of the Harpies, _Andrea del Sarto_,                I.432
  --The Pitti, _Murillo_,                              I.348
  --The Sistine, _Raphael_,                            I.220
  Magi, Coming of the,                                 I.408
  Malta,                                               IV.468
  Mar-sarba, Convent of,                               I.154; V.358
  Massada, Ruins of Fortress at,                       II.404
  "Mater Amabilis in Gloria," _Bodenhausen_,           I.42
  Memnon, Great Statues of,                            I.192
  Merchants, Camel,                                    I.176
  Miletus, Ruins of Greek Theater,                     IV.420
  Mizpah, The Ancient,                                 II.356
  Moabite Stone, The,                                  III.376
  Moses, _Sargent_,                                    II.90
  --on Mount Nebo, _Thomas Nast_,                      II.270
  --Smiting the Rock, _Murillo_,                       II.246
  Mother, The Little, _Ferruzzi_,                      I.470
  Mountains, The,                                      I.66
  Mount of Beatitudes, looking Northeast from,         IV. 108
  --of Olives,                                         IV.242, 260

  Nablous, Ancient Shechem,                            II.82
  Naxos, Island of,                                    IV.432
  Nativity, The,                                       I.400
  --_Lerolle_,                                         IV.16
  Nazareth,                                            I.88, 100; IV.60
  --Children of,                                       I.216
  Nebo, Moses on Mount, _Thomas Nast_,                 II.270
  Nile, Banks near Cairo,                              II.148
  --The River,                                         I.120; II.154
  Olympus, Distant Views of,                           IV.428
  Omar, Mosque of,                                     II.464; III.224
  --Interior,                                          II.468
  On Guard,                                            I.302

  Palestine, On the Coast of, at Sunset,               V.110
  Palms, Date, in Egypt,                               II.102
  Parthenon,                                           IV.406
  Pass of Upper Beth-Horon from the South,
    the Scene of Many Hebron Victories,                III.102
  Paul and the Roman Centurion, Shipwreck,
    _E. Martin Hennings_,                              IV.366
  --Appian Way traveled by,                            IV.472
  --Saint, _Raphael_,                                  IV.366
  --Ship of, when Caught in the Euroclydon,            IV.460
  --Ship on which he Sailed for Rome just
      before the Wreck,                                IV.464
  --Statue of, on the Island of Malta,                 IV.480
  Petra, Rock Temple in,                               II.252
  Philae, Temple on,                                   I.116
  Philistia, Water Works in,                           I.142
  Plowing in the Lands of the Bible,                   I.84
  --in Palestine,                                      I.50
  Praying on a housetop,                               III.192
  "Prophets, The," _Sargent_,                          V.262, 372, 382, 390
  Puteoli, where Paul Disembarked,                     IV.440
  Pyramids and the Sphinx,                             I.124; II.98
  --One of the,                                        I.180
  --with Village in the Foreground,                    II.11O

  Quiet Afternoon in the Upland Pastures,              I.34

{537}

  Rabbath Ammon, Ruins of,                             II.434
  Rebekah, _Goodall_,                                  II.54
  --and Eliezer, _Thorwaldsen_,                        II.48
  Repose in Egypt,                                     IV.44
  Resting beneath the Trees, _Corot_,                  I.38
  Resting Place under the Palms at the
    "Spring of Moses" in the Wilderness of Sinai,      II.l94
  River, The,                                          V.84
  River Kishon and Mount Carmel,                       III.56
  Road from Jerusalem to Jericho,                      III.132; V.270
  Road near Tiberias,                                  I.196
  Road Running Eastward from Upper Beth-Horon,         II.304
  Rock of Elijah's Altar on Mount Carmel, and
    Outlook North over the Plain of Esdraelon,         III.118
  Ruins of an Ancient City,                            III.430
  Ruth in the Harvest Fields of Boaz, _Brueck-Lajos_,   III.44
  Salonica,                                            IV.436
  Samaria, from the South,                             III.384
  --Ruins of,                                          III.156, 360
  Samuel, The Infant, _Reynolds_,                      I.46
  Scene of the Fight between David and
    Goliath in the Valley of Elah,                     II.388
  Sea, The,                                            I.62
  Shechem,                                             II.82, 336
  Sheep,                                               V.34
  Sheep, _Jacque_,                                     I.278
  --_Rosa Bonheur_,                                    I.378
  Shepherd and Sheep,                                  I.146, 210, 284;
                                                       II.190, 410; V.72
  Shepherd, The Divine, _Murillo_,                     I.336
  Shepherd, The Good, _W. C. T. Dobson_,               I.288
  Shepherd, The Good, _Bernard Plockhorst_,            I.308
  Shiloh, Ruins of,                                    II.344
  Ship of Paul when Caught in the Euroclydon,          IV.460
  Ship on which Paul Sailed for Rome just
    before the Wreck,                                  IV.464
  Shipwreck--Paul and the Roman Centurion,
    _E. Martin Hennings_,                              IV.366
  Shunammite Boy,                                      III.146
  Shunem Village,                                      III.136
  Sidon, on Road from Tyre,                            III.436
  --Ruins of the Castle at,                            III.442
  Siloam, Pool of,                                     III.304
  Siloam, Village of,                                  III.274
  Sinai, Wilderness of,                                II.200
  Sorek, Valley of,                                    III.180
  Soul's Awakening, The, _James Sant_,                 I.322
  Sphinx,                                              II.140
  Star, Following the, _Sidney H, Riesenberg_,         I.Frontispiece
  Star, The Wise Men and the, _B. A. Devine_,          IV.Frontispiece
  Street of an Ancient Eastern City,                   III.356
  Sunion, Cape,                                        IV.432
  Syracuse,                                            IV.440

  Tabor, Mount,                                        V.102
  Tarsus, looking Northeast toward Taurus Mountains,   IV.374
  Tempe, Vale of,                                      IV.414
  Thebes, Temple at,                                   I.184
  --Valley of Tombs of Kings,                          II.176, 182
  Threshing,                                           I.128, 274
  --Floor,                                             II.440
  Tiberias,                                            I.96; IV.138
  Tomb at Timneh, called the Tomb of Joshua,           II.310
  Tombs in the Valley of Jehoshaphat,                  III.260
  --near Jerusalem,                                    II.450
  --of the Kings, north of Jerusalem,                  III.284
  --of the Kings, Valley of the, at Thebes,            II.176, 182
  Tomb of Rachel,                                      I.150
  Traditional Spot on which Moses read the
    Ten Commandments,                                  II.224
  View from Ramah, the Traditional Home of Samuel,     II.136
  View of the Dead Sea,                                II.258

  Warriors, Desert,                                    II.322
  Water Works in Old Philistia,                        I.142
  Wilderness of the Brook Cherith,                     III.126
  --of Sinai,                                          II.200
  --of the Temptation,                                 IV.72
  --on the Road from Jerusalem to Jericho,             V.270
  Winnowing,                                           I.158
  Winnowing of Grain after Threshing in Egypt,         I.162
  Winter,                                              I.58
  Wise Men and the Star, _B. A. Devine_,               IV.Frontispiece
  Women Grinding at the Mill,                          V.176
  Women at the Tomb, _Bouguereau_,                     IV.290
  Women at the Tomb,                                   IV.300
  Wounded Lamb, The, _Von Bremen_,                     I.368

{538}

  INDEX TO ARTISTS

  Bida, Alexandre,
    The Family of Elimelech Going to Moab,             III.38
  Biermann, G.,
    Ascension of Christ,                               IV.312
  Blashfield, Edwin Howland,
    Christmas Bells,                                   I.474
  Blume,
    Boy and Dog,                                       I.298
  Bodenhausen,
    "Mater Amabilis in Gloria,"                        I.42
  Bonheur, Rosa,
    Sheep,                                             I.378
  Bouguereau, Adolph,
    Flight into Egypt,                                 IV.40
    Madonna of the Angels,                             I.332
    The Adoration of the Angels,                       I.426
    Women at the Tomb,                                 IV.290
  Brueck-Lajos,
    Ruth in the Harvest Fields of Boaz,                III.44

  Cazin,
    Hagar and Ishmael,                                 II.38
  Corot,
    Resting Beneath the Trees,                         I.38
  Correggio,
    The Holy Night,                                    I.396

  Devine, B. A.,
    Wise Men and the Star,                             IV.Frontispiece
  Dobson, W. C. T.,
    The Good Shepherd,                                 I.288
  Dolci, Carlo,
    Madonna and Child,                                 I.340
    Saint John the Evangelist,                         V.472

  Ferruzzi,
    The Little Mother,                                 I.470

  Giradet, P.,
    The Lost Lamb Found,                               I.312
  Goodall,
    Rebekah,                                           II.54

  Hennings, E. Martin,
    Joseph the Prime Minister Greeting his Family,     II.Frontispiece
    The Shipwreck-Paul and the Roman Centurion,        IV.366
  Hofmann, Heinrich,
    Christ and the Rich Ruler,                         IV.21O
    Christ in Gethsemane,                              IV.266
    Jesus and the Money Changers,                      IV.236
    Jesus and the Woman of Samaria,                    IV.84
    Jesus Healing the Sick,                            I.104
    Jesus Knocking at the Door,                        I.498
    The Lord Jesus,                                    IV.164
  Hunt, Holman,
    Finding of Christ in the Temple,                   IV.52
    Jesus in the Temple,                               I.458
    The Light of the World,                            I.466

  Jacque,
    Sheep,                                             I.278

  Lerolle,
    The Nativity,                                      IV.16

  Mengelberg, O.,
    The Boy Jesus on his Way to Jerusalem,             IV.48
  Michael Angelo,
    David,                                             II.384
  Mueller, Carl,
    The Holy Family,                                   I.404
  Munkacsy,
    Christ before Pilate,                              IV.274
  Murillo,
    Divine Mother and the Child,                       I.30
    Divine Shepherd, The,                              I.336
    Jacob's Dream,                                     II.64
    Jesus and John,                                    I.436
    Madonna,                                           I.450
    Moses Smiting the Rock,                            II.246
    The Children of the Shell,                         I.480
    The Pitti Madonna,                                 I.348

  Nast, Thomas,
    Moses on Mount Nebo,                               II.270
  Notte, Gherado delle,
    The Adoration of the Children                      I.414

  Oppenheim, Moritz,
    The End of the Flood,                              III.28

  Papperitz, Georg,
    Madonna and Child,                                 I.364
  Plockhorst, Bernard,
    Christ and his Disciples on the Way to Emmaus,     IV.304
    Jesus Blessing the Little Children                 I.236
    Jesus Entering Jerusalem in Triumph,               I.254
    Jesus Taking Leave of his Mother,                  IV.68
    The Announcement to the Shepherds,                 I.388
    The Good Shepherd,                                 I.308

  Raphael,
    Madonna della Tenda,                               I.444
    Saint Paul,                                        IV.364   {539}
    The Granduca Madonna,                              I.356
    The Sistine Madonna,                               I.220
  Reni Guido,
    Christ and John the Baptist,                       IV.152
  Reynolds, Joshua,
    Child with Dog,                                    I.374
    The Age of Innocence,                              I.382
    The Infant Samuel,                                 I.46
  Richter, Gustav,
    Jesus and the Little Girl,                         I.112
  Riesenberg, Sidney H.,
    Following the Star,                                I.Frontispiece

  Sant, James,
    The Soul's Awakening,                              I.322
  Sargent,
    The Prophets,                                      V.262, 372, 382, 390
    Moses,                                             II.90
  Sarto, Andrea del,
    The Madonna of the Harpies,                        I.432
  Schoenherr, Carl,
    "Lo! I Stand at the Door and Knock,"               IV.184
  Scott, W.,
    Building the Ark,                                  III.Frontispiece
  Sichel,
    Madonna and Child,                                 I.392
  Siemiradski,
    Jesus in the Home of Mary and Martha,              I.260

  Thompson, J. K.,
    The First Easter Dawn,                             I.264
  Thorwaldsen,
    Rebekah and Eliezer,                               II.48

  Vernet,
    Daniel in the Lions' Den,                          III.204
  Vinci, Leonardo da,
    Head of Christ,                                    IV.256
    The Last Supper,                                   IV.252
  Von Bremen,
    The Wounded Lamb,                                  I.368

  Widmarsky, C. A.,
    The Greek Temple,                                  V.Frontispiece
  Winterstein,
    The Boy Jesus,                                     I.74

  Zimmermann,
    Jesus and the Fishermen,                           IV.76


INDEX TO MAPS

  Christ's Journey to Jerusalem,                       IV.123
  Christ's Last Journey,                               IV.213
  Elijah's Travels,                                    III.112
  Palestine, Time of The New Testament,                IV.24
  Palestine, Time of the Old Testament,                III.14
  Paul's First Journey,                                IV.381
  Paul's Second Journey,                               IV.393
  Paul's Third Journey,                                IV.415
  Paul's Journey to Rome,                              IV.449